6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 1/618
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE 2019 - 33
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND
TITLE 4, CHAPTER 3 OF THE VILLAGE CODE
OF THE VILLAGE OF GLENDALE HEIGHTS, ILLINOIS
(Number of Licenses)
PASSED AND APPROVED BY
THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
THIS 16TH DAY OF MAY, 2019.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 2/618
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the
Corporate authorities of the Village of Glendale
Heights, Illinois the 16th day of May, 2019.
ORDINANCE 2019 - 33
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND
TITLE 4, CHAPTER 3 OF THE VILLAGE CODE
OF THE VILLAGE OF GLENDALE HEIGHTS, ILLINOIS
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and the Board of Trustees of the Village of Glendale Heights, Du Page County, Illinois, as
follows:
Section 1. The facts and statements contained in the preambles to this Ordinance are found to be true and correct and hereby adopted as the
findings of the corporate authorities of the Village of Glendale Heights as if fully recited herein.
Section 2. That Section 4-3-13 entitled “Number of License” of Chapter 3, entitled “Liquor Control” of Title 4 entitled “Business and License
Regulations” of the Village of Glendale Heights Municipal Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
4-3-13: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
A. Effective May 2, 2019, the Local Liquor Commissioner shall not issue more
than the number of licenses set forth herein for each class:
Class A License 8
Class A-1 License 0
Class A-2 License 0
Class A-3 License 0
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 3/618
Class A-F License 3
Class A-G License 1
Class A-H License 0
Class A-R License 0
Class A-V License 2
Class A-V-1 License 0
Class B License 1
Class C License 9
Class C-1 License 1
Class D License 7
Class E License 1
Class E-1 License 6
Class E-2 License 6
Class F License 2
Class F.S. License 0
Class G License Unlimited
Class M License 0
Class M-1 License 0
Class N License 4
Class S License Unlimited
B. Whenever a license previously issued under the provisions of this chapter is revoked, surrendered, or terminated by dormancy as herein provided,
the maximum number of local liquor licenses in that license class shall automatically and immediately be reduced by one. Thereafter, the number of
reduced local liquor licenses for that class shall not thereafter be increased without approval by a majority vote of the president and board of
trustees. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007).”
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 4/618
Section 3: That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, and publication in pamphlet form as
provided by law.
AYES: Trustees Sullivan, Light, Pojack and Schroeder
NAYS: None
ABSENT: Trustees Schmidt and Maritato
Village President
ATTEST:
Village Clerk
PASSED: This 16th day of May, 2019.
APPROVED: This 16th day of May, 2019.
PUBLISHED: This 16th day of May, 2019.
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Glendale Heights, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 2019-27, passed April 18, 2019.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
GLENDALE HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the board of trustees, this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code of the village of Glendale
Heights. This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the GLENDALE HEIGHTS VILLAGE CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the
board of trustees and shall be kept up to date as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the village attorney, acting for said village
board of trustees. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself when reference is made to this code
by title in any legal document. (1978 Code § 1-1-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 5/618
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this state
as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1-2-1 of this title. (1978 Code § 1-
1-2)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such amendments
or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place
in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code. (2011 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and
remain the property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the village clerk when directed so to do by order of the village board of trustees.
(2011 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this code or are by
necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
A. Tax levy and tax rate ordinances;
B. Appropriation ordinances;
C. Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
D. Franchise ordinances, bus transportation ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations;
E. Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants;
F. Salary ordinances;
G. Ordinances relating to personnel rules;
H. Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
I. Ordinances fixing the grades of streets and sidewalks;
J. Improvement ordinances;
K. Bond ordinances;
L. Ordinances relating to elections;
M. Ordinances relating to the purchase, lease transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the village;
N. Ordinances relating to the lease or purchase of property by the village and to the sale of surplus property by the village;
O. The comprehensive plan ordinance;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 6/618
P. The various building and fire codes, and supplements thereto, as adopted in this code by reference;
Q. Ordinances relating to intergovernmental activities or agreements involving adjoining municipalities, townships, the county of DuPage and the state of
Illinois and other governmental units and regional authorities; and
R. All other special ordinances and resolutions and administrative ordinances and regulations not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code.
(1978 Code § 1-2-1; amd. 2011 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be
repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of section 1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such matters,
in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances with respect to such provisions only. (2011 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. Prior Acts: When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive
such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. However, the repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any
punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense
committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance so repealed. (1978 Code § 1-2-1)
B. Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance. (2011 Code)
C. Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the village herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing
provisions and not a new enactment of the same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any
penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the village under any ordinance or
provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this code. (1978 Code § 1-2-3)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this code, or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference, is for any
reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness
of the remaining portions of this code, or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein by reference. The village board hereby declares that it would have
passed each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2011 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATION
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
A. Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that the true
intent and meaning of the village president and board of trustees may be fully carried out.
B. Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any
person.
C. Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section of this code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person actually doing
the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employers and all other persons concerned with or aiding or abetting the said person shall
be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth. (1978 Code § 1-1-4)
D. Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for
the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. (2011 Code)
E. Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the
day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
not be counted. Where the day on which an act is to be done or a proceeding held falls on a Sunday or a legal holiday, such act shall be done or
proceeding held on the next regular business day. "Time" shall mean Central Standard Time, except when the state of Illinois is on daylight saving time,
and then it shall mean Central Daylight Saving Time. (1978 Code § 1-3-2)
F. Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other village officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 7/618
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
G. Gender: The use of any gender based pronoun should not be construed to be gender biased, but is only used for grammatical simplicity.
H. Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
I. May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory.
J. Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical
words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to
such meaning.
K. Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
L. Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the
words "of the village of Glendale Heights".
M. Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
N. Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the village has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter", "section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to village ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2011 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such
meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.
BOARD, BOARD OF TRUSTEES, VILLAGE BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the village board of trustees of the village of Glendale Heights.
CODE: The village code of the village of Glendale Heights.
CORPORATE OR VILLAGE LIMITS: The legal boundaries of the village of Glendale Heights.
COUNTY, THE COUNTY: The county of DuPage, state of Illinois.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the village shall extend from May 1 of one year to April 30 of the following year.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the village, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OCCUPANT OR TENANT: When applied to a building or land, means any person who holds a written or oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or
part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association, or any city or state, or any subdivision thereof, and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every
right or interest therein.
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Includes real and personal property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 8/618
REAL PROPERTY: Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and shall embrace all chattels real.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians, excluding parkways.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: Shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the village, and shall
include all areas thereof embraced between the property lines and dedicated to the public use.
TWELVE O'CLOCK (12:00) MIDNIGHT: The last minute of the day.
VILLAGE: The village of Glendale Heights, county of DuPage, state of Illinois.
WHOLESALE, WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood and held to relate to the sale of
goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for purposes of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in smaller
quantities direct to the consumer.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person or, in case such person is unable to write, by
such person's proper mark.
YEAR: A calendar year. (1978 Code § 1-3-2; amd. 2011 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(2011 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Whenever in this code, or in any ordinance of the village, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor or a violation of
this code, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a
misdemeanor or a violation of this code, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violator of any such provision of this code or any ordinance
shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day any such violation of any provision of this code or of any ordinance shall continue. (Ord. 2014-75, 12-11-2014)
B. Any penalty imposed for a violation of this code or any village ordinance that remains unpaid may be forwarded to a collection agency for collection. An
additional one hundred dollar ($100.00) processing fee shall be imposed on all matters referred for collection. (Ord. 2000-22, 4-6-2000)
1-4-2: LICENSE REVOCATION:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code any license previously issued him by the village may be revoked by the board of
trustees. (1978 Code § 1-4-4)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Application Of Penalty; Misdemeanor Violations: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as
though it were a part of each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty is prescribed
or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
B. Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this
code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 9/618
C. Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of section 1-4-1 of this chapter shall apply. (1978 Code § 1-4-2)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or
penalty provided in this code for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the village board to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty or unless a penalty or fine is prescribed by state law. (1978 Code § 1-4-3)
1-4-5: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING ORDER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay a fine or penalty which has been imposed by an administrative hearing officer pursuant to article A of this
chapter within fifteen (15) days of a final determination of liability, as provided in section 1-4A-12 of this chapter. A separate offense shall be deemed to be
committed each subsequent fifteen (15) days that such fine or penalty remains unpaid. (Ord. 2002-43, 6-20-2002)
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS
1-4A-1: PURPOSE:
The stated purpose of this article is to provide for fair and efficient enforcement of village of Glendale Heights' (hereinafter referred to as the "village")
ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of such village ordinances. In addition
the purpose of this article is to establish a schedule of fines and penalties for violations as well as the authority and procedures for collection of unpaid
fines and penalties. (Ord. 2014-74, 12-11-2014)
1-4A-2: CREATION OF CODE HEARING UNIT; JURISDICTION:
There is hereby created within the village of Glendale Heights an executive unit of the municipal government to be known as the code hearing unit, which
is authorized to provide for and operate a "system of administrative adjudication", which shall be defined as the adjudication of any violation of any
municipal ordinance of the village of Glendale Heights, including, but not limited to, those actions brought pursuant to this chapter 4, "General Penalty", of
this title; title 3, "Finance And Taxation"; title 4, "Business And License Regulations", excluding chapter 3; title 5, "Health, Sanitation And Environment"; title
6, "Police And Public Safety"; title 8, "Public Ways And Property"; title 10, "Building Regulations"; title 11, "Zoning Regulations"; and title 12, "Subdivision
Regulations", of this code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, proceedings not within the statutory or home rule authority of the village, any offense under the
Illinois vehicle code1 or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles, and any reportable offense under section 6-204 of
the Illinois vehicle code, shall not be subject to administrative adjudication pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2014-74, 12-11-2014)
1-4A-3: HEARING PROCEDURES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this article shall not preclude the village from using other methods or proceedings to enforce the ordinances of the village of Glendale
Heights, including, but not limited to, the institution of any action in the 18th judicial circuit, or any administrative proceeding. (Ord. 2014-74, 12-11-2014)
1-4A-4: CODE HEARING UNIT:
The code hearing unit shall be composed of an administrative hearing officer, an ordinance enforcement administrator, the director of community
development or her designee, the chief of police or his designee, hearing room personnel, and any other duly appointed person or persons deemed
necessary for the efficient administration of the code hearing unit, with the following powers, duties and authority:
A. All adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by an administrative hearing officer who shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of
Illinois for no less than three (3) years. The administrative hearing officer shall be appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees. Prior to conducting administrative adjudication hearings, administrative hearing officers shall have successfully completed a formal
training program which includes the following:
1. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings which they will conduct.
2. Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will adjudicate.
3. Observation of administrative hearings.
4. Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders.
B. Administrative hearing officers are hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to:
1. Administer oaths.
2. Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the existence of an ordinance violation.
3. Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the hearing upon the request of the parties or their representatives.
4. Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing, including all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 10/618
5. Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at the hearing, of whether a code violation occurred or exists. The administrative hearing
officer's determination shall be in writing and shall include written findings of fact, decision, and order including the fine, penalty, or other action with
which the respondent must comply.
6. Impose penalties consistent with applicable village of Glendale Heights code provisions and assess costs of fifty dollars ($50.00) upon finding a party
liable for the charged violation, provided, however, that the administrative hearing officer shall not be authorized to: a) impose a penalty of
incarceration, or b) impose fines in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) against a single respondent. The maximum monetary fine under this
article shall be exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs incurred by the village to secure compliance with the village's ordinances and shall not be
applicable to cases to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the municipality. (Ord. 2014-74, 12-11-2014)
1-4A-5: ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATOR:
The ordinance enforcement administrator shall either be an employee of the village or an independent contractor or agency contracted by the village to
perform such duties as enumerated herein. The ordinance enforcement administrator or his designee is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to:
A. Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of ordinance violations as authorized under section 1-4A-2 of this article and all other
village ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by ordinance.
B. Adopt, distribute, and process all notices as may be required under this article or as may reasonably be required to carry out the purpose of this article.
C. Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a determination of liability.
D. Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and maintain the system of administrative adjudication hereby established.
E. Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection agencies that may be retained by the village, by directing the village attorney to file
complaints in the circuit court, by selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on behalf of the village, or by pursuing all postjudgment
remedies available under current law.
F. Operate and maintain the computer programs for the system of administrative adjudication hereby established, on a day to day basis, including, but not
limited to:
1. Inputting of violation notice information.
2. Establishing hearing dates and notice dates.
3. Recording fine and penalty assessment and payments.
4. Issuing payment receipts.
5. Issuing any notices required by this article.
6. Keeping accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at administrative hearings, pleas entered, and fines and other penalties assessed
and paid. (Ord. 2014-74, 12-11-2014)
1-4A-6: HEARING ROOM PERSONNEL:
Hearing room personnel assigned by the chief of police shall be any police officer or auxiliary police officer, and such persons are hereby authorized and
directed to:
A. Maintain hearing room decorum.
B. Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the circuit court.
C. Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as directed by the administrative hearing officer or the ordinance enforcement
administrator. (Ord. 2014-74, 12-11-2014)
1-4A-7: COMPENSATION OF CODE HEARING UNIT PERSONNEL:
Authorization for compensation for each of the above stated positions shall be made by the president and board of trustees through the annual
appropriation process, and such compensation shall be determined by the village board. (Ord. 2014-74, 12-11-2014)
1-4A-8: COMPLAINTS AND NOTICES OF HEARINGS:
A. Filing Of Complaint: A proceeding before an administrative hearing officer shall be instituted upon the filing of a written sworn pleading or complaint by
any authorized official of the village, including police officers, community service officers, code enforcement officers, and such other employees as
authorized.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 11/618
B. Service Of Process: Respondents shall be served with a copy of the written sworn pleading or complaint along with a notice of adjudicatory hearing in
any manner reasonably calculated to give them actual notice of the proceeding instituted against them including:
1. Personal service upon a party or its employees or agents; or
2. Service by certified mail, return receipt requested at the party's address; or
3. Service by first class mail postage prepaid at the party's address; or
4. Service by posting a copy of the sworn pleading or complaint upon the property where the violation is found when the respondent is the owner or
manager of the property.
C. Notices Of Hearing: Notices of the adjudicatory hearing shall include:
1. The type and nature of the ordinance violation to be adjudicated;
2. The date and location of the adjudicatory hearing;
3. The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held; and
4. The penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
D. Option To Avoid An Appearance At An Administrative Hearing: Persons charged with a violation under this article shall have the option of avoiding an
appearance at an administrative hearing by paying a mandatory fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) prior to the start of the assigned administrative
hearing. (Ord. 2014-74, 12-11-2014)
1-4A-9: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURES:
Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for a hearing during which they may be represented by counsel, present witnesses, and cross examine
opposing witnesses. Parties may request the administrative hearing officer to issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and testimony of relevant
witnesses and the production of relevant documents. Hearings shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness, provided that for hearings scheduled in all
nonemergency situations, if requested by the respondent, the respondent shall have at least fifteen (15) days after service of process to prepare for a
hearing. For purposes of this section, "nonemergency situation" means any situation that does not reasonably constitute a threat to the public interest,
safety, health or welfare. If service is provided by mail, the fifteen (15) day period shall begin to run on the day that the notice is deposited in the mail. (Ord.
2014-74, 12-11-2014)
1-4A-10: RULES OF EVIDENCE SHALL NOT GOVERN:
The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in an adjudicatory hearing authorized under this article. Evidence, including hearsay, may be
admitted only if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. (Ord. 2014-74, 12-11-2014)
1-4A-11: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by an administrative hearing officer that a code violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of
judicial review and shall be subject to review under the Illinois administrative review law2. (Ord. 2014-74, 12-11-2014)
1-4A-12: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
A. Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure
to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois administrative review law is a debt due and owing the village of Glendale Heights and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
B. After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of an ordinance
violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order of the administrative hearing officer may be enforced in
the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. In any case in which a respondent has failed to comply with a judgment ordering the respondent to correct an ordinance violation or imposing any fine
or other sanction as a result of an ordinance violation, any expenses incurred by the village to enforce the judgment entered against that respondent,
including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of
competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the village of Glendale Heights and may be collected in accordance with
applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by the administrative hearing officer pursuant to this section, the village shall provide a notice to the
respondent that states that the respondent shall appear at a hearing before the administrative hearing officer to determine whether the respondent has
failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such hearing, which shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date that notice
is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven (7) day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
D. Upon being recorded in the manner required by article XII of the Illinois code of civil procedure3, or by the uniform commercial code4, a lien shall be
imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the respondent in the amount of any debt due and owing the village under this article. The
lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 12/618
E. The administrative hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed by the respondent
within thirty (30) days after the issuance of the order of default, if the administrative hearing officer determines that the respondent's failure to appear at
the hearing was for good cause, or at any time if the respondent establishes, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the village did not provide
proper service of process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to this section, the administrative hearing officer shall have authority to enter an order
extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the village as a result of the vacated default judgment. When a judgment is
vacated, the administrative hearing officer shall set a new date for a hearing on the underlying violation(s). (Ord. 2014-74, 12-11-2014)
1-4A-13: SEVERABILITY:
Should a court of competent jurisdiction determine that one or more sections or subsections of this article are invalid, the remaining sections and
subsections of this article shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 2014-74, 12-11-2014)
Chapter 5
OFFICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
1-5-1: OFFICIAL SLOGAN:
the official slogan of the village shall be the words "a proud and progressive village for all people", "proud and progressive" as submitted by Mrs. Betty
Azar and "a village for all people" as submitted by Ms. Barbie Jakubowski. (Ord. 96-29, 4-4-1996)
1-5-2: OFFICIAL LOGO:
The official logo of the village shall be that certain design prepared and designed by Mrs. Carol Toede of CA Designs, Inc. Said design contains the slogan
"A PROUD AND PROGRESSIVE VILLAGE FOR ALL PEOPLE" and the village name "Glendale Heights". The design emphasizes "Glendale" in a solid,
modern style. "Heights" is unique and creative showing imagination, freedom and growth. The upward movement of the "H" in Heights presents a proud
and progressive trend. The colors blue and green denote continuing cooperative growth. "Glendale Heights" is superimposed over a circle with houses
and a park scene which expresses an integrated, neighborly atmosphere. A facsimile of said logo is attached to the ordinance codified herein as exhibit A.
(Ord. 96-29, 4-4-1996)
1-5-3: MISSION STATEMENT:
The village strives to improve the quality of life for all its residents and commits to serve, protect and provide a high standard of services and programs
through the cooperative efforts of its residents, businesses, employees and elected officials. (Ord. 96-54, 6-6-1996)
1-5-4: OFFICE HOURS:
The hours of business for all village offices and all village departments shall be (excepting holidays):
A. Monday through Wednesday from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M.;
B. Thursday from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.;
C. Friday from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M.; and
D. Saturdays during the month of June from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon. (Ord. 2004-76, 9-23-2004)
Chapter 6
VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-6-1: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the village president and board of trustees shall be held, without notice, on the first and third Thursdays of
each month of the year at seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. in the council room of the village complex at 300 Civic Center Plaza, unless otherwise
ordered by the village president and board of trustees. However, there will not be any regular meetings of the village president and board of trustees
during the month of July nor will there be a regular meeting of the village president and board of trustees on the third Thursday during the month of
December. Any regular meeting falling on a legal holiday shall be held on the next secular day at the same hour and place. (Ord. 2014-53, 9-4-2014)
B. Special Meetings: Upon the signed, written request of the village president or of any three (3) members of the village board of trustees, the village clerk
shall issue a written call for a special meeting, which shall be made at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the meeting, to all members of the board of
trustees, when called by the village president, and to the members of the board of trustees and the village president when called by three (3) trustees.
The call shall state the time and place of the special meeting and the purpose for which it is called, stating the names of the members requesting the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 13/618
meeting. Each notice shall be personally served by any police officer of the village at the residence or business address of each person to whom
delivery is required. Special meetings may be called at any previous regular meeting by a majority vote of the board of trustees without further notice,
and if all trustees are present at a special meeting, no notice of such meeting shall be necessary. (1978 Code § 1-5-1; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Electronic Attendance At Meetings:
1. Rules Statement: It is the decision of the village of Glendale Heights that any member of the council may attend any open or closed meeting of the
council via electronic means (such as by telephone, video or internet connection) provided that such attendance is in compliance with these rules
and any applicable laws.
2. Prerequisites: A member of the council may attend a meeting electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
a. The member shall notify the village clerk in advance of the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications equipment can be
arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result in denial of a request for remote attendance.
b. The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
(1) The member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability; or
(2) The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the business of the village of Glendale Heights; or
(3) The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
3. Authorization To Participate:
a. The village clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request, shall inform the council of the request for electronic attendance.
b. After establishing that a quorum is physically present at a meeting where a member of the village of Glendale Heights desires to attend
electronically, the presiding officer shall state that: 1) notice was received by the member of the council in accordance with these rules and 2) the
member will be deemed authorized to attend the meeting electronically unless a motion objecting to the member's electronic attendance is made,
seconded and approved by a majority of the members of the council physically present at the meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded, or
if any such motion fails to achieve the required vote by the members of the council physically present at the meeting, then the request by the
member to attend the meeting electronically shall be deemed approved by the council and presiding officer shall declare the requesting member
present. After such declaration by the presiding officer, the question of a member's electronic attendance may not be reconsidered.
4. Adequate Equipment Required: The member participating electronically and other members of the council must be able to communicate effectively
and members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the meeting site. Before allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the
council shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting site.
5. Minutes: Any member attending electronically shall be considered an off site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting if the
member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state specifically whenever a member is present by electronic means.
6. Rights To Remote Member: A member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting and
participate in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted
and adhered to. The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered and counted as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any
member attending electronically shall be called during any vote taken and his or her vote counted and recorded by the village clerk and placed in the
minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any member, provided
the member attending electronically shall announce his or her leaving and returning.
7. Committees, Boards And Commissions: These rules shall apply to all committees, boards and commissions established by authority of the council of
the village of Glendale Heights. (Ord. 2012-11, 2-16-2012)
1-6-2: QUORUM; ADJOURNMENT:
Three (3) members of the board of trustees and the village president or four (4) members of the board of trustees shall constitute a quorum to do business.
However, a smaller number of the board may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absentees. (1978 Code § 1-5-2)
1-6-3: COMPELLING ATTENDANCE:
Should less than a quorum of the village board of trustees be present at any regular or special meeting at the time and place appointed, such minority may
instruct the village clerk to send immediate notice to any absent trustee that can be found commanding him to appear immediately at such meeting, and
any trustee receiving such notice and not obeying the same, without reasonable excuse, shall be subject to a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor
more than ten dollars ($10.00) for each and every offense. (1978 Code § 1-5-3)
1-6-4: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The order of business of the village board of trustees shall be as follows, unless the same is temporarily suspended by consent of two-thirds (2/3) of the
trustees present:
A. Roll call of members.
B. Pledge Of Allegiance to the flag.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 14/618
C. Presentation of minutes of preceding meeting, correction and approval of same.
D. Petitions and communications.
E. Report of officers.
F. Committee reports.
G. Public discussion of old and new business as listed in or added to subsections I and J of this section on the current board agenda.
H. Consent agenda.
I. Unfinished or old business.
J. Miscellaneous or new business.
K. Public discussion as specified in subsection G of this section. (1978 Code § 1-5-4)
1-6-5: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
A. Ordinances And Resolutions:
1. In Writing; Record Kept: All resolutions, ordinances, and amendments to resolutions or ordinances shall be made in writing by the member of the
village board of trustees wishing to introduce the same and shall be handed to the village clerk to be read, but in all cases where the resolution,
ordinance or amendment thereto shall be a matter of record on the minutes of the board of trustees, the name of the member offering or making the
same shall be entered thereon.
2. Passing Ordinances: All proposed ordinances shall be submitted to a first public reading and may then be passed upon second reading at the
meeting next following the first reading. The provisions of this subsection A2 may be waived by a majority of the village board of trustees. (1978
Code § 1-5-5)
3. Recording Vote: In all cases of the passage of all ordinances for whatever purpose, and of any resolution or motion involving the creation of a liability
against the village, the expenditure or appropriation of its monies, or at the request of any member, the yeas and nays shall be taken, and the result
shall be recorded in the record book of the village board of trustees, and the concurrence of a majority of the elected members of the board shall be
necessary to the passage of any such ordinance, resolution or motion. (1978 Code § 1-5-5; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Vote Required; Exceptions: When a question is stated from the chair, every member of the village board of trustees who shall be present shall vote
thereon unless excused by the village president and board of trustees, or unless he is personally or directly interested in the question before the board
of trustees.
C. Expulsion Or Censure Of Members: Any member of the village board of trustees acting or appearing at a meeting in a disgraceful manner or using
violent and insulting language to or about any member of the board of trustees or who does not obey the orders of the chair shall, on action, be
censured by a majority vote of the members present or expelled by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all members elected.
D. Questions Of Order; Robert's Rules Of Order: The village president shall decide all questions of order, and in all cases not specially provided by law or
ordinance, the village board of trustees shall be guided by parliamentary law as laid down in "Robert's Rules Of Order", as revised.
E. Board Consent Required To Address Meetings: No person not a member of the village board of trustees shall address said board of trustees without the
unanimous consent of the members present, except during public discussion or listening post. (1978 Code § 1-5-5)
F. Restriction On Commencement Of New Issues: No discussion or hearing shall commence on any new matter or issue before the board of trustees after
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. (Ord. 96-58, 6-6-1996)
G. Time Limitations: Public discussion of old and new business shall be limited to five (5) minutes per speaker per meeting. (Ord. 2013-91, 12-12-2013)
1-6-6: PRESIDENT'S VOTE:
The village president shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution or action before the village board of trustees, except in the following instances when he
shall be required to vote:
A. Where the vote of the board of trustees has resulted in a tie; (1978 Code § 1-5-6)
B. Where one-half (1/2) of the trustees elected have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion even though there is no tie vote; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 15/618
C. Where a vote of greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is required by statute or an ordinance to adopt an ordinance, resolution or motion.
(1978 Code § 1-5-6; amd. 2011 Code)
1-6-7: COMMITTEES OF THE BOARD:
A. Committee Of The Whole: There shall be a committee of the village board of trustees which shall consist of the president and board of trustees then
holding office. Said committee shall be known as the committee of the whole and shall meet as provided in subsection 1-6-1A of this chapter, or
immediately following the regular meeting of the board of trustees, whichever is later. Public discussion at the committee of the whole shall be limited to
five (5) minutes per speaker per meeting. (Ord. 2013-91, 12-12-2013)
B. Special Committees: The president and board of trustees voting jointly shall appoint all special committees of the board and the chairpersons thereof,
and the president and board of trustees voting jointly shall have the power to remove the members of said committees and the chairpersons thereof at
any time and for any reason. (1978 Code § 1-5-7)
1-6-8: APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL OF BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND ADDITIONAL COMMITTEES:
All boards, commissions and additional committees of the village, not otherwise specifically provided for by statute or ordinance, shall be appointed by the
president and board of trustees voting jointly, and any member thereof including the chairperson may be similarly removed at any time for any reason by
the president and board of trustees voting jointly. (1978 Code § 1-5-7)
1-6-9: DEPUTY VILLAGE PRESIDENT; ACTING VILLAGE PRESIDENT:
A. Deputy Village President:
1. There is hereby established the office of deputy village president. The deputy village president shall be appointed by the village president, with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees, and shall exercise the powers and perform the duties as the village board prescribes. The deputy village
president shall be a village trustee. The deputy village president shall assist the village president in the performance of his duties, as directed by the
village president.
2. In the event of the absence of the village president from any regular or special meeting of the village board, the deputy village president shall act as
chair pro tem of that meeting, shall exercise the powers of a presiding officer and shall only have the right to vote in his capacity as a village trustee
on any ordinance, resolution or motion.
3. The deputy village president shall exercise the powers and duties of the village president during: a) a vacancy in the office of president; or b) the
temporary absence of the village president from the village. The deputy village president shall exercise the powers and duties of the village president
thereafter until: a) a vacancy in the office of village president ceases to exist; b) the return of the village president to the village; or c) until such time
as the board of trustees revokes the appointment of the member of the board to exercise the duties of the village president. The appointment to the
office of deputy village president shall be rendered invalid if the deputy village president ceases to be a member of the village board. The deputy
village president shall receive no additional compensation because of such appointment. (1978 Code § 1-6-4-1)
B. Alternate Deputy Village President: There is created the office of alternate deputy village president. In the event of the incapacity of the village
president, the deputy village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall appoint a village trustee to fill the position of alternate
deputy village president. The alternate deputy village president shall perform the duties of the deputy village president in the event the deputy village
president is absent or incapacitated. (Ord. 99-87, 9-16-1999)
C. Acting Village President: Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of village president, it shall be filled as follows:
1. If there are at least twenty eight (28) months remaining in the unexpired term and the vacancy occurs at least one hundred thirty (130) days before
the next scheduled general municipal election, the vacancy shall be filled by the electorate at that general municipal election for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
2. Until such time as a successor to fill the vacancy has been elected and has qualified, the vacancy shall be filled by the board of trustees electing one
of its members as acting village president. The acting village president shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the
president and shall be compensated as the president.
3. Until such time as an acting village president has been elected by the board of trustees, the deputy village president shall perform the duties and
possess all the rights and powers of the president. (1978 Code § 1-6-4-2)
1-6-10: ACTING VILLAGE TRUSTEE:
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the office of village trustee, it shall be filled as follows:
A. If there are at least twenty eight (28) months remaining in the unexpired term and the vacancy occurs at least one hundred thirty (130) days before the
next scheduled general municipal election, the vacancy shall be filled by the electorate at that general election for the remainder of the unexpired term.
B. Until the office is filled by election, the village president shall appoint a qualified person to the office, subject to the advice and consent of the board of
trustees. Any person appointed under this subsection shall hold office until the successor has been duly elected and qualified. (1978 Code § 1-6-4-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 16/618
Chapter 7
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL
1-7-1: VILLAGE OFFICIALS ENUMERATED:
The officials of the village, excluding police officers, shall consist of the following:
A. Village president and board of trustees.
B. Deputy village president.
C. Village clerk.
D. Village treasurer.
E. Village attorney.
F. Village administrator.
G. Assistant village administrator.
H. Chief of police.
I. Director of finance.
J. Village engineer.
K. Village collector.
L. Director of community development. (Ord. 2010-73, 12-9-2010)
M. Director of public works. (Ord. 2010-73, 12-9-2010; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
N. Director of parks, recreation and facilities.
O. Director of golf course operations.
P. Such other officials as the village president and board of trustees may deem expedient and establish by ordinance. (Ord. 2010-73, 12-9-2010)
1-7-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be eligible to hold any office if he or she is indebted to the village of Glendale Heights. (Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
1-7-3: APPOINTMENTS; TERMS; VACANCIES:
A. Appointments: All appointive officials of the village shall be appointed by the village president, by and with the advice and consent of the village board of
trustees. (1978 Code § 1-6-2)
B. Terms Of Office: The terms of office of all village officials shall be as the village president and board of trustees may determine by ordinance, and until
their successors are appointed and have qualified. (1978 Code § 1-6-3)
C. Vacancies In Office: Vacancies occurring before the end of any term of any village office shall be filled as in the case of the original appointment and as
set forth in this section. In any event, such official shall serve until his successor shall have been duly appointed and qualified. (1978 Code § 1-6-4)
1-7-4: OATH OR AFFIRMATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 17/618
A. All village officials, whether elected or appointed, shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe to the following
oath or affirmation:
I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois,
and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of , according to the best of my ability.
B. The oath or affirmation set out in subsection A of this section shall be filed in the office of the village clerk. (1978 Code § 1-6-5)
1-7-5: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Every village official, other than a member of the village board of trustees, who shall be elected or appointed to office shall, before entering upon the duties
of his office, execute his bond with a corporate surety to be approved by the village president and the board of trustees. The bond shall be payable to the
village in the amount provided in this section and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance by such official of the duties of his office and the
payment of all public monies received by him, in accordance with state law and the village ordinances. All bonds, except that of the village clerk, shall be
filed with the village clerk, and the bond of the village clerk shall be filed with the village treasurer. All premiums charged by the corporate surety on such
bonds shall be paid by the village out of its general funds, and in no case by the individual official furnishing the bond. The amounts of the official bonds
shall be as follows: (Ord. 2011-20, 4-20-2011)
Village president $ 3,000.00
Deputy village president 1,000.00
Village clerk 1,000.00
Village treasurer 110,000.00
Village attorney 1,000.00
Village administrator 1,000.00
Assistant village administrator 1,000.00
Director of finance 110,000.00
Chief of police 2,000.00
Village engineer 1,000.00
Village collector 1,000.00
Director of community development 1,000.00
Director of public works 1,000.00
Director of parks, recreation and facilities 1,000.00
Director of golf course operations 1,000.00
(Ord. 2011-20, 4-20-2011; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
1-7-6: OFFICIALS COMMISSIONED:
All officials, elected or appointed, except the village president and village clerk, shall be commissioned by warrant signed by the village president and
attested by the village clerk under the corporate seal of the village. The commission shall be substantially in the following form:
Official Commission Village of Glendale Heights, Illinois.
Greeting: , has been duly (elected or appointed) to the office of in and for the said Village, in the County of DuPage and State of Illinois, for
the term from , 20 , to , 20 , and until his successor shall have been duly elected or appointed and qualified.
Given under my hand and the Corporate Seal of said Village on , 20 .
President
Attest:
Village Clerk
(1978 Code § 1-6-7)
1-7-7: DUTIES:
A. Generally: Every village official, besides the powers and duties assigned thereto by statute and ordinance, shall have the further powers and perform
the duties which usually pertain to his office, and shall be subject to such other rules and regulations as the village president and board of trustees may
from time to time establish. (1978 Code § 1-6-8)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 18/618
B. Accounting For Monies: Every official or employee of the village who shall collect monies belonging to the village shall, each month or as otherwise
provided by the village president and board of trustees, pay over to the village treasurer such monies, together with an itemized written report covering
his collections for the preceding month. (1978 Code § 1-6-10)
C. Licenses And Permits Issued: All licenses and permits issued by any official pursuant to an ordinance of the village shall be in writing, and duplicates
thereof shall be kept in a permanent file. (1978 Code § 1-6-12)
D. Property To Successor: Any person having been an official of the village shall, within five (5) days after notification and request, deliver to his successor
in office all property, books and effects of every description in his possession belonging to the village and pertaining to his office. (1978 Code § 1-6-11)
1-7-8: COMPENSATION:
A. Established: The salaries of all officials, employees and appointees of the village shall be the amount fixed from time to time by ordinance of the village.
The salaries of the village officials hereinafter designated shall be in the following amounts:
1. Village President: For any village president whose term of office commences on or after April 5, 2005, the president of the village board of trustees
shall receive an annual compensation for the performance of his/her duties in the amount of seven thousand four hundred dollars ($7,400.00).
Further, the village president shall receive the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each meeting he/she attends that is held by a citizen's group, business
organization, developer, municipal organization, other municipal corporations, or any other governmental entity, so long as the meeting is attended
by the village president on behalf of the village and when such meeting pertains to the governmental affairs of the village. The village president shall
submit a voucher to the village confirming his/her meeting attendance prior to receiving any payment.
2. Village Trustee: For any trustee whose term of office commences on or after April 5, 2005, such village trustee shall receive an annual compensation
for the performance of his/her duties in the amount of four thousand five hundred dollars ($4,500.00). Further, each trustee shall receive the sum of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each meeting he/she attends that is held by a citizen's group, business organization, developer, municipal
organization, other municipal corporations, or any other governmental entity, so long as the meeting is attended by the trustee on behalf of the village
and when such meeting pertains to the governmental affairs of the village. The trustee shall submit a voucher to the village confirming his/her
meeting attendance prior to receiving any payment.
3. Village Clerk: For any village clerk whose term of office commences on or after April 13, 1999, such village clerk shall receive an annual
compensation for the performance of his/her duties in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
4. Village Treasurer: The village treasurer shall receive an annual compensation for the performance of his/her duties in the amount of one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). In the event the finance director also serves as the village treasurer, the designated salary of the village treasurer
shall not be paid.
5. Village Liquor Control Commissioner: The village liquor control commissioner shall receive an annual compensation of one thousand six hundred
dollars ($1,600.00).
6. Village Emergency Management Agency Coordinator: The village emergency management agency coordinator shall receive an annual
compensation of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
B. Annual Payments: The salaries of the village officials shall be paid annually on May 1 of each year.
C. Reimbursement Of Salaries: In the event the village president, a village trustee, the village clerk, the village treasurer, the village liquor control
commissioner, or the village emergency management agency coordinator cannot fulfill his/her term of office for any reason other than death or serious
illness, then said village official leaving office shall reimburse to the village a portion of his/her annual salary as follows:
1. In the event a village official leaves office on or before August 31, said village official shall refund seventy five percent (75%) of his/her annual salary
to the village.
2. In the event a village official leaves office on or before November 30, said village official shall refund fifty percent (50%) of his/her annual salary to
the village.
3. In the event a village official leaves office on or before February 28, said village official shall refund twenty five percent (25%) of his/her salary to the
village. (Ord. 2004-67, 9-2-2004)
1-7-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
The village shall be responsible for, hold employees harmless from and pay for damages or monies which may be adjudged, assessed or otherwise levied
against any village employee except as otherwise provided by law, so long as the employee is acting or was acting within the scope of his employment,
and so long as the employee cooperates with the village in the defense of the action or actions or claims. Employees shall have legal representation by the
village in any civil cause of action brought against an employee resulting from or arising out of the performance of his duties, except as otherwise provided
herein. Employees shall be required to cooperate with the village during the course of the investigation, administration or litigation of any claim arising out
of this section. The village will provide the protections set forth hereinabove so long as the employee cooperates with the village in defense of the action or
actions or claims. The village shall not indemnify or defend any employee for any actions arising out of claims for punitive or exemplary damages. In
addition, the village responsibility with regard to this section shall not extend to any criminal charges brought against an employee. (Ord. 96-76, 8-1-1996)
1-7-10: SOCIAL SECURITY:
A. Policy And Purpose: It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village and the purpose of this section to extend to eligible employees, effective as of
July 1, 1966, the benefits of the federal old age, survivors and disability insurance provisions of the federal social security act, and amendments
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 19/618
thereto. In pursuance of said policy and for that purpose, the village president shall take such action as may be required by applicable state and federal
laws or regulations.
B. Agreement With State Employee Retirement System: The village president is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement with the social
security unit of the state employee retirement system to secure coverage of eligible employees.
C. Withholdings: Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the purpose provided in subsection A of this section are hereby authorized to be
made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the proper
state agency in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws or regulations. (1978 Code § 1-10-1)
D. Employer Contributions: Employer contributions and administrative expense shall be paid to the state agency in accordance with applicable state laws
and regulations from amounts appropriated for such purposes. (1978 Code § 1-10-1; amd. 2011 Code)
E. Records And Reports: The village clerk shall maintain such records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations. (1978 Code § 1-10-1)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE CLERK
1-7A-1: ELECTION AND TERM:
The village clerk shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term and until his/her successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute. (1978 Code
§ 1-7-1)
1-7A-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Generally: The village clerk shall have all the powers and perform all the duties now or hereafter provided by the laws of this state and the ordinances of
the village. Among other things, it shall be his/her duty as follows:
1. To keep his/her office at the place appointed by the board of trustees.
2. To attend all meetings of the board of trustees and to take minutes of all its proceedings.
3. To record such minutes, together with all ordinances and resolutions passed by the board of trustees, in books to be kept for that purpose.
4. To publish all proceedings of the board of trustees and all ordinances required by law to be published.
5. To serve all notices, either by personal service, by publication or by posting, required by law or the order of the board of trustees or the president to
be served, unless such notices are expressly ordered to be served by some other person.
6. To notify, within five (5) days after the result of any election is declared or appointment made, all persons elected or appointed to any village office of
their election or appointment, and unless such persons shall respectively qualify within ten (10) days after such notice, the office shall become
vacant.
7. To file all ordinances, communications, receipts and other documents required to be filed, and to arrange the same in systematic order for ready
reference.
8. To keep the corporate seal of the village and affix the same to all papers which require it.
9. To be the custodian and keeper of all the books, records, ordinances and papers of the village, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
10. To make copies of all papers in his/her office, and transcripts from journals and other records and files of his/her office, certified under the corporate
seal for use in evidence when required.
11. To file or cause to be filed a certified copy of each tax levy ordinance with the county clerk within the time required by law. (1978 Code § 1-7-3)
B. Custodian Of Documents: The village clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the village which are not assigned to the custody of
some other officer. (1978 Code § 1-7-4)
C. Signature: The village clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the village and all licenses, permits and such other documents as shall require this
formality. (1978 Code § 1-7-5)
D. Records Kept: In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the clerk is required by statute to keep, he/she shall keep a register of all
licenses and permits issued, and the payments thereon; a record showing all the officers and regular employees of the village; and such other records
as may be required by the board of trustees. (1978 Code § 1-7-6)
E. Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, the village clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by statute
or ordinance. (1978 Code § 1-7-7)
1-7A-3: VACANCY IN OFFICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 20/618
In case the office of village clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall appoint a
successor to fill such office until the next annual village election, as is provided by statute. The president and board of trustees may appoint a village clerk
pro tempore whenever necessary, as provided by statute. (1978 Code § 1-7-8; amd. 2011 Code)
1-7A-4: DEPUTY VILLAGE CLERK:
A. There is hereby created the office of deputy clerk. The village clerk is authorized to appoint a deputy clerk who shall have the power and duty to execute
all documents required by any law or ordinance to be executed by the village clerk, and affix the seal of the village thereto whenever required. When
signing any documents, the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the village clerk followed by the word "By" and the deputy clerk's own name and the
words "Deputy Clerk".
B. The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised by such deputy clerk only in the absence of the village clerk from his/her office, and only
when either written direction has been given by the village clerk to exercise such power, or the president and board of trustees have determined by
resolution that the village clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such function.
C. The deputy clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the village clerk and shall have the authority and power herein described, and such further power and
authority as may be provided by statute. (1978 Code § 1-7-9)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
1-7B-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
The office of village administrator is hereby created. The village administrator shall be appointed by the village president, with the advice and consent of
the board of trustees. (1978 Code §§ 1-8-1, 1-8-2; amd. 2011 Code)
1-7B-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
A. The village administrator shall be appointed on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his/her
educational background, actual experience or knowledge of municipal management and the accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office. In
addition, the village administrator must, at the time of his/her appointment, possess the following minimum qualifications:
1. An advanced degree (beyond bachelor's degree) from an accredited American college or university in the area of public administration (or similarly
designated area of study); and
2. At least four (4) years' administrative experience in municipal or business practice.
B. The village administrator may, in substitution for the qualifications cited in subsections A1 and A2 of this section, at the time of his/her appointment,
have served for seven (7) or more years either as the assistant village administrator for the village or in some other clearly administrative (i.e.,
department head) capacity for the village. Any such individual must, at the time of the appointment to the position of village administrator, be currently
employed in an administrative position for the village. (1978 Code § 1-8-2)
1-7B-3: RESIDENCY:
The village administrator shall, within twelve (12) months of his/her appointment to that position, become a permanent, full time resident of the village. The
village administrator shall, for his/her entire tenure in that position with the village, remain a permanent, full time resident of the village. (1978 Code § 1-8-
2)
1-7B-4: TERM OF OFFICE:
The village administrator shall be appointed for a term not to exceed four (4) years plus sixty (60) days. It is expected that the term of the village
administrator shall run concurrently with that of the village president. In the event the position of village administrator becomes vacant during the term of a
village president or the village administrator's term is set at less than four (4) years plus sixty (60) days, any village administrator appointed to that position
shall be given a term not to exceed the remaining term of the previous village administrator or village president, whichever is shorter. In the event an
incumbent village president is reelected to that office, the term of the village administrator will still expire after no more than sixty (60) days, necessitating
reappointment of the individual serving as village administrator to that position. In the event an incumbent village administrator is not reappointed and does
not also receive the approval of the board of trustees within sixty (60) days of a village president's new term, then the term of the incumbent village
administrator shall expire. The village president shall have no authority to appoint a temporary village administrator except as provided by this code. (1978
Code § 1-8-2)
1-7B-5: COMPENSATION:
The village administrator shall receive such compensation as shall be designated and approved by the village president and board of trustees. (1978 Code
§ 1-8-3; amd. 2011 Code)
1-7B-6: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 21/618
The Village President, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, may remove the Village Administrator at any time. (1978 Code § 1-8-2)
1-7B-7: CONTRACT FOR SERVICES:
The Village Administrator may be given a written contract for services for a definite period of time, not to exceed the term as described in section 1-7B-4 of
this article. (1978 Code § 1-8-2)
1-7B-8: DUTIES:
The Village Administrator shall exercise general supervision over and be the administrative head of all departments and activities of the Municipal
government of the Village, shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments, and shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed
by ordinance or directed by the Village Board of Trustees, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. Maintain Office; Devote Time To Duties: The Village Administrator shall maintain an office in the Village Hall and devote his/her entire time to the
performance of his/her duties.
B. Act As Purchasing Agent; Purchasing Powers And Duties: In the event of a vacancy in the Office of the Purchasing Agent, the Village Administrator
shall act as the Purchasing Agent until such time as the office is no longer vacant and shall have such powers and duties as are set forth in title 3,
chapter 1 of this Code.
C. Hiring, Suspending Or Discharging Employees; Evaluation Of Employees; Recommend Compensation: Subject to limitations prescribed by the Board of
Trustees or by State law, the Village Administrator shall have the authority to hire and to discharge all employees. No appointment shall be made upon
any basis other than that of merit and fitness. Any and all removals or suspensions shall be immediately reported, in writing, to the Village President
and Board of Trustees with specific reasons given for said action. The Village Administrator shall establish a procedure by which there shall be a
regular (meaning no less than once per year) performance evaluation of each and every Village employee, including department heads. Said
procedure shall be presented to the Board of Trustees for their information within the final quarter of each fiscal year or at some other mutually
convenient time. The Village Administrator shall also recommend to the Board the rate of compensation for all employees.
D. Submit Budget; Assist In Preparation Of Appropriation Ordinance: The Village Administrator shall prepare and submit to the Village Board of Trustees
for its consideration as soon as practicable after the close of each fiscal year, a budget containing estimates of revenues and expenses for the ensuing
fiscal year, which can serve as a basis for the preparation of the appropriation ordinance for that year, and he/she shall assist in the preparation of such
appropriation ordinance.
E. Serve As Business Manager: The Village Administrator shall act as Business Manager of the Village under the direction of the Board of Trustees and in
cooperation with the Village Treasurer and Village Clerk, and shall control and direct all expenditures made by the Village. He/she shall, before such
expenditures are presented to the Board of Trustees for approval, certify as to the correctness of all bills and accounts and shall have supervision over
the accounting work of the Village. He/she shall keep or cause to be kept full and complete books of accounts showing the exact condition of the
financial affairs of the Village, and shall supervise the keeping of all necessary records to accomplish this to the extent that such supervision is not
vested in the Village Treasurer or Village Clerk by statute or ordinance.
F. Keep Inventory; Custodian Of Village Property: The Village Administrator shall keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the Village
and the location of such property. He/she shall be responsible for the care and custody of all Village property which is not by statute or ordinance
assigned to some other officer or body for care and control.
G. Enforce Laws And Ordinances: The Village Administrator shall enforce the laws and ordinances within the Village.
H. Control Village Departments: The Village Administrator shall exercise control of all departments of the Village and divisions thereof.
I. Serve As Department Director Or Superintendent During Vacancies: The Village Administrator shall have and exercise the power, authority and duty of
any Director or Superintendent of a department or division thereof prescribed by this Code during the time when the Office of such Director or
Superintendent shall be vacant where no person shall have been appointed thereto.
J. Issue Licenses And Permits: The Village Administrator shall issue all licenses or permits not otherwise provided for by the Statutes of the State of
Illinois. (1978 Code § 1-8-4)
K. Duties During Emergencies: The Village Administrator shall assign employees to perform duties or assume responsibilities outside the scope of the
position descriptions and to direct and implement the Village emergency operations plan in the event of a Village disaster declaration or a homeland
security code red threat. (Ord. 2019-21, 4-18-2019)
1-7B-9: COOPERATION WITH OTHER VILLAGE OFFICERS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS:
A. The Village Administrator shall render to the several officers of the Village, and such officers shall render to him, all such assistance as is possible in the
performance of their respective duties, and all officers and employees of the Village shall furnish and disclose to the Village Administrator such oral or
written information and material relating to the affairs of the Village as he shall request.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 22/618
B. The Village Administrator shall advise and assist all regularly constituted boards, committees and commissions of the Village and provide necessary
facilities for their operation and purpose, as directed by the Village Board of Trustees.
C. The Village Administrator shall attend all regular and special meetings of the Board of Trustees unless excused by said Board.
D. The Village Administrator shall, from time to time, make recommendations to the Board of Trustees relative to the adoption of such ordinances and
resolutions as he may deem necessary and such reports or recommendations relative to the affairs of the Village as he may deem advisable or as the
Board of Trustees may request. (1978 Code § 1-8-5)
1-7B-10: REPORTS AND STATEMENTS:
A. Monthly Reports And Statements: The Village Administrator shall render or cause to be rendered and correlated monthly to the Village Board of
Trustees a written report covering the work of each department or operation of the Village under his management, and monthly statements showing the
exact financial condition of the Village as of the end of the preceding month and a summarized statement of receipts and expenditures.
B. Annual Reports And Statements: The Village Administrator shall, at the end of each fiscal year of the Village, prepare and present to the Board of
Trustees a written report summarizing the workings of each department, office or operation of the Village under his management during the fiscal year,
and a financial statement including the same information for each fiscal year as is required on the monthly financial statement provided by subsection A
of this section. (1978 Code § 1-8-6)
1-7B-11: ASSISTANT VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR; ACTING VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
A. Office Created: The Office of Assistant Village Administrator is hereby created.
B. Qualifications: The Assistant Village Administrator shall possess a bachelor's degree from an accredited American college or university in the area of
public administration (or similarly designated area of study).
C. Powers And Duties: The Assistant Village Administrator shall exercise such powers, duties and responsibilities as are delegated by the Village
Administrator or as otherwise provided by ordinance. In accomplishing the duties of his office, the Assistant Village Administrator shall be under the
supervision of and shall report to the Village Administrator. In addition, in the absence of the Village Administrator through temporary absence,
disability, vacancy in office or otherwise, the Assistant Village Administrator shall carry out the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Village
Administrator.
D. Chief Of Police May Serve As: In the absence of, or where no Assistant Village Administrator has been appointed, the Chief of Police shall carry out the
powers, duties and responsibilities of the Village Administrator until such time as a Village Administrator or Assistant Village Administrator is appointed
as provided by this section. (Ord. 2013-61, 10-3-2013)
ARTICLE C. DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
1-7C-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
The office of director of finance is hereby created. Wherever in this code or other ordinances of the village the term "finance director" shall appear, it shall
mean and it shall be synonymous with the term "director of finance". The director of finance shall be appointed by the village president, by and with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. (1978 Code §§ 1-16-1, 1-16-2)
1-7C-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
The director of finance shall be chosen on the basis of objective executive, administrative and financial qualifications, with special reference to educational
background, actual experience and knowledge in the area of municipal and public finance and the accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office.
No person, however, shall be qualified to serve in the position of director of finance unless said individual possesses the following minimum qualifications:
graduation from a four (4) year college or university with major coursework in accounting, finance, business or related field; thorough, but not less than six
(6) years', experience in financial administration, including senior level supervisory experience; MPA/MBA or CPA are desirable; or any equivalent
combination of training and experience which provides the following knowledge, abilities and skills:
A. Thorough experience and knowledge of the applicable laws and administrative policies governing municipal finance practice and procedure.
B. Thorough knowledge of the principles and practices of municipal accounting.
C. Thorough knowledge of the principles and methods of organization, management and supervision.
D. Ability to plan, organize and direct comprehensive financial programs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 23/618
E. Ability to formulate and install accounting methods and procedures and ensure that these comply with federal, state and local laws.
F. Ability to prepare complex financial reports for presentation to experts and to the public.
G. Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with village officials and the public.
H. Ability to assess needs, perform fiscal planning, target available resources and implement effective programs.
I. Ability to provide informed financial advice to the village administrator, village board of trustees and the public.
J. Ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing. (1978 Code § 1-16-2)
1-7C-3: RESIDENCY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2013-61, 10-3-2013)
1-7C-4: TERM OF OFFICE:
The Director of Finance shall be appointed for a term not to exceed four (4) years plus sixty (60) days. The term of the Director of Finance shall run
concurrently with that of the Village President. In the event the position of Director of Finance becomes vacant during the term of a Village President or the
Director of Finance's term is set at less than four (4) years plus sixty (60) days, any Director of Finance appointed to that position shall be given a term not
to exceed the remaining term of the previous Director of Finance or Village President, whichever is shorter. In the event an incumbent Village President is
reelected to that office, the term of the Director of Finance will still expire after sixty (60) days, necessitating reappointment of the individual serving as
Director of Finance to that position. In the event an incumbent Director of Finance is not reappointed and does not also receive the approval of the Board
of Trustees within sixty (60) days of a Village President's new term, then the term of the incumbent Director of Finance shall expire, and that office shall be
declared vacant. The Village President shall have no authority to appoint a temporary Director of Finance except as provided by this Code. (1978 Code
§ 1-16-2)
1-7C-5: COMPENSATION:
The Director of Finance shall receive such compensation as shall be designated and approved by the Village President and Board of Trustees. (1978
Code § 1-16-3; amd. 2011 Code)
1-7C-6: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
The Village President, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, may remove the Director of Finance at any time pursuant to the requirements for
removal of office established by the Illinois Municipal Code. (1978 Code § 1-16-2)
1-7C-7: CONTRACT FOR SERVICES:
The Director of Finance may be given a written contract for services for a definite period of time, not to exceed the term as described in section 1-7C-4 of
this article. (1978 Code § 1-16-2)
1-7C-8: DUTIES:
The Director of Finance shall exercise general supervision over and be the Executive Manager for planning, organizing and directing the activities of the
Department of Finance and assisting in the long range strategic planning for the Village and shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by
ordinance or directed by the Village Board of Trustees, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. The Director of Finance shall maintain an office in the Village Hall and devote his/her entire time to the performance of his/her duties. Other duties shall
include, but not be limited to, the following: planning, organizing and directing all operations of the Department of Finance, including budgeting,
accounting, payroll, appropriation, disbursement and investment of all Village funds and other fiscal activities. Work also includes long range financial
planning. Supervision is exercised over Finance Department personnel directly or through a subordinate supervisor. Work is performed under the
administrative direction of the Village Administrator and the compliance with Federal, State and Village rules and regulations. Work is reviewed through
conferences and reports for overall program effectiveness.
B. Other duties and responsibilities shall include the following:
1. Plan, organize and direct the management and administration of fiscal records in compliance with Federal and State Statutes and this Code.
2. Assist the Village Administrator in long term strategic and financial planning.
3. Supervise, train, direct and evaluate department personnel and monitor all activities and operations of the department; set goals and objectives and
establish guidelines for performance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 24/618
4. Develop systems, policies and procedures for transacting financial matters. Develop plans for internal and external financing of projects.
5. Direct general accounting activities and develop and maintain internal control systems; act as the main contact person for the annual audit.
6. Implement Village Board goals as they relate to financial management programs.
7. Coordinate the Village involvement in various Municipal self-insurance pools, if any.
8. Prepare fiscal studies, income and expenditure estimates, cost/benefit analyses and financial reporting as required by the Village Administrator and
by law.
9. Advise the Village Administrator, Village Board of Trustees and other officials on budgetary and fiscal management.
10. Coordinate development of the annual budget, including the capital improvement plan. Assist in the preparation of ordinances to implement the
budget, including tax levy and tax levy abatement ordinances; monitor budget performance.
11. Coordinate the various functions of the Finance Department with all other departments and other public agencies.
12. Supervise procurement and purchasing of goods and services for the Village.
13. If so requested by the Village Board, attend Village Board of Trustees and other meetings as required and prepare items for Board action.
14. Promote and maintain responsive community relations.
15. Perform related work as required. (Ord. 2019-22, 4-18-2019)
1-7C-9: ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF FINANCE:
A. Position Created; Selection: The job position of Assistant Director of Finance is hereby created. If the necessary appropriations are made by the Village
Corporate Authorities for the position of Assistant Director of Finance, the Assistant Director of Finance shall be selected by the Village Administrator,
with direct input and recommendations from the Director of Finance.
B. Qualifications: The Assistant Director of Finance must possess the same qualifications as the Director of Finance, except that the Assistant Director of
Finance need not possess more than two (2) years' experience in financial administration and need not possess senior level supervisory experience.
C. Powers And Duties: The Assistant Director of Finance shall exercise his/her powers, duties and responsibilities as are delegated to the Assistant
Director of Finance by the Director of Finance, the Village Administrator or as otherwise provided by ordinance. In addition, in the absence of the
Director of Finance through disability, vacancy in office or otherwise, the Assistant Director of Finance shall carry out the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the Director of Finance, but shall not be deemed an officer of the Village. (1978 Code § 1-16-5)
ARTICLE D. DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
1-7D-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
The office of director of community development is hereby created. The director of community development shall be appointed by the village president, by
and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, for such term as may be determined at the time of appointment. In accomplishing the duties of
his/her office, the director of community development shall be under the supervision of and shall report to the village administrator. (1978 Code § 4-1-1b;
amd. 2011 Code)
1-7D-2: COMPENSATION:
The director of community development shall receive such salary as is designated and approved by the village president and board of trustees. (1978
Code § 4-1-1b; amd. 2011 Code)
ARTICLE E. DIRECTOR OF GOLF COURSE OPERATIONS
1-7E-1: PURCHASING POWERS AND DUTIES:
The person or firm which the village president and board of trustees designates or contracts with as the manager of the village golf course facility is hereby
expressly authorized, except where specific provision to the contrary is made by state law or by the village president and board of trustees, to purchase
and make expenditures for supplies, materials, equipment and services needed by the village for the operation or maintenance of the village golf course
facility for which funds are provided by appropriation, budget, golf course revenues or special fund designated for such purpose. The director of golf course
operations may exercise this authority, in his discretion, without previous authorization by the board of trustees to purchase supplies, materials, equipment
or services needed by the village for the operation and maintenance of the village golf course facility costing not more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00). In all other respects, all purchase orders or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment or services needed by the village for the operation
and maintenance of the village golf course facility involving the expenditure of more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be let to the lowest
responsible bidder after a public advertisement for bids and approved by the village president and board of trustees unless such board, by vote of twothirds
(2/3) of all the trustees elected, shall waive public advertisement for bids. (1978 Code § 1-11-8)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 25/618
Chapter 8
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
1-8-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created the department of public works of the village, which department shall consist of a director of public works and such other officers
and employees as may from time to time be provided by the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. 2013-61, 10-3-2013; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-
2014)
1-8-2: POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
A. The director of public works shall have charge and supervision over all public property of the village, including all streets, parkways, sidewalks,
municipal buildings and all other property of the village not specifically assigned to some other officer.
B. The director of public works shall have charge of and be responsible for the condition of all motor vehicles, trucks and other public works equipment of
the village and of all buildings or places in which the same are housed and kept.
C. The director of public works shall submit a proposal to be acted upon by the board of trustees before the expenditures of any monies on behalf of the
village. (Ord. 2013-61, 10-3-2013; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
1-8-3: RESIDENCY REQUIRED:
The director of public works shall, within twelve (12) months of his/her appointment to that position, become a permanent, full time resident of the village.
The director of public works shall, for his/her entire tenure in that position with the village, remain a permanent, full time resident of the village. (Ord. 2013-
61, 10-3-2013; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
Chapter 9
ETHICS
1-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given the definitions provided in this section:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action; b) relating
to collective bargaining; or c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elective office, or who has been appointed to fill a
vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code1.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 3 of the Illinois public labor relations act2.
COMPENSATED TIME: Means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time
requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment but, for purposes of this chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods,
personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are
not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the
officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate, in whole or in part, for time worked in excess of
the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of the election code3.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village of Glendale Heights, whether on a full time or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are
subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not include an
independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Glendale Heights.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an
officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a) compensation for employment; b) service credit towards pension
benefits; and c) health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by statute or this chapter, regardless of whether the officer is compensated
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 26/618
for service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include
activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action; b) relating to collective bargaining; or c) that are
otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under section 9-3 of the election code4, but only with regard to those activities that
require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.
B. Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser,
political meeting, or other political event.
C. Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value or intended as a campaign contribution.
D. Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization
for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
E. Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
F. Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
G. Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort
to get voters to the polls.
H. Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
I. Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in the capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
J. Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
K. Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for
elective office or for or against any referendum question.
L. Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question.
M. Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
N. Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention.
O. Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
A. Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer; or 2) by an employee; or 3) by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
B. Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer; or 2) with an employee; or 3) with the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
C. Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer; or 2) by an employee; or 3) by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
D. Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee. (Ord. 2004-
28, 5-13-2004)
1-9-2: ETHICS ADVISOR:
A. Position Created: The village president, with the advice and consent of the president and board of trustees, shall designate an ethics advisor for the
village. The duties of the ethics advisor may be delegated to an officer or employee of the village unless the position has been created as an office by
the village.
B. Duties: The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and state ethics laws. The ethics advisor shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the president and board of
trustees. (Ord. 2004-28, 5-13-2004)
1-9-3: ETHICS COMMISSION:
A. Created; Appointment; Restrictions: There is hereby created a commission to be known as the ETHICS COMMISSION OF THE VILLAGE OF
GLENDALE HEIGHTS. The commission shall be comprised of three (3) members appointed by the village president, with the advice and consent of
the board of trustees. No person shall be appointed as a member of the commission who is related, either by blood or by marriage up to the degree of
first cousin, to any elected village officer. (Ord. 2004-28, 5-13-2004; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Terms Of Office: At the first meeting of the commission, the initial appointees shall draw lots to determine their initial terms. Two (2) commissioners shall
serve two (2) year terms, and the third commissioner shall serve a one year term. Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed to two (2) year
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 27/618
terms. Commissioners may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms.
C. Organization: At the first meeting of the commission, the commissioners shall choose a chairperson from their number. Meetings shall be held at the
call of the chairperson or any two (2) commissioners. A quorum shall consist of two (2) commissioners, and official action by the commission shall
require the affirmative vote of two (2) members. (Ord. 2004-28, 5-13-2004)
D. Removals And Vacancies: The president and board of trustees may remove a commissioner in case of incompetency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in
office after service on the commissioner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a copy of the written charges against the commissioner and after
providing an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel upon not less than ten (10) days' notice. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as
original appointments. (Ord. 2004-28, 5-13-2004; amd. 2011 Code)
E. Powers And Duties: The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
1. To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers.
2. Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for disciplinary
actions, impose fines in accordance with section 1-9-7 of this chapter and refer violations of section 1-9-4 or 1-9-5 of this chapter to the appropriate
attorney for prosecution. The commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a violation of this chapter and not
upon its own prerogative.
3. To receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons who may
have violated the provisions of this chapter.
4. To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all
officers and employees of the village to cooperate with the commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with
requests by the commission shall constitute grounds for disciplinary discharge.
5. The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters clearly within the purview of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-28, 5-13-2004)
1-9-4: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
A. No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any "compensated time", as defined in section 1-9-1 of this
chapter.
B. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village in connection with any prohibited political activity.
C. At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as part of that
officer or employee's duties; 2) as a condition of employment; or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
D. No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being
awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any
prohibited political activity.
E. Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that
are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this chapter.
F. No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment; or 2) in a position, the salary for which is paid in
whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in aid
programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political party or of a political
organization or club. (Ord. 2004-28, 5-13-2004)
1-9-5: GIFTS:
A. Gift Ban: Except as permitted by this section, no officer or employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is
otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this section.
B. Exceptions:
1. This section is not applicable to the following:
a. Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public.
b. Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
c. Any:
(1) Contribution that is lawfully made under the election code; or
(2) Activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 28/618
d. Educational materials and missions.
e. Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
f. A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great
uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, or half sister, and
including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
g. Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances,
the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not
because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
(1) The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts
between those individuals;
(2) Whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or
business reimbursement for the gift; and
(3) Whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other
officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members.
h. Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per person in value on a single calendar day; provided, that the food or
refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared; or 2) catered. For the purposes of this subsection
B1h, "catered" means food or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
i. Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that
are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
j. Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this chapter, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee
of another governmental entity.
k. Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
l. Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
2. Each of the exceptions listed in this subsection B is mutually exclusive and independent of every other.
C. Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living with the officer or employee does not violate this
chapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its
value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded. (Ord. 2004-28, 5-13-2004)
1-9-6: COMPLAINT PROCEDURE:
A. Filing Complaints: Complaints alleging a violation of this chapter shall be filed with the ethics commission.
B. Notice Of Complaint: Within three (3) business days after the receipt of a complaint, the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of the complaint. The commission shall send by
certified mail, return receipt requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant within three (3) business days after receipt by
the commission. The notices to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time, and place of the meeting to determine the
sufficiency of the complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
C. Review Of Complaint; Decision On Validity:
1. Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' public notice, the commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is
deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this chapter, to determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the
complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the open meetings act. The commission shall issue
notice to the complainant and the respondent of the commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause, to
proceed, within seven (7) business days after receiving the complaint.
2. If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 1-9-5 of this chapter and there is a determination of probable cause, then the
commission's notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled within four (4) weeks after the complaint's receipt. Alternatively, the
commission may elect to notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and request that the
complaint be adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or if there is no determination of probable cause,
then the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that
notice shall be made public.
3. If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 1-9-4 of this chapter, then the commission shall notify in writing the attorney
designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in the
custody of the commission concerning the alleged violation.
D. Hearing: On the scheduled date and upon at least forty eight (48) hours' public notice of the meeting, the commission shall conduct a hearing on the
complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 29/618
the open meetings act.
E. Decisions And Recommendation: Within thirty (30) days after the date the hearing or any recessed hearing is concluded, the commission shall either: 1)
dismiss the complaint; or 2) issue a recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the village administrator or impose a fine upon the
violator, or both. The particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any fine imposed shall be a matter of public information.
F. Demand Of Public Hearing:
1. If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven (7) business
days after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of
the recommendation or fine.
2. Within fourteen (14) days after receiving the demand, the commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at least forty eight (48)
hours' public notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. Within seven (7) days thereafter, the
commission shall publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator and to the village administrator or impose a fine upon the violator, or
both.
G. Complaints Filed Near Election Dates: If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days preceding the date of any election at which the respondent is a
candidate, the commission shall render its decision as required under subsection F of this section within seven (7) days after the complaint is filed, and
during the seven (7) days preceding that election, the commission shall render such decision before the date of that election, if possible.
H. Time Limit For Filing Complaint: A complaint alleging the violation of this chapter must be filed within one year after the alleged violation. (Ord. 2004-28,
5-13-2004)
1-9-7: PENALTIES:
A. Violations Of Section 1-9-4:
1. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-9-4 of this chapter may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00). (Ord. 2004-28, 5-13-2004; amd. 2011 Code)
2. A violation of section 1-9-4 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the village by filing in the circuit court an
information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction
shall require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
B. Violations Of Section 1-9-5:
1. A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-9-5 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one thousand one
dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). (Ord. 2004-28, 5-13-2004)
2. A violation of section 1-9-5 of this chapter may be prosecuted by the ethics commission through the designated administrative procedure. (Ord.
2004-28, 5-13-2004; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Intentional False Reports: Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement
authorities, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official, may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00).
D. Additional Enforcement: In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally
violates any provision of section 1-9-4 or 1-9-5 of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge. (Ord. 2004-28, 5-13-2004)
Chapter 10
ELECTIONS
1-10-1: ELECTION DISTRICTS:
The village is hereby redivided into six (6) districts as described in exhibit A (consisting of 6 pages), attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a
part hereof, and as illustrated in exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a part hereof. Each of the six (6) districts shall be
represented by one trustee who shall be elected by only the electors of that district. (Ord. 2001-41, 6-7-2001)
1-10-2: MANNER OF CONDUCTING ELECTIONS:
All elections held within the village shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by state law. (1978 Code § 1-11-2)
1-10-3: COMPENSATION OF ELECTION JUDGES AND OFFICIALS:
Election officials and election judges shall receive no more than the maximum compensation permitted by state law. (1978 Code § 1-11-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 30/618
Chapter 11
VILLAGE RECORDS
1-11-1: OPEN RECORDS:
All ordinances, resolutions, minutes of public meetings and correspondence of the village board of trustees and other bodies of the village shall be
available for inspection by the public at reasonable times during normal business hours, upon request being made to the village clerk. (1978 Code § 1-11-
1; amd. 2011 Code)
1-11-2: AVAILABILITY OF RECORDS; FEES:
As provided by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/3 (2005), rules and regulations concerning the time and place where records may be made available, the
persons from whom said records may be obtained, and the associated duplication fees to be charged are hereby established as follows:
A. All records subject to the freedom of information act shall be made available for inspection and/or copying in the office of the functional unit of the village
responsible for the storage of the record requested, only during the regularly scheduled working hours of the unit responsible for the storage of the
record requested.
B. Requests for inspection and/or copying of public records subject to the freedom of information act shall be presented in writing to the village clerk or to
the department head or other designated employee of the functional unit of the village responsible for the storage of the record requested.
C. The village clerk shall maintain and make available to the public an index of village records with an indication on said index of the functional unit of the
village responsible for storage of the record.
D. The village clerk shall also maintain a listing of the regularly scheduled working hours of the functional units of the village responsible for the storage of
records, as well as the title of the department head or other employee designated to receive requests for inspection of records in each functional unit.
E. The indexes required to be maintained by the village clerk shall be posted at the office of the village clerk and at the office of each functional unit
responsible for the storage of records subject to the freedom of information act.
F. Costs incurred for duplication and/or certification of records provided in accordance with the freedom of information act shall be borne by the individual
requesting said duplication and/or certification rather than the general public.
G. The corporate authorities find that the costs listed below are reasonably calculated to reimburse the actual cost to the village to reproduce and certify
public records pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/6. Copies of public records shall be provided by the office of the village clerk, the
department head or other designated employee of the functional unit of the village responsible for the storage of the record requested, and fees shall
be charged in accordance with the following schedule:
Duplication of letter and legal size documents $1.00 per page
Photographs (per photograph) 8 x 10 = $10.00
5 x 7 = 8.00
3 x 5 = 5.00
If still photographs are requested from recordings, add an additional $5.00 per photograph
Video recordings CD/DVD recordings = $30.00
VHS tape recordings = 25.00
Audio recordings $15.00
Accident reports 6.00
Reconstructed accidents (reports) 25.00
Copies of manuals 25.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 31/618
H. Pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 140/6, all fees imposed may be reduced or waived at the discretion of the village clerk or the department head
of the functional unit of the village responsible for the storage of the record requested. All requests for reductions or waivers shall be made in writing.
(Ord. 2005-44, 6-16-2005)
1-11-3: FEES FOR SUBPOENAED RECORDS:
A. Fees shall be charged to all persons issuing a subpoena to the village or its departments for documents in accordance with the following fee schedule:
Duplication of letter and legal size documents $1.00 per page
Photographs (per photograph) 8 x 10 = $10.00
5 x 7 = 8.00
3 x 5 = 5.00
If still photographs are requested from recordings, add an additional $5.00 per photograph
Video recordings CD/DVD recordings = $30.00
VHS tape recordings = 25.00
Audio recordings $15.00
Accident reports 6.00
Reconstructed accidents (reports) 25.00
Copies of manuals 25.00
B. All fees imposed may be reduced or waived at the discretion of the village clerk or the department head of the functional unit of the village responsible
for the storage of the record subpoenaed. All individual requests for reductions or waivers shall be made in writing. (Ord. 2005-44, 6-16-2005)
Chapter 12
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
1-12-1: PLAN ADOPTED:
The revised official comprehensive plan of the village, dated November 30, 1973, printed in pamphlet form and incorporated herein by reference, is hereby
adopted and designated as the revised official comprehensive plan of the village. (1978 Code § 6-1-1)
1-12-2: AMENDMENT PROCEDURE:
Either the plan commission or the village board of trustees, in the manner provided by statute, may initiate or originate proposed amendments to the
official comprehensive plan adopted herein. (1978 Code § 6-1-2; amd. 2011 Code)
1-12-3: COPIES OF PLAN:
The village clerk shall keep in the village hall for inspection by interested persons copies of the official comprehensive plan and any amendments thereto.
The village clerk shall also make available copies of the official comprehensive plan for purchase as provided in chapter 11 of this title. (1978 Code § 6-1-
3; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 13
DISCLOSURE OF INTERESTS IN REAL ESTATE
1-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 32/618
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AGENT: A person authorized to act for another person or corporation.
APPLICANT: One who applies for any benefits on behalf of himself or some other entity.
BENEFICIAL INTEREST: Any interest in a land trust.
BENEFICIARY: Any person, corporation or other entity having a beneficial interest in a land trust.
CORPORATION: A body of persons authorized by law to act together as a single person and, for the purpose of this chapter, includes any association,
joint stock company, syndicate or partnership.
LAND TRUST: An express agreement whereby the legal and equitable title to real estate is held by a trustee for the benefit of beneficiaries who have the
exclusive right to manage and control said real estate.
LESSEE: One who has an interest in real estate by virtue of a lease.
NOMINEE: One designated to act for another, with limited authority.
OPTION HOLDER: One having the right to purchase real estate upon compliance with conditions named in a contract.
STOCKHOLDER: One owning certificates of stock in a corporation or membership in an association, joint stock company, syndicate or partnership. (1978
Code § 7-1-4)
1-13-2: DISCLOSURE REQUIRED:
A. Any application to the village board of trustees, village clerk or any other village board or commission for authorization, benefit, license, permit, variation,
zoning amendment or planned unit development relating to real estate shall be signed by the owner, lessee, option holder, agent or nominee of either.
B. If the application is made by a person other than the fee owner, it shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the owner that the person signing the
application has authority to make the application, and the application shall disclose the full names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant
and owner.
C. If the applicant or the owner is a corporation, the application shall disclose the names and addresses of the officers, directors, registered agents and
those shareholders or members owning in excess of five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock or interest in the corporation.
D. If the applicant is a trustee, the full name, address, telephone number and the extent of the interest of each beneficiary must be disclosed.
E. If the applicant is a beneficiary, nominee or option holder, the application must disclose the names, addresses and telephone numbers of those persons
or entities for whom he is acting, and if it is a corporation, there shall be compliance with the provisions of subsection C of this section. (1978 Code § 7-
1-4)
1-13-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person making a false or incomplete statement in the application shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). After a statement is determined to be falsified, missing or incorrect, a written notice of the omission or falsification shall be sent to the
applicant. Each day that elapses until the date the required information is furnished or corrected shall constitute a separate offense. (1978 Code § 7-1-4;
amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 14
ANNEXATIONS
1-14-1: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
A. Each petition for annexation to the village shall be accompanied by petitions for annexation of the same territory to the relevant school district, the public
library district and the fire protection district, unless the territory is already entirely within such districts, or any of them.
B. If a petition for annexation is pending before the plan commission or the village board, a preliminary plat for subdivision will not be acted upon by the
plan commission until the petition for annexation has been approved or disapproved by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 2012-55, 9-6-2012)
1-14-2: ANNEXATION FUNDS:
A. Fees For Petitions To Annex:
1. Established: No land shall be annexed to the village except upon the payment of both a nonrefundable application fee and an annexation fee as set
forth in chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 2011-82, 10-20-2011; amd. Ord. 2014-63, 10-16-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 33/618
2. Payment; Refunds: Such fees shall be paid by the owners to the village clerk upon the filing of the petition to annex. The annexation fee, but not the
application fee, shall be refunded to the owners of the property in the event that the village president and board of trustees fail to act upon the
petition to annex within one hundred twenty (120) days following the filing thereof, or if for any other reason the requested annexation fails to be
completed. (Ord. 2011-35, 6-16-2011)
B. Annexation Agreement; Deposit Requirements: Where an annexation is conditioned upon the execution of an annexation agreement, the owner or
petitioner, in addition to the foregoing fees, shall be responsible for payment to the village the following cash deposit to be applied against all costs and
expenses incurred thereby with regard to such annexation agreement including publication costs of legal hearing notices and fees paid to the village
attorney and village engineer for drafting, review, inspection and other related services; said costs to be payable when incurred and to be
nonrefundable. Any costs and expenses incurred in excess of the following cash deposit shall be invoiced by the village to the owner or petitioner who
shall be responsible for payment of the invoice upon its receipt. Any unused portion of the cash deposit provided in this subsection shall be refunded to
the owner of the property or petitioner upon annexation or in the event that the village president and board of trustees fail to act upon the petition to
annex within one hundred twenty (120) days following the filing thereof, or if for any reason the requested annexation fails to be complete.
Under 5 acres $ 500.00
5 to 10 acres 1,000.00
10 to 20 acres 1,500.00
20 acres and over 2,000.00
C. Proof Of Payment: No petition for annexation or annexation agreement shall be considered until the owner or petitioner has first exhibited a receipt of
the village clerk showing payment of the fees and, if applicable, the cash deposit provided in this section.
D. Application Of Fee And Deposit To Other Zoning Situations: If the owner or petitioner should apply for a zoning amendment, conditional use, variance or
a planned unit development in addition to annexation, only one application fee and cash deposit shall be required. (1978 Code § 1-11-4)
Chapter 15
LAND USE FEES
1-15-1: FEES ESTABLISHED:
The items listed below shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as indicated below:
Annexation application fee $250.00
Annexation:
Residential $250.00 or $1,000.00 per acre (whichever is greater)
Business or manufacturing $1,000.00 per acre or fraction of acre
Appearance code application fee:
Residential $ 0.00
Commercial or industrial 250.00
Conditional use application fee 500.00
Entertainment permit application fee:
Annual 150.00
Single event 50.00
Entertainment permit:
Annual 300.00
Single event 100.00
Plat filing fees (for subdivision):
5 acres or less 250.00
Over 5 acres, but not exceeding 10 acres 500.00
Rezoning 500.00
Text amendment 500.00
Variance:
Fences 50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 34/618
Other 500.00
Zoning compliance 75.00
(Ord. 2014-63, 10-16-2014; amd. Ord. 2015-50, 9-3-2015)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLAN COMMISSION
2-1-1: CREATED; RESIDENCY; APPOINTMENT; RESTRICTIONS:
A plan commission for the village is hereby created. Said plan commission shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be residents of the village and
who shall be appointed by the village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, on the basis of their particular fitness for duty on the
plan commission. No full time employee of the village shall be eligible for appointment to the plan commission. (Ord. 2003-53, 8-7-2003)
2-1-2: APPLICATION FOR MEMBERSHIP; RECOMMENDATION:
Any person desiring membership on the plan commission shall send a resume to the village administrator or the village president. An interview shall be
scheduled with the plan commission new member committee. Applicants shall be asked to fill out additional information prior to the interview. A report and
recommendation of the plan commission new member committee, along with copies of that committee's data sheets, shall be given to the commission
chair and to the village president and members of the board of trustees. (1978 Code § 2-1-1-1)
2-1-3: TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES:
Members shall be appointed to the plan commission for a term of five (5) years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only. Any
member may be reappointed to succeed himself. (1978 Code § 2-1-2)
2-1-4: RESIGNATION OF MEMBERS ELECTED TO PUBLIC OFFICE:
If elected to public office, that member's resignation from the plan commission shall become effective immediately upon official certification of the election
by operation of this section. (1978 Code § 2-1-2-1)
2-1-5: OFFICERS:
A. Established: The officers of the commission shall consist of a chair, a vice chair and a secretary. The secretary shall not be a member of the
commission. (1978 Code § 2-1-4)
1. Chair: At the time of making the appointments to the plan commission, one member shall be designated as chair of the plan commission by the
village president to serve a one year term. The chair may be reappointed to succeeding terms by the village president. The commission shall
annually recommend a member of the commission to the village president for appointment as chair of the commission. This recommendation shall
be advisory only. (1978 Code § 2-1-4-1)
2. Vice Chair: In the event that the member so recommended by the commission is not appointed by the village president as chair, that member so
recommended shall assume the office of vice chair of the commission. In the event that the member so recommended is appointed as chair by the
village president, the position of vice chair of the commission shall be filled by election by the commission members. Such election shall be held at
the first regular meeting after the appointment of a chair. The vice chair shall serve for a one year term. The vice chair may serve succeeding terms
pursuant to this subsection A2. In the event the office of chair is vacated, the vice chair shall assume the duties of the chair until such time as the
village president shall appoint a successor chair. In the event the office of vice chair is vacated, a successor vice chair shall be elected by the
commission members at the next regular meeting of the commission. (1978 Code § 2-1-4-2)
3. Secretary: The secretary of the commission shall be hired by the village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and the
secretary shall not be a member of the commission. (1978 Code § 2-1-4-3)
B. Duties: The commission officers shall have the following duties:
1. Chair:
a. The chair shall preside at all regular and special meetings of the plan commission.
b. The chair shall generally supervise the business of the plan commission.
c. The chair shall appoint committees and their chairpersons, and request volunteers for those committee positions.
d. The chair may serve as an ex officio member of any committee but shall not serve as chair of any committee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 35/618
e. The chair may seek the advice or input of citizens with experience or expertise on any matter before the commission, but such advice shall be
sought and rendered on a voluntary and unpaid basis.
f. The chair may consult with the village attorney in all cases where the powers and duties of the commission are not clearly defined. All questions to
the village attorney shall be directed through the commission chair. (1978 Code § 2-1-6-1)
2. Vice Chair: The duties of the vice chair shall be:
a. To preside at any regular or special meeting where the chair is absent.
b. To perform such other duties as assigned by the chair. (1978 Code § 2-1-6-2)
3. Secretary: The duties of the secretary shall be to attend all regular and special meetings of the commission, to keep the minutes of those meetings
and to distribute said minutes to the commission members within seven (7) calendar days of each meeting. (1978 Code § 2-1-6-3)
2-1-6: MEETINGS:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month of the year, with the exception of the month of
July and the fourth Tuesday in December, at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. at the Glendale Heights Civic Center. Any regular meeting falling on a legal
holiday shall be held on the next secular day at the same hour and place.
B. Committee Meetings: Committee meetings shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month of the year, with the exception of the month
of July and the fourth Tuesday in December, immediately following the regular plan commission meeting, or at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. at the
Glendale Heights Civic Center if there is no regular meeting.
C. Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the chair or any three (3) members of the plan commission. Each member shall be advised in
writing at least forty eight (48) hours before the time fixed for such meeting of the purpose of such meeting and the time and place of holding the same.
If any such notice cannot be personally delivered, then a copy of the same may be left at the residence of such commission member with a person in
his family over the age of ten (10) years. Public notices shall be properly posted, and the provisions of the open meetings act1, shall be satisfied. Only
that business designated for which the special meeting was called shall be addressed at that special meeting.
D. Quorum: No action shall be taken by the plan commission except at a duly constituted meeting wherein a quorum of a majority of commissioners then
appointed, which shall consist of no less than four (4) members, is present.
E. Expeditious Action: The plan commission shall act expeditiously on matters referred thereto after allowing for publication as required by law. (Ord. 2013-
65, 10-17-2013)
2-1-7: RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS:
All meetings of the commission shall proceed as follows:
A. Time: Meetings shall begin promptly at that time as established in section 2-1-6 of this chapter or at any other time so published.
B. Order Of Business: The order of business shall be as follows:
1. Roll call and declaration of quorum.
2. Reading and approval of the minutes of the previous meeting.
3. Communications.
4. Committee reports.
5. Unfinished business.
6. New business.
7. Questions or comments from the public.
8. Adjournment. (1978 Code § 2-1-10)
C. Robert's Rules Of Order: The rules of parliamentary practice comprised as the latest published edition of "Robert's Rules Of Order Revised" shall
govern the commission in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the bylaws of the commission. (1978 Code
§ 2-1-17)
2-1-8: ABSENCE FROM MEETINGS:
If a commission member is absent from two (2) consecutive meetings without prior notification, or if a member misses one-fourth (1/4) of the regular or
committee meetings during a year, that member may be dismissed from the plan commission by the village president, with the approval of the board of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 36/618
trustees, upon recommendation of the plan commission. A commissioner may petition the chair for a leave of absence due to lengthy illness or
hospitalization, and this type of leave, if approved, would be exempt from this section. (1978 Code § 2-1-13)
2-1-9: DUTIES:
The plan commission shall have the following duties:
A. To recommend changes in the official comprehensive plan of the village or any part thereof.
B. To make recommendations for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the residents of the village and contiguous territory.
C. To prepare and recommend to the village president and board of trustees, from time to time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of the official
comprehensive plan.
D. To give aid to the municipal officials charged with the direction of projects and progress for improvements embraced within the official comprehensive
plan, to further the making of these projects, and generally to promote the realization of the official plan.
E. To conduct hearings and make findings and recommendations in matters brought before the commission when public hearings are required by statute
or ordinance, or when such hearings are deemed desirable by the plan commission. The commission shall study and make recommendations to the
village president and board of trustees upon all plans for subdivision, resubdivision and annexation which are referred to them by the corporate
authorities, prior to any action taken by the village president and board of trustees.
F. To prepare, revise and keep correct and current the official map and other documents which form a part of the official comprehensive plan.
G. To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by this chapter and by such other ordinances as may be conferred by the village
president and board of trustees. (1978 Code § 2-1-5)
2-1-10: OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
The commission shall have the power and duty to prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities a plan of the present and future development or
redevelopment of the village and contiguous unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits of the village
and not included in any other municipality. The plan, when adopted by the village president and board of trustees, shall be designated as the official
comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the village. (1978 Code § 2-1-7)
2-1-11: COOPERATION WITH REGIONAL PLANS:
The activities of the plan commission shall be in cooperation with and implemented by any regional or county plan adopted by other municipalities in the
county insofar as the same is possible, including the Northeastern Illinois regional planning commission. (1978 Code § 2-1-8)
2-1-12: PUBLIC HEARINGS ON PLANS:
At all public hearings for approval of plans, an applicant may appear in his own behalf or be represented by counsel or his agent. The applicant or his
representative may address the commission outlining the nature of his request prior to the introduction of any evidence. Evidence shall be presented in the
following order:
A. The chair may clarify an applicant's presentation, if necessary.
B. The applicant presents his evidence and offers any testimony.
C. The commission and any objector may cross examine any witness of the applicant prior to the presentation of any new witness.
D. Any objector presents his evidence and offers any testimony.
E. The commission and the applicant may cross examine any objector's witness prior to any new witness.
F. Rebuttal testimony by applicant.
G. Rebuttal testimony by objectors.
H. The commission may offer its evidence. (1978 Code § 2-1-11)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 37/618
2-1-13: RECOMMENDATIONS OF COMMISSION:
A. All decisions of the commission shall be made by a majority vote of the members present and voting, by motion made and seconded. The chair shall
poll the membership by roll call vote. The motion shall contain findings of fact supporting the commission's recommendation. In the event that
conditions are imposed upon recommendations of the commission, such conditions shall be set forth in the motion, and the approved recommendation
shall be subject to such conditions being met by the applicant.
B. Final recommendations to the village president and board of trustees shall be made in writing not more than sixty (60) days after receipt from the
applicant of all documents, etc., required to be provided by the applicant.
C. Written notice of the commission's recommendation shall be given to the applicant within seven (7) days of the rendering of that recommendation.
(1978 Code § 2-1-12)
2-1-14: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
The plan commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public inspection in the office of the village clerk. The
minutes of each meeting and transcripts of hearings shall be approved by the plan commission and shall be a part of the public record of the commission.
All records of the commission shall be kept by the secretary and filed at the regular meeting place of the plan commission or at the office of the village
clerk and shall be part of the public record of the commission. The plan commission shall also file an annual report with the village president and board of
trustees, setting forth its transactions and recommendations. Other reports shall be presented as requested or needed. (1978 Code § 2-1-14)
2-1-15: INFORMATION PROVIDED COMMISSION:
The village clerk shall furnish the plan commission, for its consideration, a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The plan commission shall report in relation thereto, if it deems a report necessary or advisable, for consideration by the village president and
board of trustees. (1978 Code § 2-1-15)
2-1-16: COMPENSATION:
All members of the plan commission shall, after one year of faithful service, serve with compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the village
president and board of trustees, and the secretary of the plan commission may receive such compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the village
president and board of trustees; provided, that this section shall not be construed as preventing any such member from receiving any salary or other
compensation from the village for which he may be entitled by reason of his service as an officer or employee of the village in any capacity other than that
as a member of the plan commission. (1978 Code § 2-1-3)
2-1-17: STAFF AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT:
The plan commission may, with the approval of the village president and board of trustees, employ necessary help whose salaries, wages and other
necessary expenses shall be provided in the appropriations ordinance of the village. If the plan commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical
advice or service, it may be done upon authority from the village president and board of trustees. (1978 Code § 2-1-16)
Chapter 2
BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-2-1: CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS:
There is hereby created a board of police commissioners as provided by state law, which board shall consist of three (3) members whose terms of office
shall be three (3) years and until their respective successors shall be appointed and shall have qualified.
As of January 1, 2013, there are three (3) members currently serving. The first member is serving a term expiring April 30, 2013; the second member is
serving a term expiring April 30, 2014; and the third member is serving a term expiring April 30, 2015.
Vacancies on the board of police commissioners shall be appointed by the village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. No such
appointment, however, shall be made by any village president within thirty (30) days before the expiration of the village president's term of office.
Appointment to the board of police commissioners shall not preclude a member or secretary thereof from holding another appointed office or serving on
the board of another commission within the village of Glendale Heights. (Ord. 2013-10, 2-21-2013)
2-2-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. The board of police commissioners shall have charge of all appointments to and dismissals from the police department, except in the case of the chief
of police, and shall conduct and hold all entrance and promotional examinations in the manner required by law. (1978 Code § 2-2-2)
B. No member of the police department shall be removed or discharged or suspended except by the board of police commissioners after a hearing on
written charges, as provided by law. (1978 Code § 2-2-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 38/618
2-2-3: EMPLOYEE RECORDS:
A separate copy of the current and past records of police officers shall be maintained. These files shall be kept in a secure location separate from other
records and accessed only at the direction of the board of police commissioners, or the director of human resources. When either the board of police
commissioners or the director of human resources desires to access these records, the party desiring access shall notify the other, as well as the
employee whose records are sought. These records may only be accessed jointly by the secretary of the board of police commissioners and the director of
human resources. (Ord. 2000-36, 6-1-2000)
Chapter 3
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
2-3-1: CREATED; APPOINTMENT AND ELECTION:
There is hereby created a board of trustees of the police pension fund to be composed of five (5) members. Of these members, two (2) shall be appointed
by the village president, two (2) shall be elected from the regular police force by the active members thereof, and the fifth member shall be elected by and
from among the beneficiaries of the police pension fund. (1978 Code § 2-7-1)
2-3-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
A. Appointed Members: One of the members of the board of trustees of the police pension fund appointed by the village president shall serve for a term of
one year commencing on the second Tuesday in May 1966, and the other appointed members shall serve for a term of two (2) years commencing on
the same date. At the time of their appointment, the village president shall designate which member shall serve for which term. The successors of the
first appointed members of the board shall serve for two (2) years each or until their successors are appointed and qualify.
B. Elected Members: The elected members of the board of trustees of the police pension fund shall be elected for a term of two (2) years beginning on the
second Tuesday of the first May after such election. (1978 Code § 2-7-2)
2-3-3: CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS:
The election of members of the board of trustees of the police pension fund shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April at such place in the village
and under the Australian ballot system and such other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed members of the board. All members of the
regular police force shall be entitled to vote only for the police force members of the board. All beneficiaries of legal age shall be entitled to vote only for
the member to be elected from among the beneficiaries. No person shall be entitled to cast more than one ballot at such election. (1978 Code § 2-7-3;
amd. 2011 Code)
2-3-4: VACANCIES OF ELECTED MEMBERS:
Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any elected member of the board of trustees of the police pension fund, his successor shall be elected for
the unexpired term at a special election to be called by the board and conducted in the same manner as the regular biennial election. (1978 Code § 2-7-4;
amd. 2011 Code)
2-3-5: ORGANIZATION:
A. Meetings: The board of trustees of the police pension fund shall hold regular quarterly meetings on the second Tuesday of July, October, January and
April annually and such special meetings as may be called by the president.
B. Officers: At the regular July meeting, the board shall select from its members a president, vice president, secretary and assistant secretary to serve for
the period of one year, and until their respective successors are elected and qualify.
C. Expenditures; Quorum Required: No resolution or order for the payment of money shall be valid unless approved by a majority of the members of the
board of trustees of the police pension fund, and any order for such payment shall be signed by the president and secretary of the board. (1978 Code
§ 2-7-5)
2-3-6: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the members of the board of trustees of the police pension fund to control and manage exclusively the pension fund established in
section 6-1-10 of this code, and all such monies shall be placed by the village treasurer to the credit of the pension fund, subject to the order of the board.
The board shall order and direct the payment of pensions and invest the pension funds and perform such other duties in such manner as provided by
statute. (1978 Code § 2-7-6)
Chapter 4
RESERVED
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 39/618
(Ord. 2011-99, 12-8-2011)
Chapter 5
YOUTH COMMISSION
2-5-1: ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE:
The corporate authorities hereby establish the Glendale Heights youth commission, an organization to assess the needs of the youth in the community,
collaborate in the development and facilitation of villagewide efforts to benefit youth, and coordinate available youth services for improving the welfare of
the village youth. (Ord. 2001-26, 3-15-2001)
2-5-2: MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT:
The commission shall consist of twenty (20) members, to be appointed by the village president, with the advice and consent of the board, subject to the
following conditions:
A. Appointments to the commission shall include at least one representative from the village, the village police department, and the village parks,
recreation and facilities department.
B. Remaining appointments may be made from the following groups/organizations: local elementary and high school districts, the judiciary, the local
prosecutor's office, local churches, local business leaders, community representatives, parents and high school students. (Ord. 2001-26, 3-15-2001)
2-5-3: TERMS OF OFFICE; COMMISSION CHAIRPERSON:
All members of the commission, excluding students, shall serve terms of two (2) years. High school students, if any serve on the commission, shall serve a
one year term. The village president shall, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, appoint one member annually to serve as chairperson of
the commission. (Ord. 2001-26, 3-15-2001)
2-5-4: ORGANIZATION:
A. Meetings: Regular meeting dates for the commission may be established at dates and times to be determined by the commission. Special meetings of
the commission may be called by the village president and board of trustees.
B. Bylaws, Goals, Rules And Regulations: The commission may adopt bylaws, goals, rules and regulations as necessary to carry out the duties
enumerated in this chapter. (Ord. 2001-26, 3-15-2001)
2-5-5: DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND GOALS:
The commission shall have such duties, responsibilities and goals as assigned by the village president and board of trustees, including the following:
A. Create awareness of available youth services and activities to resident youths, member organizations, parents, and the community at large.
B. Identify youth oriented programs already in place, research new programs and facilitate the implementation of new or expanded programs as required
by the community.
C. Identify and publicize available counseling, referral programs and services for youth.
D. Seek and support new or enhanced opportunities for youth recreation and socialization, including safe after school facilities and programs, community
service programs and tutoring and mentoring opportunities for youth.
E. Identify young people in need of social, recreational and educational services.
F. Seek funding opportunities and support projects in order to accomplish the goals of the commission. (Ord. 2001-26, 3-15-2001)
2-5-6: COMPENSATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 40/618
Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. Travel expenses may be reimbursed in accordance with village travel expense regulations
if approved in advance by the village administrator. (Ord. 2001-26, 3-15-2001)
Title 3
FINANCE AND TAXATION
Chapter 1
PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES
3-1-1: PURPOSE; SCOPE; EXEMPTIONS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in public purchasing by the Village, to
maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity.
B. Scope: This chapter applies to contracts for the procurement of equipment, supplies, services and construction of public improvements entered into by
the Village. It shall apply to the expenditure of public funds by the Village for public purchasing. When the procurement involves any expenditure
regulated by Federal or Illinois law or by Federal or Illinois regulations, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any mandatory
applicable laws and regulations. (Ord. 2007-100, 10-18-2007)
C. Exemptions:
1. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the selection of the Village Attorney who shall be appointed by the Village President pursuant to
section 1-7-3 of this Code or other special legal counsel retained by the Village. (Ord. 2009-62, 11-19-2009)
2. Reserved. (Ord. 2017-59, 11-2-2017)
3. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to cooperative purchasing pursuant to section 3-1A-1, "Cooperative Purchasing Authorized; Purpose",
of this chapter.
4. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to purchases or contracts for professional services. (Ord. 2016-45, 8-18-2016)
3-1-2: PURCHASING AGENT:
A. Purchasing Agent Serve As: Except as otherwise provided herein, the Purchasing Agent shall serve as the principal public purchasing official for the
Village and shall be responsible for the procurement of equipment, supplies, contractual services and construction of public improvements in
accordance with this chapter, as well as the management and disposal of supplies. In the event of a vacancy in the Office of the Purchasing Agent, the
Village Administrator shall act as the Purchasing Agent until such time as the office is no longer vacant.
B. Duties: In accordance with this chapter and subject to the supervision of the Village Administrator, the Purchasing Agent shall:
1. Procure or supervise the procurement of equipment, supplies, contractual services, and construction of public improvements needed by the Village;
2. Exercise general supervision over all inventories of equipment and supplies belonging to the Village;
3. Sell, trade, or otherwise dispose of surplus equipment or supplies belonging to the Village; and
4. Establish and maintain programs for specifications development, contract administration, inspection and acceptance, in cooperation with the
departments using procured equipment, supplies, and contractual services, in construction of public improvements.
C. Delegation Of Purchasing Duties: With the approval of the Village President, Village Administrator and Board of Trustees, the Purchasing Agent may
delegate authority to other Village officials to purchase certain equipment, supplies, contractual services, or construction of public improvements items
if such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement of those items. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-3: COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING:
A. All contracts of the Village for the purchase of equipment, supplies, contractual services or construction of public improvements exceeding ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, except as otherwise provided.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall issue an invitation for bids which shall include specifications and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the
procurement.
C. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of
bids. Such notice may include publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the community in a reasonable time prior to bid opening. The
public notice shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening.
D. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 41/618
E. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such as
inspections, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for particular purposes. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered
in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids shall
set forth the evaluation criteria to be used.
F. Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes,
may be permitted where appropriate. If mistakes are discovered before bid opening, the bid may be withdrawn by written notice received in the office
designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for bid opening. Any modification prior to the bid opening must be submitted in a sealed
envelope prior to the scheduled opening of the bid. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices or other provision of bids prejudicial to the interest of the
Village or fair competition shall be permitted. In lieu of the bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw
its bid if, in the sole judgment of the Board of Trustees:
1. The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
2. The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made.
All requests to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes shall be supported by a written
request to the Purchasing Agent indicating the reason for the request.
G. Unless all bids are rejected by the Board of Trustees, the contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by appropriate written notice to the
lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. In the event the low
responsive and responsible bid for a construction of public improvements project exceeds available funds, the Purchasing Agent is authorized, when
time or economic considerations preclude resolicitation of work of a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the low responsive
and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds.
H. When it is considered impractical to prepare initially a purchase description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued
requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers have been determined to be
technically acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-4: COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSALS:
A. The Purchasing Agent, with the approval of the Village Administrator, may determine that it is not advantageous or practical to use the competitive
sealed bidding process and, alternatively, utilize the sealed proposal method.
B. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals.
C. Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided in subsection 3-1-3C of this chapter, provided the
minimum time shall be twenty (20) calendar days.
D. No proposals shall be handled so as to permit disclosure of the identity of any offerer or the contents of any proposal to competing offerers prior to the
time at which the proposals are due. A register of proposals shall be prepared containing the name of each offerer, the number of modifications
received, if any, and a description sufficient to identify the item offered. The register of proposals shall be open for public inspection only after the time
at which proposals have been formally awarded.
E. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors.
F. As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerers who submit proposals determined to be reasonably
susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation
requirements. Offerers shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals, and such
revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers.
G. The award shall be made by the Board of Trustees to the responsible offerer whose proposal is determined to be the most advantageous to the Village,
taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-5: AUTHORIZATION OF AWARD AND FORMAL BID WAIVERS:
The Village Administrator shall have the authority to provide approval authorization of recommendations for all formal bid waivers, award of formal sealed
competitive bids, and award of request for proposals with monetary values not to exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). The Village President and
Board of Trustees shall provide authorization for values exceeding twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), or values below twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) as requested by the Village Administrator, of the award of formal sealed competitive bids and award of request for proposals. The Board of
Trustees, by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all Trustees elected, may waive any and all requirements of section 3-1-3 or 3-1-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-100,
10-18-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
3-1-6: SMALL PURCHASES:
A. Any purchase not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may be made in accordance with the small purchase procedures authorized in this
section. Contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 42/618
B. Insofar as is practical for small purchases in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), no less than three (3) businesses shall be solicited to submit
quotations. The award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation and in the best interest of the Village. The names of the
businesses submitting quotations and the date and amount of each quotation shall be recorded and maintained as part of the purchase record.
C. The Purchasing Agent shall adopt operational procedures for making small purchases of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less. Such operational
procedures shall provide for obtaining adequate and reasonable competition for the supply, service, or construction of public improvements being
purchased. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-7: SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT:
A contract may be awarded without competition when the Purchasing Agent determines, in writing, after conducting a good faith review of available
sources, that there is only one source for the required equipment, supply, service, or construction item. A record of sole source procurement shall be
maintained as a public record and shall list each contractor's name, the amount and type of each contract, a listing of the item(s) procured under each
contract, and the identification number of each contract file. For contracts with values of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00), the Purchasing Agent must obtain prior authorization from the Village Administrator, and contracts with values exceeding twenty thousand
dollars ($20,000.00) must be authorized by the Village President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-8: EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the Village Administrator may make or authorize the Purchasing Agent and others to make
emergency procurement of equipment, supplies, contractual services, or construction items when there exists a threat to the public health, welfare, or
safety; provided, that such emergency procurement shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written
determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. As soon as practicable,
a record of each emergency procurement shall be made and shall set forth the contractor's name, the amount and type of the contract, a listing of the
item(s) procured under the contract, and the identification number of the contract file. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-9: CANCELLATION OF INVITATIONS FOR BIDS OR REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS:
An invitation for bids, a request for proposals or other solicitation may be canceled. Any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part when it
is in the best interests of the Village. Each solicitation issued by the Village shall state that the solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal
may be rejected in whole or in part when it is in the best interests of the Village. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. (Prior ord.)
3-1-10: RESPONSIBILITY OF BIDDERS AND OFFERERS:
If a bidder or offerer who otherwise would have been awarded a contract exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) is found nonresponsible, a
determination of nonresponsibility shall be made by the Board of Trustees. The unreasonable failure of a bidder or offerer to supply promptly information in
connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds for a determination of nonresponsibility with respect to such bidder or offerer. The
Purchasing Agent shall notify the nonresponsible bidder or offerer of the determination. The determination shall be made part of the contract file and be
made a public record. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-11: BID AND PERFORMANCE BONDS:
Bid and performance bonds or other security may be requested for supply contracts or service contracts as the Purchasing Agent or head of a using
department deems advisable to protect the Village interest and shall be required for all contracts for the construction of public improvements. Any such
bonding requirements shall be set forth in the solicitation. The bid or performance bond shall not be used as a substitute for a determination of a bidder's
or offerer's responsibility. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-12: TYPES OF CONTRACTS:
A. Authorized Contracts: The Village may use any type of contract which is appropriate to the procurement and which will promote the best interests of the
Village.
B. Multiterm Contracts:
1. Subject to the limitations imposed by law, a contract for supplies or services may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best
interests of the Village, provided the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation, and funds are
available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. The contract shall provide that the payment and performance obligations for succeeding
fiscal periods shall be subject to cancellation and termination without penalty dependent upon the availability and appropriation of funds therefor.
2. Prior to the utilization of a multiterm contract, it shall be determined in writing:
a. That the estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are reasonably firm and continuing.
b. That such a contract will serve the best interests of the Village by encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economies in Village
procurement.
3. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract
shall be canceled.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 43/618
C. Restrictions On Awarding Contracts: Multiple source awards shall not be made when a single award will meet the Village needs without sacrifice of
economy or service. Awards shall not be made for the purpose of dividing the business, making available product or supplier selection to allow for user
preference unrelated to utility or economy, or avoiding the resolution of tie bids. Any such awards shall be limited to the least number of suppliers to
meet the valid requirements. (Prior ord.)
3-1-13: CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION SYSTEM:
A contract administration system designed to ensure that a contractor is performing in accordance with the solicitation under which the contract was
awarded and the terms and conditions of the contract shall be maintained. (Prior ord.)
3-1-14: RIGHT TO INSPECT FACILITIES:
As a condition to the submission of any bid, proposal or quotation by a prospective vendor or contractor, the prospective vendor or contractor grants to the
Village the permission, at reasonable times upon adequate notice, to inspect the plant of the vendor, place of business, or work site of a contractor or
subcontractor at any tier which is pertinent to the performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the Village. (Prior ord.)
3-1-15: REPORT ANTICOMPETITIVE PRACTICES:
When, for any reason, collusion or other anticompetitive practices are suspected among any bidders or offerers, a notice of the relevant facts shall be
transmitted to the Village Attorney or the appropriate legal officer having jurisdiction. (Prior ord.)
3-1-16: VILLAGE PROCUREMENT RECORDS:
A. All determinations and other written records pertaining to the solicitation, award, or performance of a contract shall be maintained for the Village in a
contract file by the Purchasing Agent.
B. All procurement records shall be retained and disposed of by the Village in accordance with records retention guidelines and schedules approved by the
State of Illinois. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-17: MAXIMUM PRACTICABLE COMPETITION:
All specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the Village needs,
and shall not be unduly restrictive. The policy enunciated in this section applies to all specifications including, but not limited to, those prepared for the
Village by architects, engineers, designers, and draftsmen. (Prior ord.)
3-1-18: BRAND NAME OR EQUAL SPECIFICATION:
A. Brand name or equal specifications may be used when the Purchasing Agent determines in writing that:
1. No other design or performance specification or qualified products list is available;
2. Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase description not including a brand name specification;
3. The nature of the product or the nature of the Village requirements makes use of a brand name or equal specification suitable for the procurement;
or
4. Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the best interests of the Village.
B. Brand name or equal specifications shall seek to designate three (3), or as many different brands as are practicable, as "or equal" references and shall
further state that substantially equivalent products to those designated will be considered for award.
C. Unless the Purchasing Agent determines that the essential characteristics of the brand names included in the specifications are commonly known in the
industry or trade, brand name or equal specifications shall include a description of the particular design, function, or performance characteristics which
are required.
D. Where a brand name or equal specification is used in a solicitation, the solicitation shall contain explanatory language that the use of a brand name is
for the purpose of describing the standard of quality, performance, and characteristics desired and is not intended to limit or restrict competition. (Ord.
2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-19: BRAND NAME SPECIFICATION:
A. The use of a brand name specification may be used when the Purchasing Agent makes a written determination that only the identified brand name item
or items will satisfy the Village needs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 44/618
B. The Purchasing Agent shall seek to identify sources from which the designated brand name item or items can be obtained and shall solicit such sources
to achieve whatever degree of price competition is practicable. If only one source can supply the requirement, the procurement shall be made under
section 3-1-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-20: RESPONSIBILITY FOR SELECTION OF METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTING MANAGEMENT:
A. The Purchasing Agent, with input from the user department, with direction from the Village Administrator and department Director, shall have discretion
to recommend to the Board of Trustees the appropriate method of construction contracting management for a particular project. In determining which
method to use, the Purchasing Agent shall consider the Village requirements, its resources, and the potential contractor capabilities. The Purchasing
Agent shall include in the recommendation a written statement setting forth the facts which led to the recommendation of a particular method of
construction contracting management for each project.
B. It is recognized that the following methods are currently being used for control and coordination of construction of public improvements projects:
1. A single prime contractor (including a turnkey or design build contractor); and
2. Multiple prime contractors managed by:
a. A designated general contractor;
b. A construction manager; or
c. A Purchasing Agent, Public Works Director or a project manager. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-21: BID SECURITY:
A. Bid security shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts when the price is estimated by the Purchasing Agent to
exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in the State, or
the equivalent in cash, or otherwise supplied in a form satisfactory to the Village. Nothing herein shall prevent the requirement of such bonds in service
or commodity contracts when the circumstances warrant or at lower contract values.
B. The bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least five percent (5%) of the amount bid.
C. When the invitation for bids requires security, the failure to provide bid security will result in the bid being rejected unless it is determined that the bid
fails to comply only in a nonsubstantial manner with the security requirements.
D. If a bidder is permitted to withdraw its bid before award as provided in subsection 3-1-3F of this chapter, no action shall be had against the bidder or the
bid security. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-22: CONTRACT PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BONDS:
A. When a contract for the construction of a public improvement is awarded in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), the following bonds or security
shall be delivered to the Village and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract:
1. A performance bond satisfactory to the Village, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State or otherwise secured in a
manner satisfactory to the Village, in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the price specified in the contract.
2. A payment bond satisfactory to the Village, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State or otherwise secured in a manner
satisfactory to the Village, for the protection of all persons supplying labor and materials to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of
the work provided in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the price specified in the contract. (Ord.
2017-59, 11-2-2017)
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the Village to require a performance bond or other security in addition to those bonds
or in circumstances other than specified in subsection A of this section. (Prior ord.)
3-1-23: CONTRACT CHANGES:
Every contract modification, change order or contract price adjustment in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and every contract modification,
change order or contract adjustment extending the contract completion time under a contract for the construction of a public improvement with the Village
shall be subject to prior approval by the Board of Trustees after receiving a report from the project manager as to the effect of the contract modification,
change order, or contract price adjustment on the total project budget or the total contract budget. (Prior ord.)
3-1-24: ARCHITECTURAL, ENGINEERING AND LAND SURVEYING SERVICES:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the selection of the Village Engineer who shall be appointed by the Village President, with the advice
and consent of the Board of Trustees, pursuant to section 1-7-3 of this Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 45/618
B. If it is necessary to solicit proposals for professional architectural, engineering or land surveying services, the Village shall, unless it has a satisfactory
relationship with one or more firms, announce publicly all requirements for the architectural, engineering or land surveying services. In the procurement
of architectural, engineering and land surveying services, the Purchasing Agent shall request firms to submit a statement of qualifications and
performance data. The Purchasing Agent shall mail a notice requesting a statement of interest and in the specific project for which services are sought
to all firms who have a current statement of qualifications and performance data on file with the Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing Agent shall place
an advertisement in a newspaper or periodical of general circulation requesting a statement of interest in the specific project for which services are
sought and further requesting statements of qualifications and performance data from those firms which do not have such a statement on file with the
Purchasing Agent. The advertisement shall state the day, hour and place that the statement of interest and the statements of qualifications and
performance data shall be due.
C. The Village shall negotiate contracts for professional architectural, engineering or land surveying services on the basis of demonstrated competence
and qualifications at fair and reasonable prices. If the Village has not satisfactorily utilized the services of a firm in the past or if the professional
architectural, engineering or land surveying cost is expected to exceed forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) and there has been no past relationship, a
Selection Committee appointed by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, or in the absence of such an
appointment, a Selection Committee composed of three (3) members, including the Purchasing Agent, the Director of Public Works or another officer
with appropriate professional qualifications and the project manager or head of the department in need of the architectural, engineering or land
surveying services shall evaluate the firms submitting statements of interest taking into account qualifications, ability of professional personnel, past
record and experience, performance data on file, willingness and ability to meet time and budget requirements, location, workload of the firm and such
other factors as the Selection Committee may determine are applicable. The Selection Committee shall conduct discussions with no less than two (2)
firms regarding the proposed contract and the relative utility of alternative methods of approach for furnishing the required services and any required
public presentations by firms deemed to be the most qualified regarding their qualifications, approach to the project and ability to furnish the required
services. If fewer than three (3) firms submit statements of interest and the Selection Committee determines that one or both of those firms are
qualified, the Selection Committee may proceed to negotiate a contract as set forth below with the firm or firms determined to be qualified.
D. The Purchasing Agent, in consultation with the Selection Committee, shall negotiate a contract with the firm considered to be the most qualified for
architectural, engineering or land surveying services at compensation which the Purchasing Agent determines in writing to be fair and reasonable to
the Village. In making this decision, the Purchasing Agent shall take into account the estimated value, the scope, the complexity, and the professional
nature of the services to be rendered. Should the Purchasing Agent, in consultation with the Selection Committee, be unable to negotiate a satisfactory
contract with the firm considered to be the most qualified at a price the Purchasing Agent determines to be fair and reasonable to the Village,
negotiations with that firm shall be formally terminated. The Purchasing Agent shall then undertake negotiations with the second most qualified. If
unable to come to an agreement, the Purchasing Agent shall then move to the third most qualified or further until an agreement is reached. (Ord. 2019-
23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-25: AUTHORITY TO DEBAR OR SUSPEND:
After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the Purchasing Agent, after consulting with the
Village Attorney, is authorized to debar a person for cause from consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall be for a period of not more than
three (3) years. After consultation with the Village Attorney, the Purchasing Agent shall recommend to the Village President and Board of Trustees to
suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause to believe that person has engaged in any activity which might lead
to debarment. The suspension shall be for a period not to exceed three (3) months. The causes for debarment include:
A. Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the
performance of such contract or subcontract;
B. Conviction under State or Federal Statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or
any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects responsibility as a Village
contractor;
C. Conviction under State or Federal Antitrust Statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals; or
D. Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the Purchasing Agent to be serious as to justify debarment
action:
1. Deliberate failure, without good cause, to perform in accordance with the specifications or the time limit provided in the contract;
2. A recent record of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts;
3. Any other cause the Purchasing Agent determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a Village contractor including
debarment by another governmental entity for any cause listed; or
4. For violation of the ethical standards set forth in sections 3-1-30, 3-1-31, 3-1-32 and 3-1-33 of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-26: BID PROTEST:
A. Any actual or prospective bidder, offerer, or contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the
Village Administrator. A protest with respect to an invitation for bids or request for proposals shall be submitted in writing prior to the opening of bids or
the closing date of proposals, unless the aggrieved person did not know and should not have known of the facts giving rise to such protest. The protest
shall then be submitted within ten (10) calendar days after such aggrieved person knows or should have known the facts giving rise thereto.
B. In the event of a timely protest under subsection A of this section, the Purchasing Agent shall not proceed further with the solicitation or award of the
contract until the Village Administrator makes a determination either on the merits of the protest or that the award of a contract without delay is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 46/618
necessary to protect a substantial interest of the Village. Protesters shall exhaust their administrative remedy prior to initiating judicial remedies. (Ord.
2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-27: REMEDIES FOR SOLICITATIONS OR AWARDS IN VIOLATION OF LAW:
A. If, prior to the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the Purchasing Agent, after consultation with the Village Attorney, determines that
a solicitation is in violation of Federal, State, or Municipal law, then the solicitation shall be canceled or revised to comply with applicable law.
B. If, after the bid opening or closing date for receipt of proposals, the Purchasing Agent, after consultation with the Village Attorney, determines that a
solicitation or a proposed award of a contract is in violation of Federal, State, or Municipal law, then the solicitation or proposed award shall be
canceled.
C. If, after an award, the Purchasing Agent, after consultation with the Village Attorney, determines that a solicitation or award of a contract was in violation
of applicable law and the person awarded the contract has not acted fraudulently or in bad faith:
1. The contract may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined that doing so is in the best interests of the Village;
2. The contract may be terminated and the person awarded the contract shall be compensated for the actual costs reasonably incurred under the
contract, plus a reasonable profit, prior to the termination; or
3. If the person awarded the contract has acted fraudulently or in bad faith, the contract may be declared null and void, if such action is in the best
interests of the Village. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-28: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
The Village shall utilize joint or cooperative purchasing pursuant to the provisions of article A of this chapter whenever favorable prices are obtained for
required goods and contractual services. (Prior ord.)
3-1-29: SURPLUS PROPERTY:
A. The Purchasing Agent shall provide a written recommendation to the Village Administrator when Village property should be designated as no longer
necessary or useful to or in the best interests of the Village. The Village Administrator may approve or disapprove of the designation made by the
Purchasing Agent.
B. Upon approval of the designation by the Village Administrator, the Purchasing Agent is authorized to sell or otherwise dispose of all surplus personal
property with a current market value of less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). A record shall be kept of all dispositions of property
made by the Purchasing Agent.
C. For the disposition of surplus property with a value greater than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), approval of the Village President and
Board of Trustees, including approval of the manner of sale and publication of legal notice, is required.
D. The sale of surplus property is prohibited to Village staff and elected officials. (Ord. 2019-23, 4-18-2019)
3-1-30: CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
To the extent that violations of the ethical standards of conduct set forth in this chapter constitute violations of the Illinois Criminal Code, they shall be
punishable as provided therein. (Ord. 2007-100, 10-18-2007)
3-1-31: EMPLOYEE CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
It shall be unethical for any Village employee to participate directly or indirectly in a procurement contract when the Village employee knows that:
A. The Village employee or any member of the Village employee's immediate family has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement contract; or
B. Any other person, business, or organization with whom the Village employee or any member of a Village employee's immediate family is negotiating or
has an arrangement concerning prospective employment is involved in the procurement contract. (Ord. 2007-100, 10-18-2007)
3-1-32: GRATUITIES AND KICKBACKS:
A. It shall be unethical for any person to offer, give, or agree to give any Village employee or former Village employee, or for any Village employee or
former Village employee to solicit, demand, accept, or agree to accept from another person, a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with any
decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, or preparation of any part of a program requirement or a purchase request, influencing the content of
specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity in any proceeding or application,
request for ruling, determination, claim or controversy, or other particular matter, pertaining to any program requirement or a contract or subcontract, or
to any solicitation or proposal thereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 47/618
B. It shall be unethical for any payment, gratuity, or offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to the prime
contractor or higher tier subcontractor or any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order. (Ord. 2007-100,
10-18-2007)
3-1-33: USE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
It shall be unethical for any employee or former employee knowingly to use confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain, or for the actual
or anticipated personal gain of any other person. (Ord. 2007-100, 10-18-2007)
ARTICLE A. COOPERATIVE PURCHASING
3-1A-1: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING AUTHORIZED; PURPOSE:
A. In accordance with an act authorizing certain governmental units to purchase personal property, supplies and services jointly, the village board of
trustees does herein deem it to be in the best interests of the village that the village be allowed to participate in such joint purchasing under purchasing
agreements with the state of Illinois or with other governmental units or bodies in an effort to benefit from lower prices in obtaining such personal
property, supplies and services by joint purchase agreements with other governmental units or bodies and to similarly benefit from the reduction or
elimination of administrative time and manpower in otherwise processing such purchasing procedures on an individual basis, including the preparation
of bids, bidding information and other time consuming purchasing functions.
B. The village board of trustees does herein determine, approve and authorize the village to become a participant in the joint purchasing of personal
property, supplies and services, whenever feasible, with the state of Illinois or with other governmental units. (1978 Code § 1-11-5)
3-1A-2: PURCHASING OFFICER:
The village administrator is herein authorized and directed to serve as the village purchasing officer with respect to participation in the above mentioned
joint purchasing program, and he shall take all steps and prepare and submit all documents necessary to carry out the purposes of this article and his
duties and obligations as purchasing officer with respect to joint purchasing agreements negotiated with other governmental units. (1978 Code § 1-11-5)
3-1A-3: PERSONAL PURCHASES PROHIBITED:
All joint purchases made by the village or on behalf of the village shall be for items of personal property, equipment or services for public use only, and no
such purchasing shall be for the personal use or consumption of any individual or any village employee or official. (1978 Code § 1-11-5)
Chapter 2
VILLAGE TAXES
ARTICLE A. HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' AND SERVICE OCCUPATION
TAXES
3-2A-1: TAXES IMPOSED; RATES:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail in the village at the rate of one and one-fourth percent (1.25%) of the gross receipts
from such sales made in the course of such business; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village in the business of making sales
of service at the rate of one and one-fourth percent (1.25%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen either in
the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service. (Ord. 2009-39, 4-16-2009; amd. Ord. 2015-93, 12-17-
2015)
3-2A-2: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAXES:
Such home rule municipal retailers' and service occupation taxes shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be
consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food which has been prepared for immediate consumption)
and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
(Ord. 2009-39, 4-16-2009)
3-2A-3: COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT BY STATE:
The taxes hereby imposed and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident of the taxes shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois state
department of revenue. (Ord. 2009-39, 4-16-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 48/618
3-2A-4: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAXES:
The taxes established in this article will take effect July 1, 2016. (Ord. 2009-39, 4-16-2009; amd. Ord. 2015-93, 12-17-2015)
ARTICLE B. HOME RULE MUNICIPAL USE TAX
3-2B-1: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
A tax is hereby imposed, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal code, upon the privilege of using in the village any
item of tangible personal property which is purchased at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of Illinois government. The
tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the selling price of such tangible property with "selling price" to have the meaning as defined in the use tax act,
approved July 14, 1955. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
3-2B-2: COLLECTION BY STATE:
The tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue for the village and shall be paid before the title or certificate of registration for the personal
property is issued. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
ARTICLE C. AUTOMOBILE RENTING TAXES
3-2C-1: AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed; Rate: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting automobiles in the village at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of
section 8-11-7 of the Illinois municipal code.
B. Report Required: Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the
state department of revenue required by sections (2) and (3) of an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property to purchasers for use or consumption, approved June 29, 1922, as amended.
C. Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2C-2: AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed; Rate: A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and
which is titled or registered with an agency of this state's government in the village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile
while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-8 of the Illinois municipal code.
B. Report Required: Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the
state department of revenue required by sections (2) and (3) of an act in relation to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property to purchasers for use or consumption, approved June 19, 1933, as amended.
C. Application Of Tax: The tax provided in this section shall be collected from the persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given
as being in the village.
D. Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
ARTICLE D. MUNICIPAL UTILITIES TAXES
3-2D-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever any of the following words or terms are used in this article, they shall have the following meanings:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case
may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services
and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of
the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however that
"gross receipts" shall not include any amounts specifically excluded from the definition of gross receipts in section 8-11-2(d) of the Illinois municipal code.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 49/618
representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or maintaining with this state, directly or by subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business
or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary, or other affiliate is licensed or
qualified to do business in this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use
of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code, as amended1, directly in the generation, production, transmission,
delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
TAXPAYER: Persons (as defined herein) engaged in those activities subject to this article.
VILLAGE: The village of Glendale Heights. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2011-55, 8-18-2011)
3-2D-2: GAS DISTRIBUTION TAX IMPOSED:
Effective with respect to gross receipts actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after September 1, 2011, except as otherwise provided by this
article, a tax is imposed on the privilege of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the village,
and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. 2011-55, 8-18-2011)
3-2D-3: ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION TAX IMPOSED:
Except as otherwise provided by this article, a tax is imposed on persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling electricity
for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of 4.0 percent of the gross receipts therefrom. The tax
imposed under this section shall not apply with respect to gross receipts for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or
consumption of the electricity is subject to the tax imposed under section 3-2D-4 of this article. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2D-4: ELECTRICITY USE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed; Rates: Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code, as amended, and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed
upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in the purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at
the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
Amount Of Electricity Used Or Consumed
Price Per
Kilowatt Hour
(Cents)
For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours $0.488
For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours 0.294
For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours 0.265
For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours 0.257
For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours 0.250
For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours 0.235
For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours 0.232
For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours 0.228
For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours 0.224
Electricity in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt hours 0.221
B. Effective Date Of Tax: The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill
issued on or after August 1, 1999, and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill
issued to such customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the public utilities act, as amended2, or the first bill issued to such
customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
C. Tax Is Additional: The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the village, the state of Illinois or any other political
subdivision of the state.
D. Exemptions From Tax: Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of
the tax would violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution of the state of Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 50/618
E. Collection Of Tax:
1. Subject to the provisions of subsection G of this section regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this section shall be
collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same
manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
2. Any tax required to be collected by this section, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the person delivering the
electricity; provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity, the charges for which
are written off as uncollectible; and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit
such tax.
3. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to reimburse
them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village
upon request. For purposes of this section, any partial payment of a billing amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be
for the delivery of electricity.
F. Tax Remittance And Return:
1. Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in a form prescribed by the village. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due
on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under subsection E of this
section.
2. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under subsection E2 of this section,
then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the village and pay the tax directly to the village on or before the last day of the month
following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
G. Resales:
1. Electricity that is delivered to a person in the village shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving
the electricity has an active resale number issued by the village and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to
that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
2. If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the village for a resale
number. The applicant shall state facts showing why he is not liable for the tax imposed by this section on any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish such additional information as the village may reasonably require.
3. Upon approval of the application, the village shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
4. The village may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this section for electricity used or consumed
by the person, or if the number: a) was obtained through misrepresentation; or b) is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued
making resales.
a. If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this section
directly to the village on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect and remit the tax to the village on the amount
of electricity delivered by the reseller to the purchaser.
b. Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller; provided, that the person reports to the
village the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the village may reasonably require. (Ord. 2007-110,
12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2D-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAXES:
The taxes provided in this article shall be based on the "gross receipts", as herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after
September 1, 1988. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2D-6: TAXES ARE ADDITIONAL:
The taxes imposed by this article shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to the village by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes
or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2D-7: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAXES:
No tax is imposed by this article with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business or privilege may
not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transmitting gas or electricity, or using or consuming electricity acquired in
a purchase at retail be subject to taxation under the provisions of this article for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the
provisions of the municipal retailers' occupation tax act authorized by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code; nor shall any tax authorized by this
article be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate upon all
persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the village, whether privately or municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege
within the village. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 51/618
3-2D-8: SENIOR CITIZEN DISCOUNT:
A. The village shall reimburse village utility taxes paid by qualifying senior citizens. Qualifying senior citizens are seniors that: 1) have attained the age of
sixty five (65) years; 2) have a yearly gross income at or below forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00); and 3) are homeowners or renters who pay for the
utilities taxed directly to the utility company. Reimbursement will be made annually for the preceding calendar year. Reimbursement will be made by a
check or a credit and will be issued to a senior's account for amounts due or overdue to the village.
B. Applications for reimbursement must be submitted to the village in person no later than April 30 following each calendar year. Applications received
after this date are not eligible.
C. All applicants must provide the following:
1. Proof of age: driver's license, birth certificate, medicare card or other acceptable form of identification. Once established, proof of age does not need
to be provided in future years.
2. Proof of ownership/rental status: tax bill or lease for the address for which reimbursement is requested. The name must be the same as the rebate
application and proof used for identification.
3. Proof of income: copy of U.S. tax return for the year reimbursement is requested showing adjusted gross income; IRS notice 703; or other proof of
income acceptable to the village.
D. For applicants who attain the age of sixty five (65) years during the year for which an application is filed, reimbursement will be made for those utility
billing periods which start in the month the applicant attains the age of sixty five (65), regardless of whether the billing period starts before or after the
applicant's date of birth.
E. A married couple shall qualify when one spouse attains the age of sixty five (65), if the other requirements are fulfilled.
F. Reimbursements shall be made for principal residence addresses only. Businesses or multi-family addresses are not eligible.
G. The maximum reimbursement to any one qualifying applicant will be seventy five dollars ($75.00) per year, subject to annual appropriations.
H. The senior citizen utility tax rebate program shall be administered in accordance with the village's promulgated administrative policy guidelines from
time to time modified. (Ord. 2010-87, 12-9-2010)
3-2D-9: TAX RETURNS AND REMITTANCES:
A. On or before October 31, 1988, each taxpayer shall make a return to the village treasurer for the month of September stating:
1. His name.
2. His principal place of business.
3. His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the tax is imposed.
4. Amount of tax.
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
B. On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the village treasurer for the corresponding month period.
C. The taxpayer making the return herein provided shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the village treasurer the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided, that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments
based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2D-10: CREDITS:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an
error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. (Ord. 2011-55, 8-
18-2011)
3-2D-11: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such
amount. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 52/618
3-2D-12: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this article shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity,
including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this article. The
books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times of the day during business hours. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2D-13: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
3-2D-14: TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF TAXES:
The taxes provided in this article for all taxpayers shall be suspended for a twelve (12) month period commencing March 1, 2001 through February 28,
2002, with respect to "gross receipts", as herein defined, actually paid by the taxpayer for services billed. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
ARTICLE E. SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
3-2E-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever any of the following words or terms are used in this article, they shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the village and for all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every
kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges"
for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel termination point within the village that has imposed a tax under this article and
charges for the portion of the interoffice channels provided within the village. Charges for that portion of the interoffice channel connecting two (2) or more
channel termination points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional boundary of the village, shall be determined by the retailer by
multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the interoffice channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points
that are located within the jurisdictional boundary of the village and the denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points connected
by the interoffice channel. However, "gross charge" shall not include:
A. Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: 1) the tax imposed by this article; 2) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act; 3) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code; 4) 911 surcharges; or 5) charges added to
customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, as amended, or any similar charges added to
customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois commerce commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax
liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the public utilities act;
B. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the village;
C. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
D. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
E. Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under section 9-222.1 of the public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the department of commerce and economic opportunity;
F. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this article has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation
between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;
G. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made);
H. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications devices;
I. Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the simplified municipal telecommunications act;
J. Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: 1) those charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are
taxable; 2) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or invoice; and 3) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges
on the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the "gross
charge" from the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable
services or telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the retailer of the telecommunications.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 53/618
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a
receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state universities created
by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this section. The department may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to
the satisfaction of the department, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a
permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in
this state in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this state. The permit may be
revoked by the department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this
state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or
other representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent
or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems,
and maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing conformity act.
For air to ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in the village and who incurs a tax liability as authorized by this article.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed thereto, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer
exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way communications, or any other transmission of
messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar
facilities. As used in this article, "private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or
priority use of a communications channel or group of channels from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition
of "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates
or terminates the taxable end to end communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into end to end telecommunications service shall be
nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under
this article. For purposes of this article, "prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in section 2-27 of the retailers' occupations
tax act. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
3-2E-2: TAX IMPOSED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all of the following acts or privileges:
1. The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of
the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multivillage taxation of the act or privilege that is
subject to taxation under this subsection A1, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall be
allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this subsection A1 to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid
in the village that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other municipal tax. However, such tax is not imposed on such act or privilege to
the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by municipalities in
this state.
2. The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent (6%) of
the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multistate taxation of the act or privilege that is
subject to taxation under this subsection A2, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be
allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this article to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in
such other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this state. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-
2008; amd. 2011 Code)
B. The tax imposed by this article is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the constitution and statutes of
the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the village. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2E-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
A. The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be remitted by
such retailer to the department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this article and any such tax collected by such retailer
and required to be remitted to the department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 54/618
by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed
by the department. The tax authorized by this article shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law
in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be
required to pay the tax directly to the department in the manner provided by the department.
B. Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this article shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for
telecommunications. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2E-4: TAX RETURNS:
Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed under this article on telecommunications retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the department pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement this act. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2E-5: RESALES:
A. If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized
by this article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the department may reasonably require.
B. Upon approval of the application, the department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
department may cancel any number which was obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunications tax
free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales.
C. Except as provided in subsections A and B of this section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be
made tax free on the grounds of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the department and furnishes that number
to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is nontaxable because of being a sale for resale. (Ord. 2007-110,
12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
ARTICLE F. HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX1
3-2F-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
HOTEL AND MOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping
accommodations. The terms include inns, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses and apartment houses.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupies or has the right to occupy any room or rooms in a hotel or motel for at least thirty (30) consecutive
days. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
3-2F-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE; RESPONSIBILITY FOR TAX:
A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of renting, leasing or letting of rooms in a motel or hotel in the village at a rate of five
percent (5%) of the gross rental receipts from such rental, leasing or letting. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax shall be borne by
the user, lessee or tenant of the rooms. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-1996)
3-2F-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
A. The tax imposed under section 3-2F-2 of this article shall not apply to the renting, leasing or letting of accommodations in a hotel or motel to permanent
residents. If a hotel or motel provides accommodations for both permanent residents and other guests, the rental obtained from the permanent
residents shall not be included in the computation of the tax due.
B. Village residents required to rent, lease or let accommodations in a village hotel or motel due to emergency circumstances rendering their village
residence uninhabitable because of fire, tornado or other weather or natural disaster shall be exempt from the payment of the tax imposed under
section 3-2F-2 of this article. Such village resident shall notify the village administrator of said housing emergency within fourteen (14) days of the date
hotel/motel occupancy begins. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-1996)
3-2F-4: TAX IS ADDITIONAL:
The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-1996)
3-2F-5: COLLECTION OF TAX:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 55/618
The owner and operator of each hotel or motel and the person to whom the license to operate the hotel or motel has been issued by the village shall bear,
jointly and severally, the duty to collect the tax from each user, lessee or tenant of rooms in such hotel or motel. Every person required to collect the tax
levied by this article shall secure the tax from the user, lessee or tenant of a room or rooms at the time that the price, charge or rent to which it applies is
collected. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-1996)
3-2F-6: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Administration And Enforcement Officer: The director of finance is hereby designated as the administration and enforcement officer of the tax hereby
imposed on behalf of the village. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the director of finance to collect all amounts due the village from the owners,
operators and licensees of motels and hotels in the village.
B. Tax Returns: A sworn monthly hotel and motel occupancy tax return shall be filed with the director of finance by each owner, operator or licensee of
each hotel or motel in the village showing all receipts from each renting, leasing or letting of rooms during the preceding month. The dates upon which
monthly returns are to be filed shall be provided by rules and regulations promulgated by the director of finance.
C. Inspection Of Books And Records: The director of finance or designee may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for the purposes of inspection and
examination of its books and records for the proper administration of this article, and for the enforcement of collection of the tax hereby imposed. It is
unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the director of finance or designee in the discharge of his duties hereunder.
D. Failure To Pay Or Collect Tax:
1. Whenever any person fails to pay the tax herein provided, or when any owner, operator or licensee of a hotel or motel in the village fails to collect the
tax imposed from any person who has the ultimate liability for its payment, the village prosecutor shall bring or cause to be brought an action to
enforce the payment of the tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
2. In addition, if the village president, after holding a hearing, finds that any hotel or motel owner, operator or licensee has wilfully evaded his or her
responsibility to collect the tax imposed by this article, the president may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by the tax evader. The person
shall have an opportunity to be heard at a hearing, to be held not less than five (5) days after receipt of notice of the time and place thereof,
addressed to him or her at his or her last known place of business. Any suspension or conviction resulting from the hearing shall not relieve or
discharge any civil liability for nonpayment of the tax due. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-1996)
3-2F-7: INTEREST, PENALTIES AND FINES:
A. In the event of failure by any hotel or motel owner, operator or licensee to collect and pay to the director of finance the tax required herein within thirty
(30) days after it is due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon the tax at the rate of one percent (1%) per month. In addition, a penalty of ten
percent (10%) of the tax and interest due shall be assessed and collected against any hotel or motel owner, operator or licensee who fails to collect
and remit the tax imposed by this article.
B. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any provision
of this article, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the first offense, and not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one hundred eighty (180) day period. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-1996)
3-2F-8: DISPOSITION AND USE OF PROCEEDS:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the village treasury and shall be
credited to and deposited in the general fund of the village. The use of the tax is solely to promote tourism and conventions within the village or otherwise
to attract nonresident overnight visitors to the village, and no funds received pursuant to this article shall be used to advertise for or otherwise promote new
competition in the hotel business. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
ARTICLE G. AMUSEMENT TAX
3-2G-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever any of the following words or terms are used in this article, they shall have the following meanings:
AMUSEMENT: Any theatrical, dramatic, dance or musical performance, motion picture show, flower, poultry or animal show, animal act, circus, rodeo,
athletic contest, sport, game or exhibition for public entertainment or showing or any entertainment offered for public observation or any entertainment
offered for public participation, including, without being limited to, dancing, carnivals, amusement rides and games, bowling, billiard and pool games and
golf driving ranges.
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE: The director of finance of the village of Glendale Heights.
PATRON: Any natural person who pays a fee, donation or other charge for the privilege of admission to observe or participate in an amusement, which
privilege may or may not be incidental to or in conjunction with the receipt of food, beverages, services or property of any kind or nature.
PERSON: Any natural person, administrator, executor, conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club,
company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 56/618
cooperative, fraternal, or otherwise. Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term, as applied to
associations, shall mean the owners or part owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
VILLAGE: The village of Glendale Heights, Illinois, a municipal corporation. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2G-2: TAX IMPOSED; AMOUNT; EXEMPTIONS:
A. A tax is imposed upon all amusements operated or performed on the premises of a holder of a local retailer liquor dealer's license within the village in
an amount equal to ten percent (10%) per patron admitted to the place of business for the observation or admission fee charges or participation in such
amusements; however, the tax established by this subsection shall not apply to any amusement, the proceeds of which inure exclusively to the benefit
of bona fide religious, educational, charitable or other governmental societies or organizations which have requested and received an exemption.
Written request for the exemption shall be made to the village clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the event or first event if there is a succession of
such events.
B. A tax is imposed upon all amusements operated or performed on the premises of a holder of a local retailer liquor dealer's license which does not
collect a fee, donation or other charge for the privilege of admission to observe or participate in an amusement and upon all amusements operated or
performed on the premises of a business which does not hold a local retailer liquor dealer's license within the village in an amount equal to one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from admission fees, donations or other charges, exclusive of any federal or state tax, to observe or participate in such
amusements; however, the tax established by this subsection shall not apply to any amusement, the proceeds of which inure exclusively to the benefit
of religious, educational, charitable or other governmental societies or organizations which have requested and received an exemption. Written request
for the exemption shall be made to the village clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the event or first event if there is a succession of such events.
C. The village clerk shall issue an exemption, upon written request therefor made at least fifteen (15) days prior to the event, not to exceed one per year
per business establishment, for the operation or performance of an amusement operated or performed solely within a single calendar day of the year.
(Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2G-3: LIABILITY FOR TAX; COLLECTION AND PAYMENT:
A. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the person who pays a fee, donation or other charge to observe or
participate in any such amusement. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes.
B. It shall be the duty of every owner, manager or operator of an amusement to secure said tax from the person paying a fee, donation or other charge to
observe or participate in said amusement and pay over to the village said tax under rules and regulations prescribed by the director of finance and as
otherwise provided by this article.
C. The tax herein levied shall be secured by the owner, manager, or operator of an amusement from the person paying a fee, donation or other charge
when collecting the price, donation, charge or admission fee to which it applies. Every such person shall be given a bill, invoice, receipt or other
statement or memorandum of the price, donation, charge or admission fee upon which the amusement tax shall be stated, charged and shown
separately. The amusement tax shall be paid to the person required to collect it as trustee for and on behalf of the village. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007,
eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2G-4: TAX RETURNS; FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
A. Every owner, manager, or operator of an amusement within the village shall file with the director of finance a sworn tax return on a monthly basis
showing tax receipts received with respect to amusements during the preceding monthly period, upon forms prescribed by the director of finance. At
the time of filing said tax return, the owner, manager or operator of an amusement shall pay to the village all taxes due for the period to which the tax
return applies.
B. If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of two percent (2%) per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be
added and collected. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein provided, upon the request of the director of finance, the village attorney
shall bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord.
2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2G-5: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every owner, manager or operator of an amusement in the village shall keep books and records showing the prices, donations, admission fees or charges
made or charged and taxable under this article. The director of finance, or his designee, shall, upon demand, during normal business hours, have full
access to said books and records. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
3-2G-6: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES; HEARING:
If the village administrator, after hearing held by or for him, shall find that any person has wilfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this article, he
may suspend or revoke all village licenses held by said tax evader. The owner, manager or operator of the amusement shall have an opportunity to be
heard and such hearing to be held not less than five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the hearing addressed to the owner, manager or operator
at his last known place of business. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge the owner, manager or operator of an
amusement from his civil liability for the payment of the tax nor for prosecution of such offense. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 57/618
3-2G-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person who fails to make a return, who makes a fraudulent return, or who is found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or refusing to
comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article, except when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and
not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in any one
hundred eighty (180) day period and, in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 2007-110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; amd.
2011 Code)
3-2G-8: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article, including penalties, shall be deposited in the general fund of the village. (Ord. 2007-
110, 12-6-2007, eff. 1-1-2008)
ARTICLE H. REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX
3-2H-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words or terms are used, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BENEFICIAL INTEREST: Any interest, regardless of how small or minimal such interest may be, in a land trust held by a trustee for the beneficiaries of
such land trust.
PERSON: Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture,
club, company, joint stock company, business trust, municipal corporation, political subdivision of the State of Illinois, domestic or foreign corporation,
association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise, and the United
States or any instrumentality thereof. Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term, as applied to
associations, shall mean the owners or part owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
RECORDATION: The recording of deeds or trust documents with the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County, Illinois.
VALUE: The amount of the full actual consideration for any transfer covered hereunder, including the amount of any mortgage, lien or liens assumed by
the grantee or purchasers.
VILLAGE: Village of Glendale Heights, DuPage County, Illinois. (1978 Code § 1-15-1)
3-2H-2: TAX IMPOSED; AMOUNT:
A tax is hereby imposed on the privilege of transferring title to or assigning the beneficial interest in a land trust of real estate located in the Village as
evidenced by the recordation of a deed or trust document by any person or by the delivery of any deed agreement or assignment of interest of said real
property, whether the same: a) vests the person with the beneficial interest in or legal title to said property; b) vests in the person, possession or use
thereof for any purpose; or c) secures future payment of money or the future transfer of any such property. The tax imposed shall be the greater of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) or three dollars ($3.00) for every one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of value or fraction thereof as stated in the declaration required
under section 3-2H-6 of this article. (1978 Code § 1-15-2)
3-2H-3: EXEMPT TRANSACTIONS:
The tax herein levied and imposed shall not apply to the following deeds, trust documents, or transfers provided the declaration form required under
section 3-2H-6 of this article is submitted and accompanied by a twenty five dollar ($25.00) fee paid to the Village and, in each case, is accompanied by a
certificate in the form prescribed by the Finance Director, setting forth facts evidencing the exempt nature of the deed, trust document, or transfer as
hereinafter provided:
A. Deeds or trust documents relating to: 1) property acquired by any governmental body or from any governmental body, 2) property or interests
transferred between governmental bodies, or 3) property acquired from any corporation, society, association, foundation or institution organized and
operated exclusively for charitable, religious or educational purposes. However, deeds or trust documents, other than those in which the Administrator
of Veterans' Affairs of the United States is the grantee pursuant to a foreclosure proceeding, shall not be exempt from filing the exemption.
B. Deeds or trust documents that secure debt or other obligation.
C. Deeds or trust documents that, without additional consideration, confirm, correct, modify, or supplement a deed or trust document previously recorded.
D. Deeds or trust documents where the actual consideration is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
E. Tax deeds.
F. Deeds or trust documents that release property that is security for a debt or other obligation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 58/618
G. Deeds of partition; provided, however, that if a party receives a share greater than its undivided interest in the real property, then such party shall be
liable for tax computed upon any consideration paid for the excess.
H. Deeds or trust documents made pursuant to mergers, consolidations or transfers or sales of substantially all of the assets of corporations pursuant to
plans of reorganization.
I. Deeds or trust documents made by a subsidiary corporation to its parent corporation for no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the
subsidiary's stock.
J. Deeds when there is an actual exchange of real estate and trust documents when there is an actual exchange of beneficial interests, except that the
money difference or money's worth paid from one to the other is not exempt from the tax.
K. Transfers in which the deed or other instrument of transfer is issued to the mortgagee or secured creditor pursuant to a mortgage or security interest
foreclosure proceeding or sale or pursuant to a transfer in lieu of foreclosure.
L. A transfer by lease.
M. A transfer from a decedent to his executor or administrator.
N. A transfer from a minor to his guardian or from a guardian to his ward upon attaining majority.
O. A transfer from an incompetent to his conservator, or similar legal representative, or from a conservator or similar legal representative to a former
incompetent upon removal of disability.
P. A transfer from a bank, trust company, financial institution, insurance company, or other similar entity, or nominee, custodian, or trustee therefor, to a
public officer or commission, or person designated by such officer or commission, or by a court, in the taking over of its assets, in whole or in part,
under State or Federal law regulating supervising such institutions, or upon redelivery or retransfer by any such transferee or successor thereto.
Q. Transfer from a bankrupt person or person in receivership due to insolvency to the trustee in bankruptcy or receiver, from such receiver to such trustee
or from such trustee to such receiver, or upon redelivery or retransfer by any such transferee or successor thereto.
R. A transfer from a transferee under subsections M, N, O, P, and Q, inclusive, of this section to his successor acting in the same capacity, or from one
such successor to another.
S. A transfer from trustees to surviving, substitute, succeeding or additional trustees of the same trust.
T. A transfer upon the death of a joint tenant or tenant by the entirety to the survivor or survivors thereof.
U. A transfer from a grantor or seller who meets all of the following requirements:
1. Sixty two (62) years of age or older; and
2. Owned and occupied the dwelling on the property as a primary residence for three hundred sixty six (366) consecutive days prior to its sale or
transfer; and
3. Did not rent or lease any portion of the dwelling or real property to any person or persons; and
4. If multiple owners, at least one co-owner is sixty two (62) years of age and no co-owner is less than sixty (60) years of age at the time of sale. In the
event a co-owner sixty two (62) years of age passes away prior to the sale of the qualifying dwelling, a surviving co-owner who is at least sixty (60)
years of age at the time the qualifying co-owner passes away will be entitled to the exemption. (Ord. 2019-24, 4-18-2019)
3-2H-4: LIABILITY FOR TAX; TAX IS ADDITIONAL:
The primary liability for payment of said tax shall be borne by the grantor or seller involved in any such transaction; provided, however, it shall be unlawful
for the grantee or purchaser to accept a conveyance if the Transfer Tax has not been paid. If the tax has not been paid and the requisite stamps have not
been affixed to the deed, then the grantee's title shall be subject to the lien provided in section 3-2H-10 of this article, and the grantee or purchaser shall
be liable for payment of the tax. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes imposed, levied or collected. (1978 Code § 1-15-3)
3-2H-5: COLLECTION OF TAX THROUGH REVENUE STAMPS:
A. The tax herein levied and imposed shall be paid to and collected by the Finance Director of the Village, or the Finance Director's designee, through the
sale of revenue stamps, which shall be caused to be prepared by said Finance Director in such quantities as the Village Board may from time to time
prescribe. Such revenue stamps shall be in the denominations of one dollar ($1.00), five dollars ($5.00), ten dollars ($10.00), twenty five dollars
($25.00), fifty dollars ($50.00), one hundred dollars ($100.00), two hundred dollars ($200.00), three hundred dollars ($300.00) and five hundred dollars
($500.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 59/618
B. Such revenue stamps shall be available for sale at, and during the regular hours of, the Village offices. Payment for such revenue stamps shall be made
in cash, certified check, cashier's check, Illinois attorney's check, or a title company's check. Upon payment of the tax herein levied and imposed, the
revenue stamps so purchased shall be affixed to the deed or other instrument of conveyance. Any person so using and affixing a revenue stamp or
stamps shall cancel the stamp and so deface it as to render it unfit for reuse by marking it with his initials and the day, month and year when the affixing
occurs. Such markings shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or perforating with a machine or punch. However, the revenue stamp(s)
shall not be so defaced as to prevent ready determination of its denomination and genuineness.
C. The Finance Director shall issue no Transfer Tax revenue stamps unless he verifies that any delinquent water and sewer assessments and penalties
related thereto and other debts due and owing the Village with respect to such parcel of property are paid in full and unless the declaration form
contains information necessary for the billing and collection of the final water and sewer assessment charges. (Ord. 2019-24, 4-18-2019)
3-2H-6: DECLARATION OF TRANSFER:
At the time the tax is paid, there shall be presented to the Village Finance Director, or the Finance Director's designee, the following:
A. A declaration on a form prescribed by the Finance Director signed by at least one of the sellers or grantors and also signed by at least one of the
purchasers or grantees involved in the transaction, or by their attorneys or agents, which declaration shall state the value of the property so transferred.
Where the declaration is signed by an attorney or agent on behalf of sellers or buyers who have the power of direction to deal with the title to the real
estate under a land trust agreement, the trustees being the mere repository of record legal title with a duty of conveying the real estate only when and if
directed in writing by the beneficiary or beneficiaries having the power of direction, said attorney or agent need only identify the land trust which is the
repository of record legal title and not the beneficiary or beneficiaries having the power of direction under the land trust agreement.
B. A copy of the signed deed, assignment or other instrument of conveyance or transfer involved in the transaction which is subject to the Transfer Tax
herein imposed and which reflects the date of the transaction which it evidences, the names of the grantor and grantee, and a legal description of the
property to which it relates.
C. A signed copy of the real estate transfer declaration filed pursuant to section 25 of the Real Estate Transfer Act of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 2019-24, 4-
18-2019)
3-2H-7: ASSIGNMENTS OF BENEFICIAL INTEREST:
No trustee of real estate shall accept an assignment of beneficial interest in real estate located in the Village which is subject to the tax herein imposed
without first obtaining a real estate transfer declaration from the assigner and assignee and unless revenue stamps in the required amount, as set forth in
this article, have been affixed to the assignment. (1978 Code § 1-15-6)
3-2H-8: CONTENTS OF DEEDS:
Every deed shall show the date of the transaction which it evidences, the names of the grantor and grantee, and a legal description of the property to
which it relates. (1978 Code § 1-15-7)
3-2H-9: REFUND OF TAX:
A grantor or seller who has paid to the Village the tax provided herein shall be entitled to a refund of three dollars ($3.00) for every one thousand dollar
($1,000.00) value or fraction thereof as stated in the declaration, provided any such grantor or seller presents evidence satisfactory to the Finance Director
that the seller or grantor meets all of the following requirements:
A. He owned and occupied the dwelling on the property for which such tax was paid as his principal residence;
B. He did not rent or lease any portion(s) of the dwelling or real property sold to another person or persons;
C. He buys or builds a single-family dwelling or condominium unit within the Village corporate limits within one year from the payment of the tax sought to
be refunded; and
D. He owns and occupies said single-family dwelling or condominium unit as his principal residence. (Ord. 2019-24, 4-18-2019)
3-2H-10: LIEN PROVISIONS:
In the event a deed is filed for recordation or there is an assignment of beneficial interest conveying the beneficial interest of real estate within the
corporate limits of the Village without the revenue stamps provided by this article, a lien is declared against said real estate conveyed in the amount of the
tax. The fact that the deed or assignment does not contain Glendale Heights revenue stamps in an amount as required herein shall constitute constructive
notice of the lien. In addition, the Village Administrator may record a notice of lien for the nonpayment of the tax provided herein. The lien may be enforced
by proceedings to foreclose, as provided herein. Suit to foreclose this lien must be commenced within three (3) years after the date of recording the deed.
(1978 Code § 1-15-10; amd. 2011 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 60/618
3-2H-11: ENFORCEMENT; SUIT FOR COLLECTION:
Whenever any person shall fail to pay the tax imposed herein, or any purchaser or grantee shall accept a conveyance or transfer where the tax has not
been paid, the Village Attorney shall, upon request of the Village Administrator, bring, or cause to be brought, an action to enforce the payment of said tax,
including interest and penalties as herein provided, on behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction. (1978 Code § 1-15-11)
3-2H-12: INTEREST, PENALTIES AND FINES:
A. In the event of failure by any person to pay to the Village the tax required hereunder when the same shall be due, interest shall accumulate and be due
upon said tax at the rate of one percent (1%) per month commencing as of the first day following the day when the tax became due. In addition, a
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the tax due shall be assessed and collected against any person who shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this article.
(1978 Code § 1-15-12)
B. Notwithstanding and in addition to any other provision of this article, any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or
resists or opposes the enforcement of any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. (1978 Code § 1-15-15; amd. 2011 Code)
3-2H-13: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax provided under this article, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the Village Treasury and
shall be credited to and deposited into the Village General Fund. (1978 Code § 1-15-13)
ARTICLE I. FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX
3-2I-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent (0.50%) of alcohol by volume,
which is intended for internal consumption by humans.
PREPARED FOOD: Includes any solid, liquid including both alcoholic liquor and nonalcoholic liquids, except "soft drinks" as herein defined, powder or
item used or intended to be used for human internal consumption, whether simple, compound, or mixed, and which has been prepared for immediate
consumption. Prepared food may be purchased for consumption within or upon the premises where it is sold, or it may be purchased for consumption off
the premises. However, with respect to food purchased for consumption off the premises where it is sold, the term prepared food does not include any
food which is taxed pursuant to 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/2-10 or is sold in a closed or sealed bottle, can, carton or container of the manufacturer
or wholesaler or which has not been prepared for immediate consumption. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, prepared food does not
include any food or drink sold through a vending machine regardless of the location of the vending machine.
PREPARED FOOD FACILITY: Any person, business, or establishment which sells at retail prepared food that has been prepared for immediate
consumption with seating provided for consumption of the prepared food, whether or not such prepared food facility use is conducted along with any other
use in a common establishment commonly described as an inn, restaurant, eating place, drive-in restaurant, buffet, bakery, cafeteria, cafe, lunch counter,
grocery store, convenience store, fast food outlet, catering service, coffee shop, diner, sandwich shop, soda fountain, bar, cocktail lounge, soft drink parlor,
ice cream parlor, tearoom, delicatessen, hotel, motel, or club, or any other establishment which sells at retail food which has been prepared for immediate
consumption. The term "prepared food facility" does not include churches, public or private schools, boarding houses, daycare centers, nursing homes,
retirement centers or similar residential care facilities, or programs for the central preparation of meals to be delivered and consumed at private residences
of the elderly or disabled, or other facilities of not for profit associations or corporations.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: To obtain for use or consumption and not for resale, in exchange for consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter
or any other nature.
RETAIL LIQUOR FACILITY: Any premises required to obtain a retail liquor license pursuant to title 4, chapter 3 of this code.
RETAILER: A person or entity who/which sells or offers for sale, for use or consumption and not for resale.
SOFT DRINKS: Any complete, finished, ready to use, nonalcoholic drink, whether carbonated or not, including, but not limited to, soda water, cola, fruit
juice, vegetable juice, carbonated water, and all other preparations commonly known as soft drinks of whatever kind or description that are contained in
any closed or sealed bottle, can, carton, or container, regardless of size. Soft drink does not include coffee, tea, noncarbonated water, infant formula, milk
or milk products as defined in the grade A pasteurized milk and milk products act, or drinks containing fifty percent (50%) or more natural fruit or vegetable
juice. (Ord. 2010-44, 6-3-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-2I-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
A tax, in addition to any and all other taxes imposed, is hereby levied and imposed upon the retail purchase of alcoholic liquor and prepared foods at any
food facility or retail liquor facility within the village at the rate of one percent (1.0%) of the purchase price of such alcoholic liquor and prepared foods,
excluding other taxes imposed thereon, the ultimate incidence of and the liability for payment of which shall be borne by the purchaser. (Ord. 2010-44, 6-3-
2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-2I-3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 61/618
The retailer of each prepared food facility and each retail liquor facility shall have the duty to collect and account for the tax imposed on each purchaser at
the time the consideration is paid by the purchaser. (Ord. 2010-44, 6-3-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-2I-4: TAX RETURN; PAYMENT AND USE OF TAX:
The retailer of each prepared food facility and each retail liquor facility shall have the duty to cause to be filed, a sworn prepared food and beverage tax
return with the village director of finance for each prepared food facility and retail liquor facility located within the village. The return shall be prepared and
submitted on forms prescribed by the village and filed with the village by the filing date and at the same quarterly time intervals or frequencies as the sale
and use tax return, form ST-1, is due to be filed with the Illinois department of revenue. The return shall also be accompanied by payment to the village of
all taxes imposed by this article which are due and owing for the time period covered by the return; except, that one percent (1%) of the amount due may
be deducted and retained by the retailer as an administrative fee if payment is made in a timely manner. The return shall also be accompanied by a copy
of the sale and use tax return, form ST-1, filed with the Illinois department of revenue for sales within the village during the same time period. All taxes
collected by the village pursuant to this article are general revenues of the village and may be used by the village for any lawful corporate purpose. (Ord.
2010-44, 6-3-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-2I-5: LATE PAYMENT PENALTY:
If any tax imposed by this article is not paid when due, a late payment penalty equal to five percent (5.0%) of the unpaid tax shall be added for each
month, or any portion thereof, that the tax remains unpaid, and the late payment penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed. (Ord. 2010-44, 6-3-
2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-2I-6: EXCESS TAX COLLECTIONS:
If any retailer collects an amount upon a sale not subject to the tax imposed hereby, but which amount is purported to be the collection of the tax, or if a
retailer collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax imposed herein and does not for any reason return it to the purchaser who paid
it before filing the return for the period in which it occurred, that person shall account for and pay over those amounts to the village along with the tax
properly collected. (Ord. 2010-44, 6-3-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-2I-7: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The retailer of each prepared food facility and each retail liquor facility shall have the duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records and accounts,
showing the gross receipts for sale of prepared foods and alcoholic liquor and the tax collected each business day, which shall be made available to the
village for examination and for audit by the village upon reasonable notice and during customary business hours. (Ord. 2010-44, 6-3-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-2I-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Payment and collection of the tax and any late payment penalty may be enforced by action in any court of competent jurisdiction, and failure to collect,
account for and pay over the tax and any late payment penalty shall be cause for suspension or revocation of any village license issued for the prepared
food facility or retail liquor facility, if any, and all in addition to any other penalties provided in this code. (Ord. 2010-44, 6-3-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
3-2I-9: PENALTY:
Any retailer operating a prepared food facility or retail liquor facility within the village who fails or omits to collect, account for, and pay over to the village
the tax and any late payment penalty, if any, imposed by this article, or fails to maintain or allow examination of the books and records required in section
3-2I-7 of this article, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
offense. Each day a violation of this article continues shall be considered a separate violation. (Ord. 2010-44, 6-3-2010, eff. 8-1-2010)
ARTICLE J. MUNICIPAL NATURAL GAS USE TAX
3-2J-1: SHORT TITLE:
The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the MUNICIPAL NATURAL GAS USE TAX and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the
village of Glendale Heights, the state of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof. (Ord. 2013-18, 4-18-2013)
3-2J-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT: The public utilities act1 as amended.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the public utilities act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 62/618
RETAIL PURCHASER: Any person who purchases natural gas in a sale at retail.
SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale of natural gas by a retailer to a person for use or consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means
any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling natural gas. (Ord. 2013-18, 4-18-2013)
3-2J-3: TAX:
A. Except as otherwise provided by this article, a tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming natural gas in the village that is purchased in a sale
at retail at the rate of five cents ($0.05) per therm.
B. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the retail purchaser, and nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax on
the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting natural gas.
C. The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of natural gas delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated to
collect the tax pursuant to section 3-2J-4 of this article on or before the payment due date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to
the village treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the natural gas is delivered to the retail purchaser
if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to section 3-2J-4 of this article or if the natural gas is delivered by a person other than
a public utility so designated.
D. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United States or
state of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the village.
E. A person who purchases natural gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax imposed by this article with respect to the use or consumption of the
natural gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the natural gas, shall pay the tax directly to the village treasurer on or before the fifteenth day
of the second month following the month in which the natural gas is used or consumed.
F. The tax shall apply to natural gas for which the delivery to the retail purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after July 1, 2013.
G. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this article, whether as a result of mistake of fact or an
error of law, then such amount shall be: 1) credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment or 2) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3)
years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited or refunded.
H. No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such
amount.
I. To prevent multiple taxation, the use of natural gas in the village by a retail purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this article if the gross
receipts from the sale at retail of such natural gas to the retail purchaser are properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such natural gas
pursuant to the village's municipal utility tax, as amended from time to time, specifically section 3-2D-2 of this chapter, authorized pursuant to section 8-
11-2 of the Illinois municipal code2. (Ord. 2013-18, 4-18-2013)
3-2J-4: COLLECTION OF TAX BY PUBLIC UTILITY:
The village president, village administrator and village finance director/treasurer are each authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax
imposed by this article with any public utility providing natural gas service in the village. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the
following provisions:
A. The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an independent contractor;
B. The public utility will remit collected taxes to the village treasurer no more often than once each month;
C. The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely remitted to
the village treasurer;
D. The public utility shall not be responsible to the village for any tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
E. Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. (Ord. 2013-18, 4-18-2013)
3-2J-5: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that
gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this article. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours, be
subject to and available for inspection by the village. (Ord. 2013-18, 4-18-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 63/618
Chapter 3
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
3-3-1: SCOPE; INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village procedures in connection with all of the village locally imposed and administered taxes.
B. Interpretation: This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the village tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The "local government taxpayers' bill of rights act".
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village finance director, who is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, along with staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to give full effect hereto. The exercise of such authority by the local
tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: The tax imposed by the village that is collected or administered by the village, not an agency or
department of the state. The term does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees collected by the village.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of
such tax is placed and, with respect to consumer taxes, includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered
tax to the village. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001; amd. 2011 Code)
3-3-3: NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided, proper notice is deemed to have been given in writing by first class or overnight mail to the last known address of the
addressee, or by personal service or delivery. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-4: DELINQUENT NOTICES, PAYMENTS, REMITTANCES OR OTHER FILINGS:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date; or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-5: APPLICATION OF TAX PAYMENTS:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: first, to the tax due for the applicable period; second, to the
interest due for the applicable period; and third, to the penalty for the applicable period. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-6: TAX ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Any notice of tax assessment due must be sent by United States registered or certified mail.
B. The local tax administrator shall send a written statement to a taxpayer whenever the village issues a processable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim
denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The statement shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. Written Protest Required: The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that
a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 64/618
not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if
the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
B. Statute Of Limitations: The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund for all locally imposed and administered taxes shall be one year after the
end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes,
interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the village.
C. Procedure: The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund, which consists of a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid and, as
applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the
taxpayer owes any monies to the village.
2. Within forty five (45) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear
interest at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
A. Information Required: A taxpayer must be notified in writing of a proposed audit of any locally administered tax. Each notice of audit shall contain the
following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Time For Conducting Audit: Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours not less than seven (7) days from the date the notice is given. A
reasonable effort should be made to schedule the audit on a date and time convenient to the taxpayer, but such audit shall be conducted within thirty
(30) days from the date notice is given.
C. Taxpayer's Books And Records:
1. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of
entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the
English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
2. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer (or tax
collector) fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time period, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
D. Overpayments: If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice
of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within forty five (45) days of the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
E. Payment To Improper Entity: In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify
the local governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-9: APPEALS:
The procedure for appealing a determination of tax due or an assessment is as follows:
A. A taxpayer who believes his or her determination of tax due or assessment is in error may file with the local tax administrator a written appeal setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's appeal. The written appeal must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the
written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 65/618
B. If a timely written appeal is filed, the local tax administrator shall review the determination or assessment and all documentation provided by the
taxpayer. If the local tax administrator determines the original determination or assessment was in error, he or she shall correct the determination of tax
due or assessment accordingly. If the local tax administrator determines the original determination of tax due or assessment was correct, he or she
shall reject the taxpayer's appeal, and the original determination or assessment shall stand. The local tax administrator shall rule on the taxpayer's
appeal within sixty (60) days of receipt of the written protest and shall provide written notice to the taxpayer of his or her decision.
C. If a written appeal is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing
without further notice.
D. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date
of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest be
reopened or extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-10: PAYMENT REQUIRED; INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
A. Time For Payment: In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must
be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
B. Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax to be
eighteen percent (18%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
C. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of
five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the
tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice
of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax due for the
applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is
imposed by the controlling ordinance.
D. Abatement Of Penalties: The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to
file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-11: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the
local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-12: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
A. The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing.
B. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable
period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
C. If any tax return is not filed or if, during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the village, the
tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or after the end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed, whichever
occurs later.
D. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-13: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local
tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a
voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the
filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due under this
section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date
the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax
along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case, the
application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional amounts owed as a result
of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 66/618
exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001;
amd. 2011 Code)
3-3-14: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES; COPIES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the internet
shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village clerk's office. (Ord.
2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-15: REVIEW OF LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the
local tax administrator shall:
A. Remove the lien at the village's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
3-3-16: FURTHER AUTHORIZATION OF VILLAGE:
The officials, officers and employees of the village are hereby authorized to take such further actions as are necessary to carry out the intent and purpose
of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-06, 1-4-2001)
Title 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSE AND PERMIT PROVISIONS
4-1-1: LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED; LIABILITY FOR COMPLIANCE:
A. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity shall establish, conduct, operate, carry on, manage, or otherwise engage in or maintain
any business, occupation, activity, or establishment, either by himself or itself, or through an agent, employee or partner, without first obtaining a
license for such business, occupation, activity, or establishment, except as provided in subsection 4-2-1B of this title.
B. Whenever a license or permit is required for the maintenance, management, operation, or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in an
activity or occupation, all persons, firms, partnerships, corporations and other legal entities shall be subject to the licensing requirement of subsection A
of this section if, by himself or itself, or through an agent, employee or partner:
1. He or it holds himself or itself out as being engaged in the business, activity or occupation;
2. He or it actively or passively solicits patronage for the business, activity, or occupation; or
3. He or it performs or attempts to perform any part of such business, activity, or occupation within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-
21-2010)
4-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT:
A. Applications for all licenses and permits shall be made to the village clerk in writing on a form provided for that purpose, except as otherwise provided.
B. Forms for all licenses, permits and applications therefor shall be prepared and kept on file by the village clerk, and each license issued by the village
shall bear the signature of the village clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary.
C. If the applicant is an individual (sole proprietorship), the application shall contain his name, residence address and residential telephone number. If the
applicant is a partnership or other noncorporate business entity, the application shall contain the name and residential address and residential
telephone number of each partner, principal or member thereof. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall contain the name, residential
address and residential telephone number of each principal officer and the registered agent thereof.
D. Each application also shall contain:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 67/618
1. A designation of the type or kind of license or permit desired;
2. The location or proposed location of the place of business, occupation or activity; (1978 Code § 3-1-2)
3. The applicable fee to be paid as provided in chapter 2 of this title; (1978 Code § 3-1-2; amd. 2011 Code)
4. The number of the certificate of registration required under the retailers' occupation tax act, service occupation tax act, and/or use tax act, if
applicable; and
5. Such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of village officials in the evaluation of such application, including proof of any
insurance policy or bond required by this code. (1978 Code § 3-1-2)
4-1-3: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Notwithstanding any provisions contained herein to the contrary, no permit or license required by the provisions of this code shall be issued to any
individual, partnership, corporation, land trustee or other business entity if that individual, partnership, corporation, land trustee or other business entity, or
any partner, shareholder, beneficiary or member thereof, is financially indebted to the village. (1978 Code § 1-11-9)
4-1-4: INVESTIGATION OR INSPECTION OF APPLICANT:
A. Where this code authorizes or necessitates an investigation or inspection by any department or official of the village before the issuance of a license or
permit, and requires the approval by such department or official regarding the proper location or condition of the premises in which the business,
occupation or activity for which a license or permit is applied is to be managed, conducted, operated or carried on, or regarding the condition and
nature of the equipment and methods intended to be used by the applicant in such business, occupation or activity, the clerk shall transmit to the
appropriate official or department such information necessary for the required investigation or inspection. (1978 Code § 3-1-3; amd. 2011 Code)
B. The designated official or department:
1. Shall make all necessary investigations and inspections, and the results thereof shall be reported in writing to the clerk; and
2. Shall indicate on the application a recommendation for the approval or disapproval thereof.
C. Upon receipt of all related investigative and inspection reports, the clerk shall forward such reports, together with the application, to the village
administrator for final determination. (1978 Code § 3-1-3)
4-1-5: APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
A. Approval: If, after due consideration of the information contained within the application and related investigative and inspection reports, the village
administrator shall determine that the applicant is in compliance with all requirements for the issuance of the license or permit applied for, then he shall
approve the application. Thereupon, the village clerk shall notify the applicant that the application has been approved. The license or permit shall be
signed by the village administrator, attested by the village clerk, and then issued to the licensee or permittee.
B. Disapproval: If, after due consideration of the information contained within the application and related investigative and inspection reports, the village
administrator shall determine that the applicant is not in compliance with all requirements for the issuance of the license or permit applied for, then he
shall disapprove the application, indicating the reasons therefor. Thereupon, the village clerk shall notify the applicant that the application has not been
approved and that no license or permit will be issued. (1978 Code § 3-1-4; amd. 2011 Code)
4-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE; EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL:
A. Term And Expiration: Each license shall indicate its term. All annual licenses shall be operative, and the license year for the village shall commence on
January 1 of each year. No license shall be granted for a period longer than one year. Except where otherwise provided herein, every license shall
expire on December 31 following the date of issuance.
B. Renewals:
1. The village clerk shall mail to all licensees of the village a notice of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if an annual license,
three (3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration. Failure to send out the notice or the licensee's failure to receive the notice shall not excuse the
licensee from his obligation to obtain a new license or renew his license, nor shall it be a defense in an action for operation without a license.
2. Except as otherwise provided herein, each license may be renewed upon proper application and payment of the required fee. The requirements and
procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal shall be the same as the requirements and procedures for granting a new license. (1978 Code
§ 3-1-5)
4-1-7: POSTING LICENSE; DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL:
A. It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the village to keep his license displayed at all times in a prominent place on the
premises, machine or vehicle used for such business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 68/618
B. No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or carry away, without the consent of the owner, any license, certificate, plate or sticker which has
been issued by the village except when such license, certificate, plate or sticker has been discontinued or the licensed premises has been abandoned.
Nothing herein shall prevent the village president or his duly authorized representative from removing any license, certificate, plate or sticker from the
possession of a former licensee, his premises, any vehicle or any machine when said license has been revoked under the provisions of this code.
(1978 Code § 3-1-16)
4-1-8: NONTRANSFERABILITY, IMPROPER DISPLAY OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; PROHIBITED ALTERATIONS; CHANGES IN
OWNERSHIP OR NAME:
A. Nontransferability; Improper Display Prohibited: No license or permit may be assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used as collateral or otherwise
encumbered. No person, firm or corporation shall use or display any license, certificate, tag, badge, or sticker which has been improperly acquired.
B. Prohibited Alterations: No person, firm or corporation shall alter, deface, forge, or counterfeit any license, certificate, plate, tag, badge or sticker issued
by the village.
C. Change In Ownership: Any changes in partners, officers, directors, or persons holding directly, indirectly or beneficially five percent (5%) or more of the
shares or ownership interest shall be reported in writing to the village administrator. The notification of change of ownership and a twenty five dollar
($25.00) administrative fee shall be submitted to the village within ten (10) days of the change. All new personnel and owners shall meet all the
standards of this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a business license in the village.
D. Change In Name: Any changes in the name of a business or organization holding a business license shall be reported in writing to the village
administrator, together with a list of those individuals and entities holding directly, indirectly or beneficially five percent (5%) or more of the shares or
ownership interest and a twenty five dollar ($25.00) administrative fee. Such information and fee shall be submitted within ten (10) days of the change.
(Ord. 98-13, 2-19-1998)
4-1-9: LICENSE FEE WHEN MORE THAN ONE LICENSE REQUIRED:
Unless otherwise provided in this code, each individual business or commercial activity within the village shall be required to obtain only one license, but
shall be required to comply with all applicable regulations contained in this code. The license fee required to be paid by an individual business which is
subject to two (2) or more licenses in this code shall be the largest of those applicable. A business shall be considered to be individual only if it is owned by
identical persons or entities, is contained within one single building, and conducts activities which are closely related. (1978 Code § 3-1-18; amd. 2011
Code)
4-1-10: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. No license or permit for the operation of a business, establishment or activity in the village shall be construed to permit its operation in more than one
location in the village; a separate license or permit shall be required for each location. For the purpose of this code, the existence of a single location
shall be evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses: 1) shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or
parcel; 2) shall be operated and managed by the same person or owner; and 3) shall be an establishment with the same classification. (1978 Code § 3-
1-8; amd. 2011 Code)
B. The location of any licensed business or occupation, other than the sale of alcoholic liquors, or the location of any permitted act may be changed;
provided, that ten (10) days' written notice is given to the village clerk of such intended change in location to determine that the operation for which the
license is required conforms with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the village at its new location. The fee for the transfer of any license shall
be five dollars ($5.00). (1978 Code § 3-1-8)
4-1-11: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall be issued for any purpose or activity if the premises and building to be used
for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the village and the state of Illinois. (1978 Code § 3-1-7)
4-1-12: NUISANCE CONDITIONS:
A. Nuisance Businesses Prohibited: No business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall be conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in
fact; and no building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof shall be used, kept, maintained, or operated in connection with any business
or establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to life or detrimental to health. Any charge of conducting or operating a
nuisance may be made under this chapter or under the provisions of this code prohibiting nuisances generally.
B. Unsafe Or Unhealthful Business:
1. No building or structure utilized, constructed, or maintained in connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an unsanitary, unsafe, or
dangerous condition.
2. No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever, which shall be dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to exist in connection with
any business or occupation, or be used in any work or labor performed in the village. (1978 Code § 3-1-9)
C. Refuse Disposal:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 69/618
1. Containers:
a. The standard refuse container required by this code shall be a receptacle of not less than ten (10) gallons and not more than thirty two (32)
gallons. However, containers may exceed thirty two (32) gallons but not more than ninety (90) gallons if the container is supplied by the village's
franchised waste hauler. The container shall be constructed of impervious and sturdy material, with a tightfitting cover, and equipped with handles
properly placed to facilitate handling. (1978 Code § 3-1-9; amd. 2011 Code)
b. All refuse which is placed for collection service outside any building or structure must be kept in standard refuse containers unless another type of
container is approved by the village clerk due to the unusual nature of the refuse produced by the business.
2. Removal Of Refuse:
a. It shall be the duty of the occupant of every building, structure or premises used or maintained in connection with any business or occupation, to
cause to be removed at his own cost and expense, at least once each week, all refuse produced therein.
b. Every person owning or controlling any hotel, restaurant, cafe, retail food establishment or other business or occupation, where more than thirty
two (32) gallons of refuse is normally produced weekly, shall cause all substances deposited in such containers to be removed as often as shall be
necessary, including daily removal from the premises, to ensure the healthful environment surrounding such establishment. Such removal shall be
at his own expense. (1978 Code § 3-1-9)
D. Abandoned Gasoline Service Stations:
1. Any gasoline service station determined by the community development director or his/her designee to be abandoned shall be deemed a public
nuisance which adversely affects surrounding property values and the public safety and welfare. A gasoline service station shall be considered
abandoned if it is not operated for at least three hundred (300) hours in any sixty (60) day period. Whenever the community development director or
his/her designee shall determine that any service station is abandoned, he shall immediately notify the owner of the real estate, either in person or by
certified mail, and issue an order of abatement with which there must be compliance within ninety (90) days. A nuisance caused by abandonment
may be abated only as follows:
a. Placing the station back in operation for a minimum of six (6) hours per day, six (6) days per week; or
b. Razing all structures and removing all underground tanks in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the village. After razing all structures, the
entire lot must be sodded as soon as weather permits; or
c. Making an appropriate application for a change in the use of the real estate to a permitted or conditional use. If the proposed use is approved, the
owner of the real estate shall have a definite time period, as specified by the village administrator, to commence operation of the proposed use. If
the new use is not commenced within such time period, the nuisance shall be immediately abated under subsection D1a or D1b of this section. If
the proposed use is disapproved, the owner of the real estate shall do one of the following within ninety (90) days:
(1) Apply for another proposed use; or
(2) Abate the nuisance under subsection D1a or D1b of this section.
The village shall not be required to consider more than three (3) proposed uses before it may abate the nuisance itself under subsection D2 of this
section.
2. If, upon the giving of notice, the owner of the real estate fails to abate the nuisance within the time and in the manner specified in the notice, the
village is hereby authorized to abate the nuisance and to assess the cost thereof against the owner of the real estate upon which the nuisance exists.
The amount of such costs shall be paid by the owner to the village.
3. In addition to being a debt due and owing the village by the owner of the real estate upon which the nuisance exists, the cost of such abatement
shall constitute a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances, except tax liens, if, within sixty (60) days
after such cost or expense is incurred by the village, a notice of lien is filed with the county recorder of deeds. The notice of lien shall consist of a
sworn statement setting out:
a. A legal description of the real estate;
b. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred for the abatement of the nuisance; and
c. The date or dates when the costs and expenses were incurred by the village.
Upon the payment of the costs and expenses to the village by the owner of or persons interested in the real estate, the lien shall be released by the
village. (Ord. 2010-65, 11-4-2010)
4-1-13: WORKING CONDITIONS:
A. Health Requirements Generally: No owner, lessee, manager, or superintendent of any store, factory, workshop, or other place shall allow or cause any
room or part thereof to be overcrowded or inadequate or faulty in respect to light, ventilation, heat or cleanliness.
B. Sanitation: All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean condition, free from the effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable, or other nuisance;
also, as far as practicable, such premises shall be free from all gases, vapors, dust or otherwise which are injurious to health. Sufficient washroom
facilities for all employees shall be provided, and such facilities shall be properly ventilated.
C. Heat Requirements: It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the heating plant which furnishes heat to any factory, workshop, retail
business, or other commercial establishment to maintain a temperature, when workers are present within such factory or workshop, of not less than
sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) (20°C) without such undue restriction of ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein;
provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to any factory or workshop where the business conducted therein is of such a nature that a
lower temperature than sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) (20°C) is necessary or expedient for the work or manufacturing process of such
business.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 70/618
D. Inspections: The appropriate village officials shall visit or cause to be visited all such places of employment in the village as often as they shall deem
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this section, and to have such arrangement made as may be deemed necessary for the health
and safety of the employees. (1978 Code § 3-1-10)
4-1-14: PUBLIC BUSINESSES:
All businesses or commercial establishments licensed by the village which invite the public generally into their establishments for the purpose of
conducting business, a commercial activity, or any other activity licensed by the village shall be subject to the following regulations in addition to all other
applicable provisions of this code: (1978 Code § 3-1-11; amd. 2011 Code)
A. All areas within the licensed premises where the public may enter shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition.
B. All business or commercial establishments subject to this section shall refrain from all deceptive trade practices as defined by state or federal law or
regulation and shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations regarding consumer protection and deceptive trade practices. In the event of any
such violation, the business license of the establishment may be revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises open to the public or engaged in the transportation, processing, preparation or packaging of food or
beverages any person who the employer knows or should have known, based upon reasonable observation, was afflicted with, or who is a carrier of,
any contagious or infectious disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who knows or should have known that he was afflicted with or a carrier of
any such disease to work in or about any such premises. (1978 Code § 3-1-11)
4-1-15: BUSINESS VEHICLES:
A. Posting Of Tag Or Sticker: Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis, in whole or in part, for a license fee, the village clerk shall furnish the
licensee, upon payment of the appropriate fee, with a tag or sticker for each vehicle covered by the license, and such tag or sticker shall be posted or
affixed in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle. (1978 Code § 3-1-17)
B. Insurance Requirements: Whenever any licensee shall make use of one or more motor vehicles in the licensed activity, such licensee shall carry at all
times public liability insurance with a responsible insurer qualified to do business in Illinois, to secure payment of loss or damage resulting from an
occurrence arising out of or caused by the operation or use of any such vehicles, but each vehicle shall be insured in compliance with 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/7 or 5/8, as required. Every insurance policy or contract for such insurance shall provide for the payment and satisfaction of any
final judgment rendered against the owner or any person driving any insured vehicle; and shall further provide that suit may be brought in any court of
competent jurisdiction upon such policy or contract by any person having claims arising from the operation or use of such vehicles. It shall contain a
description of each vehicle insured, manufacturer's name and serial number, the state license number and the village license number. (1978 Code § 3-
1-17; amd. 2011 Code)
4-1-16: INSPECTIONS AND ANALYSES:
A. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided or required by this
code, or any ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the village, or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to admit thereto, for the purpose of making the inspection,
any officer or employee of the village who is duly authorized to make such inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is requested.
B. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this code, or of any ordinance
or regulations, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any duly authorized
officer or employee of the village requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon official request.
C. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the village president may revoke, under the provisions of this code, the license of any owner or
operator of a licensed business in the village who refuses to permit any duly authorized officer or employee to make such inspection or to take an
adequate sample of said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duties. (1978 Code § 3-1-12)
4-1-17: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
A. Summary Suspension: When the conduct or operation of any business, occupation, activity or establishment, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall
constitute a nuisance in fact and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, or where the holder of any license shall
have refused to allow an inspection of his premises or has refused to furnish a sample of his goods for testing, the village president shall be authorized
to summarily order the cessation of business and the closing of the premises until the danger no longer exists.
B. Hearing To Determine Revocation: Within five (5) days after a license or permit is suspended, the village president shall call a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether or not the license or permit should be revoked.
C. Revocation:
1. Grounds: Licenses and permits issued by the village, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the village president after notice and hearing as
provided in subsections C2 and C3 of this section for any of the following causes:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 71/618
a. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the license or permit.
b. Any violation by the licensee or permittee of provisions of this code or other ordinances of the village relating to the license or permit, the subject
matter of the license or permit or the premises occupied.
c. Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor where such conviction indicates his inability to operate a safe, honest
and legitimate business operation within the village.
d. Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine, penalty or charge owed to the village.
e. Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling or any interference with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the reasonable
performance of his duties in making such inspections, as provided in section 4-1-16 of this chapter. (1978 Code § 3-1-14)
2. Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at
his last known address, at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. If the licensee or permittee shall request a continuance in the date
of the hearing, the ten (10) day suspension shall be in effect until two (2) days after the final hearing date. (1978 Code § 3-1-14; amd. 2011 Code)
3. Hearing: At the hearing, the village attorney shall present the complaint and shall represent the village. The licensee or permittee shall be permitted
counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. The village president shall preside and shall render the decision.
4. Record Of Hearing: A stenographic or electronically recorded record of the hearing shall be kept. The village shall pay the cost of attendance fees of
the recorder and the cost of the transcript, if such transcript shall be ordered by the village. The licensee or permittee shall pay the cost of any
transcript ordered by him. (1978 Code § 3-1-14)
5. Decision: Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing, but not later than thirty (30) days after such conclusion, the village president
shall file a written decision in which he has summarized the evidence and has stated the reasons for his decision. (1978 Code § 3-1-14; amd. 2011
Code)
6. Effect Of Other Penalties: Such revocation, if ordered, shall not prelude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of
other applicable provisions of this code or other ordinances of the village. (1978 Code § 3-1-14)
4-1-18: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the village administrator in regard to the denial of an application for a business license or a permit, as provided in
subsection 4-1-5B of this chapter, shall have the right to appeal to the village president, and if the president denies the appeal, the person aggrieved may
then appeal to the village board of trustees in the manner set out in this section. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the village president in
connection with the revocation of a license or permit, or the closing of an establishment dangerous to the public, as provided in this chapter, shall have the
right to appeal to the village board of trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the village clerk, within ten (10) days after notice of a denial of an
application or a revocation of a license or permit, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The village board of
trustees shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee or
permittee in the same manner as provided in section 4-1-17 of this chapter. The decision of the village board of trustees on such appeal shall be final.
(1978 Code § 3-1-15; amd. 2011 Code)
4-1-19: PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Unless otherwise expressly provided, any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. Every day that a violation of this chapter occurs shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. (1978 Code § 3-1-13; amd.
2011 Code)
B. Whenever a person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to procure any license required by this code, or otherwise violates the terms of this
chapter, the village administrator is authorized to cause appropriate legal action and proceedings to be instituted to enforce the license requirement.
(1978 Code § 3-1-13)
C. The village administrator shall take all necessary and appropriate action to compel compliance with the regulatory provisions of this chapter. When
necessary and expedient, he may call upon the chief of police and the members of his department to assist in such enforcement, and it shall be the
duty of the chief of police and the members of his department to perform such enforcement acts as may be required of them. All village employees duly
authorized and acting as license inspectors shall be conservators of the peace with police powers for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
code and other village ordinances relating to the licensing of businesses and occupations and their regulations. Members who are conservators of the
peace must successfully complete the training course administered by the Illinois law enforcement training standards board. (1978 Code § 3-1-13;
amd. 2011 Code)
4-1-20: ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE:
Whenever, within this chapter, any regulation or public record is adopted and incorporated by reference, the manner of its adoption and incorporation shall
have complied with the provisions of Illinois Compiled Statutes allowing such incorporation and adoption. (1978 Code § 3-1-19; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 2
LICENSE FEES
4-2-1: LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE BASED UPON SQUARE FOOTAGE; EXCEPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 72/618
A. Unless otherwise provided, annual license fees for the operation of all business establishments, other than those designated in subsection B of this
section, within the village shall be determined upon the square footage area. Square footage area is the sum total of the gross horizontal areas of all of
the several floors of a building and its accessory buildings measured in square feet from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of
party walls separating two (2) buildings or establishments on each of the respective floors, and shall include the basement floor, cellar floor, motor
vehicle parking space when such space is used in conjunction with a drive-in facility (food establishment, bank, etc.) or where equipment, whether
open or enclosed, including such equipment as may be located on the roof, penthouse, attic space, balconies, mezzanines, porches and verandas and
floor area devoted to and occupied by accessory uses. License fees shall be paid annually unless otherwise provided, and proof of any bond or liability
insurance policy required by this code shall be provided with the license fee. Said fees are as follows: (Ord. 2004-91, 11-18-2004; amd. 2011 Code)
Areas In Square Feet Fee
Up to 2,500 $ 53.00
2,501 to 5,000 80.00
5,001 to 7,500 105.00
7,501 to 10,000 130.00
10,001 to 15,000 185.00
15,001 to 20,000 235.00
20,001 to 30,000 290.00
30,001 to 40,000 340.00
40,001 to 50,000 390.00
50,001 to 75,000 445.00
75,001 to 100,000 500.00
Over 100,000 550.00
B. The license fees provided in subsection A of this section shall be applicable to all businesses and occupations operated within the village except for the
following businesses and occupations:
Architects.
Attorneys at law.
Business and vocational schools.
Dentists.
Detection and deception (lie detector) examiners.
Detective agencies.
Engineers; professional and structural.
Horseracing operators, racetrack owners and organizations, harness drivers, jockeys and others employed at racetracks.
Insurance brokers.
Land surveyors.
Nurses.
Optometrists.
Pharmacists.
Physical therapists.
Physicians and surgeons.
Podiatrists.
Psychologists.
Public accountants.
Real estate brokers and salesmen.
Shorthand reporters.
Social workers. (Ord. 2004-91, 11-18-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 73/618
4-2-2: LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE BASED UPON USE:
The annual licensing fees, unless a shorter licensing period is indicated, for the following businesses and occupations shall be as follows:
Business License Fee
Adolescent dance facilities:
For occupancy up to 100 $
1,000.00
For occupancy from 101 to 200 5,000.00
For occupancy from 201 to 300 10,000.00
For occupancy from 301 to 600 20,000.00
Ambulance service (private):
Service location or establishment Based on square feet
Each mobile intensive $ 10.00
Each ambulance 10.00
Auctioneers 10.00 per day
Businesses containing amusement devices 1,000.00
Catch basin or grease trap cleaners 10.00 per day
Christmas tree sales 50.00 per lot
Coin operated amusement devices, vending machines and other coin operated
machines:
Bulk gum, candy and nut machines 30.00 per machine
Bulk gum, candy, nut and novelty machines on a multiple machine rack 55.00 per rack
Cigarette and tobacco machines 85.00 per machine
Coin operated amusement devices and game machines 185.00 per machine
Hot or cold food machines 70.00 per machine
Jukeboxes 85.00 per machine
Snack, beverage and miscellaneous items machines 55.00 per machine
Videocassette rental machines 85.00 per machine
Driving schools:
Service location or establishment Based on square footage
Each vehicle $ 10.00
Exterminators 10.00
Food delivery vehicles 135.00
Fuel oil, solid fuel dealer:
Service location or establishment Based on square footage
Each delivery vehicle $ 10.00
Ice cream vending business 300.00
Ice cream vendor's license -0-
Mobile home park license 100.00 plus $5.00 for each trailer coach space
Multiple-family dwelling operator license:
Rental apartment complexes 100.00 per building, plus $50.00 per unit
Condo complexes 100.00 per building
Mixed rental apartments/condo complexes 100.00 per building, plus $50.00 per noncondo unit
Condos 200.00 per unit as paid under single-family operator
license
Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers 1,500.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 74/618
Peddlers and solicitors 15.00
Perishable and seasonal commodities sales 50.00 per lot
Public amusements:
Athletic exhibition 2,000.00 per event
Automobile show 10.00 per day
Balloon contest 10.00 per day
Billiard and pool halls Based on square footage
Bowling alley Based on square footage
Carnival or circus $10.00 per day
Commercial playground or amusement park Based on square footage
Fireworks display $50.00 per day
Horse or dog show 10.00 per day
Live entertainment:
Open air or tent enclosed concert or other live professional entertainment 10.00 per day
Single performer within a restaurant, tavern or
other business establishment (including a piano
bar, standup comedian or sole entertainment act)
300.00
Instrumental units or 2 or more performers
within a restaurant, tavern or other business
establishment
1,000.00
Public skating rink Based on square footage
Rodeo $ 50.00 per day
Stock or poultry show 10.00 per day
Theater (motion picture or dramatic) 125.00 per screen/stage
Ticket sales for theatrical shows, amusements,
athletic events or other exhibitions at a place
other than the theater or location where the
theatricals, shows, amusements, athletic events
and other exhibitions are given or exhibited
Based on square footage
Video gaming terminals $500.00 per terminal
Single-family dwelling rental operator license for a residential property inspection and
housing seminar:
Single-family home/duplex/townhome 300.00 per year
Condo unit 200.00 per year
Tobacco dealers:
Retail sale of tobacco 200.00
Retail sale of tobacco and smoking 500.00
Vehicles for hire 50.00
Waste disposal contractors:
Residential:
Effective until December 31, 2011 365.00
Effective January 1, 2012 1,100.00
Effective January 1, 2013 1,800.00
Effective January 1, 2014 2,500.00
Commercial/industrial:
Effective until December 31, 2011 365.00
Effective January 1, 2012 755.00
Effective January 1, 2013 1,125.00
Effective January 1, 2014 1,500.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 75/618
(Ord. 2006-26, 5-4-2006; amd. Ord. 2007-105, 11-1-2005; Ord. 2008-82, 11-6-2008; 2011 Code; Ord. 2011-38, 6-16-2011; Ord. 2011-39, 6-16-2011; Ord.
2011-54, 8-18-2011; Ord. 2011-57, 8-18-2011; Ord. 2011-76, 10-6-2011; Ord. 2012-68, 11-15-2012; Ord. 2013-37, 6-20-2013; Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
4-2-3: PRORATED FEES:
When an applicant for a license has not been engaged in business until after the expiration of part of the current license year, the license fee shall be
prorated by quarters and the fee paid for each quarter or fraction thereof during which the business has been or will be conducted. (1978 Code § 3-1-22)
4-2-4: NO REBATES OR REFUNDS:
No rebate or refund shall be made of any license fee or part thereof by reason of death of the licensee or by any reason of nonuse of the license or
discontinuance of the operation of the license establishment. (1978 Code § 3-1-22)
4-2-5: LATE PAYMENTS:
In the event that the license fees provided in this chapter are not paid by January 31 of the year when such license is to be in effect, there shall be a late
payment fee assessed as follows:
A. An amount equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the established fee if payment is received in February;
B. An amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of the established fee if payment is received in March; and
C. If license fee and late fees, if applicable, are not received on or before March 31, the license shall be revoked. (Ord. 96-106, 12-5-1996)
Chapter 3
LIQUOR CONTROL
4-3-1: TITLE:
The provisions of this chapter may be referred to as the GLENDALE HEIGHTS LIQUOR CONTROL CODE. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-2: APPLICATION OF OTHER ORDINANCES AND LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the owner, proprietor or person in charge of any tavern or other place in the village where alcoholic liquor is
sold from the restrictions and requirements of any other ordinance of the village or of any of the provisions of state law. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases defined in an act entitled "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", approved January 3, as amended from time to time, and as set forth
generally in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., are hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter. Unless the context otherwise requires,
the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: As defined in the village of Glendale Heights zoning ordinance, as amended.
SERVICE BAR: A work area not over six feet (6') in length or three feet (3') in width or five feet (5') in height, from which alcoholic liquors are mixed or
prepared for human consumption and situated in a restaurant, from which work area the alcoholic liquors are mixed or prepared for the purpose only of
being taken by the employees of such establishment to tables occupied by patrons of such restaurant, for consumption, in connection with and as a part of
the meals sold to the customers of such business. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
4-3-4: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
A. President Serve As: The village president is hereby authorized to be the local liquor control commissioner as defined in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/4-2 and shall be charged with the administration of the liquor control act and of such ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be
enacted by the village president and board of trustees. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Deputy Commissioners: The president may appoint one or more persons to assist in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties
provided for the local liquor control commissioner, and such other persons as may be appointed shall be designated deputy local liquor control
commissioners.
C. Powers And Duties: The local liquor control commissioner shall have the following powers and duties with respect to local liquor licenses and any other
powers and duties which may be granted from time to time by law:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 76/618
1. To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke for cause all local licenses issued to persons or entities for premises within the
village and to levy fines and impose costs on the licensee as set forth in subsection 4-3-35A of this chapter for violations of the provisions of the
liquor control act, this chapter, or any other ordinance or resolution enacted by the corporate authorities of the village.
2. To enter, or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter, at any time, upon the premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of the state law or village ordinances or any rules or regulations adopted by the village or by the Illinois liquor control commission have
been or are being violated, and at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in connection therewith. Any person or persons appointed by
the local liquor control commissioner pursuant to subsection B of this section shall have the powers given to the local liquor control commissioner by
this subsection.
3. To receive complaint(s) from any citizen within the village that any provision of state law or of this chapter has been or is being violated and to act
upon such complaint(s) in the manner provided by law.
4. To receive local license fees and deposit same to the credit of the village.
5. To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served, or any licensee against whom a citation proceeding has been instituted by the state of Illinois liquor
control commission; to examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; and to hear testimony and take
evidence for his information in the performance of his duties, and for such purposes, to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of the
state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this subsection, he may authorize
his agent to act on his behalf.
6. To order, by issuance of a written order, any licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be
heard during that period, if the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises
will immediately threaten the welfare of the village; except, if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses
on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
7. To notify the secretary of state where a club incorporated under the general not for profit corporation act of 19861 or a foreign corporation functioning
as a club in this state under a certificate of authority issued under that act has violated this chapter or the liquor control act by selling or offering for
sale at retail alcoholic liquors without a retailer's license.
8. To notify the secretary of state of any convictions or dispositions of court supervision for a violation of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-20 or section
4-3-30 of this chapter. (2011 Code)
4-3-5: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the village any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license or in violation of the
terms of such license.
B. It is unlawful for any business or club to allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of that business or club unless the business or
club has a validly issued liquor license. However, a business or club may allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of that
business or club without a valid liquor license, limited to events of a special occasion, such as a grand opening, and the consumption of alcoholic
beverages is without fee or charge at said special occasion.
C. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away or to keep with the intention of selling at retail or giving away, alcoholic liquor on the
premises of any adult entertainment cabaret within the village without having a class A-R local retail liquor dealer's license.
D. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away or to keep with the intention of selling at retail or giving away, alcoholic liquor on the
premises of an establishment within the village where more than twenty (20) televisions, video monitors or screens display broadcast video
programming, cable video programming, direct satellite video programming or prerecorded video programming for observation by patrons without
having a class A-V local retail liquor dealer's license. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-6: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
A. No local retail liquor dealer's license shall be issued to:
1. A person who is not a resident of the village.
2. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides.
3. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
4. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law, if determined by the local liquor control commissioner that such person
has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant public trust after considering matters set forth in such person's application and the commissioner's
investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant.
5. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a house of ill fame.
6. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
7. A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for cause.
8. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.
9. A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited partnership thereof, owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate limited
partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 77/618
10. A corporation or limited liability company if any member, officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other
than citizenship and residence within the village.
11. A corporation or limited liability company unless it is incorporated or organized in Illinois or unless it is a foreign corporation or foreign limited liability
company which is qualified under the business corporation act of 19832 or the limited liability company act to transact business in Illinois. The local
liquor control commissioner shall permit and accept from an applicant for a license under this chapter proof prepared from the secretary of state's
website that the corporation or limited liability company is in good standing and is qualified under the business corporation act of 1983 or the limited
liability company act to transact business in Illinois.
12. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by
the licensee.
13. A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor
subsequent to the effective date of the local liquor control act or has forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
14. A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee.
15. A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
16. Any law enforcing public official, the village president or any member of the village board of trustees, and no such official shall have a direct interest
in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor; except, that a license may be granted to such official in relation to premises that is not
located within the village if the issuance of such license is approved by the state liquor control commission; and except, that a license may be
granted to any member of the village board of trustees in relation to premises that is located within the village if: a) the sale of alcoholic liquor
pursuant to the license is incidental to the selling of food; b) the issuance of the license is approved by the state commission; c) the issuance of the
license is in accordance with all applicable village ordinances in effect where the premises is located; and d) the official granted a license does not
vote on alcoholic liquor issues pending before the village board to which the license holder is elected. Notwithstanding any provision of this
subsection to the contrary, a member of the village board of trustees, other than the village president, may have a direct interest in the manufacture,
sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor as long as he or she is not a law enforcing public official or the village president. To prevent any conflict of
interest, the elected official with the direct interest in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor cannot participate in any meetings,
hearings, or decision on matters impacting the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
17. Any person, firm or corporation not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license.
18. A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of the subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/28-1, or as proscribed by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-3, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a statute
replacing any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
19. A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued
a license under the raffles act3 or the Illinois pull tabs and jar games act4.
20. A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the maximum liability amounts set out in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-21, subsection a.
21. Any person who has sold, given away or delivered alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, in violation of applicable
state law or village ordinances, or to any intoxicated person, except as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16.1, unless otherwise
determined by the local liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
B. No new or renewal license shall be issued unless all debts, fines and penalties due and owing the village from the licensee, applicant for license, or
licensed premises have been paid in full. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-7: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for a local retail liquor dealer's license shall be made to the local liquor control commissioner, in writing, signed by the applicant, if an
individual; signed by each individual partner, if a partnership; or signed by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation; verified by oath or
affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information:
A. The applicant's name, mailing address and telephone number.
B. The name and address of the applicant's business.
C. If applicable, the date of the filing of the "assumed name" of the business with the county clerk.
D. In case the applicant is a partnership, the date of the formation of the partnership, the full name, age, address and telephone numbers of all persons
with an ownership interest in the partnership, or who have a right to receive a direct or indirect benefit from the profits of the partnership.
E. In the case of a corporation, if an Illinois corporation, the date of its incorporation, or if a foreign corporation, the state where it was incorporated and the
date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois business corporation act to transact business in the state of Illinois, and in either case, a statement of
the objects for which the corporation was organized, the full names, ages, addresses and telephone numbers of all shareholders with an aggregate of
more than five percent (5%) of the capital stock of the corporation or of any persons receiving a direct or indirect benefit from the profits of the sale of
alcoholic liquors in the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 78/618
F. The names, ages, addresses and telephone numbers of the persons who will manage the business of the applicant in the village.
G. The citizenship of all persons required herein to be identified in the application, their date and place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and
place of naturalization.
H. The character of the business of the applicant.
I. The length of time that the applicant has been in the business of that character.
J. The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time application is made.
K. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license and the following information:
1. If a leased premises, a copy of the lease shall be provided, and the lease shall be for a term of sufficient length to encompass the term of the license
sought; and
2. The name and address of the owner or owners of the premises and the names and addresses of all the owners of the beneficial interest of any trust
if said premises is held in trust.
3. If the application is for a class A, A-F or A-R license, a dimensioned, scaled floor plan of the premises or place of business which is to be operated
under the license.
L. A statement whether the applicant has made a similar application for a similar other license on premises other than described in this application, and the
disposition of such application.
M. A statement signed by or on behalf of the applicant and by all individuals required to be identified therein, that each of them has never been convicted
of a felony or a class A misdemeanor, and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in the laws of the state of
Illinois or the provisions of this chapter.
N. Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been issued, and if so, where and when, or if any
such license has been revoked, state the reasons therefor.
O. A statement that the applicant and all individuals required to be identified in the application have not in the past and will not in the future violate any of
the laws of the state of Illinois, or of the United States, or any ordinance of the village controlling the retail sale of alcoholic liquors in the conduct of his
place of business.
P. The applicant's retailers' occupation tax (ROT) registration number and a statement whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of the retailers'
occupation tax (sales tax), and if so, the reasons therefor.
Q. A statement whether applicant is delinquent under the thirty (30) day credit law, and if so, the reasons therefor.
R. Whether the applicant possesses a current federal wagering and gaming device stamp, and if so, the reasons therefor.
S. Whether the applicant, any individual identified in the application, or any other person, directly or indirectly interested in his place of business is a public
official, and if so, the particulars thereof. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
T. A statement whether the applicant is in violation of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-6, and if so, the reasons therefor. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd.
2011 Code)
U. A statement that the applicant and all individuals required to be identified in the application have not sold, delivered or given away alcoholic liquor in
violation of any state law or village ordinance to a person under the minimum age requirement to purchase or possess alcoholic liquor.
V. Such additional information or identification as the local liquor control commissioner may deem necessary in order to establish the character of the
applicant. Such information may include a requirement that the applicant, if an individual, shall submit his fingerprints to the local liquor control
commissioner. In the case of a partnership, the partners, or in the case of a corporation, the officers, manager or directors thereof or any stockholder(s)
owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the capital stock of said corporation may be required to furnish such additional information
including fingerprints. An applicant, whether individual, partnership, association or corporation, shall also furnish or cause to be furnished upon request
such additional information and fingerprints concerning the manager or agent who is to conduct the business for which the application is sought.
Further, such additional information may include proof that the applicant and the premises to be licensed comply with all other laws and ordinances,
including licensing provisions, which apply to the applicant, to the premises or to applicant's other business conducted on the premises. (Ord. 2007-
124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-8: PROCESSING APPLICATIONS:
Any application received by the village clerk shall be forthwith forwarded to the local liquor control commissioner, and the commissioner shall issue a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 79/618
written acceptance or rejection of such application within sixty (60) days of its receipt by the local liquor control commissioner, provided all information
requested by this chapter or by the commissioner has been furnished. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-9: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT:
At any time during the pendency of an application for issuance, the local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to compel the applicant to submit
to any examination and to produce any books and records which, in the judgment of the local liquor control commissioner, are material to the
determination of whether the applicant is qualified to receive a license under the provisions of this chapter, or whether the premises sought to be licensed
is suitable for such purposes. The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to require the applicant to answer any objection to the issuance or
renewal of the license or any charges made by any deputy commissioner, any village trustee, the chief of police, any attorney for the village, any
prosecuting attorney for the village, or the sheriff or prosecuting attorney for the county of DuPage. The failure of any applicant to appear at the time and
place fixed by the local liquor control commissioner for his examination or to produce books and records requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be
deemed to be an admission that the objections or charges are true and that the applicant is not qualified to receive a license. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-10: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. No license shall be granted to any applicant nor shall any renewal license be issued until such applicant shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the liquor
control commissioner that such applicant is covered by a policy of dramshop insurance, in an amount no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00),
issued by a responsible insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in the state of Illinois insuring such applicant against liability which
the applicant may incur under the provisions of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21.
B. The provisions of this section shall be liberally construed, and each applicant and license holder shall have the burden of providing the local liquor
control commissioner with satisfactory evidence that said insurance is in full force and effect at any particular time during the term of any such license.
Failure to do so after the issuance of any local liquor license shall render said license void ab initio. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-11: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
There shall be the following classes of licenses:
A. Class A: A class A license shall authorize the retail sale on the specified premises of all alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises where
sold.
B. Class A-F: A class A-F license shall only authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor mixed or prepared at a service bar in a restaurant by employees thereof
and taken by them to tables in such establishment occupied by patrons of such restaurant for consumption in connection with and as a part of the
meals sold to them by such business.
C. Class A-R: A class A-R license shall authorize the retail sale of beer, wine and ale for consumption only on the premises of an adult entertainment
cabaret.
D. Class A-V: A class A-V license shall authorize any person holding a class A, A-1, A-F or A-R license to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the
premises of an establishment within the village where there are more than twenty (20) televisions, video monitors or screens that display broadcast
video programming, cable video programming or prerecorded video programming for observation by patrons thereon.
E. Class A-1: A class A-1 license shall authorize any person holding a class A, A-F, A-R or A-V license to have the privilege of remaining open one
additional hour every day.
F. Class A-H:
1. A class A-H license shall authorize any hotel holding a class A, A-F, B, or C license to install cabinets for storage of liquor for the use of guests in
each room; provided, however, that each such cabinet shall be securely locked and a separate key from the room key given only to a guest twenty
one (21) years of age or older at the time of registration.
2. Any hotel providing cabinets for storage of liquor available in guestrooms on the effective date hereof must provide locks for such cabinets. All such
supplemental licenses shall be granted only upon a showing by the applicant that all applicable federal and state tax stamps have been procured.
G. Class A-3: A class A-3 license shall authorize the retail sale on the specified premises of any person holding a class A or a class A-F license of all
alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises where sold between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on a
specified Sunday only. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
H. Class A-G: A class A-G license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the premises of the Glendale Lakes Golf Course, 1500 President
Street, as part of a catering package or by the individual drink in the golf course banquet facility, golf course clubhouse or on the grounds of the golf
course for consumption only on the premises where sold. (Ord. 2010-72, 12-9-2010)
I. Class B: A class B license shall authorize the retail sale on the specified premises of all alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, and shall also
authorize the retail sale of all alcoholic liquor in its original package, not for consumption on the premises where sold. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 80/618
J. Class C: A class C license shall authorize the retail sale of beer, wine and ale for consumption only on the premises where sold.
K. Class C-1: A class C-1 license shall authorize the retail sale of beer, wine and ale for consumption only on the premises of a senior citizen center
owned, operated, managed, or maintained by a unit of local government and only at a private function, as defined by section 1-3.36 of the Illinois liquor
control act5. The class C-1 license shall authorize the retail sale for consumption on the licensed premises of beer, wine and ale made in bulk to the
person or entity hosting or sponsoring the private function or the sale of beer, wine and ale on the licensed premises by the individual drink at a cash
bar. (Ord. 2010-57, 9-2-2010)
L. Class D: A class D license shall authorize the retail sale on the specific premises of all alcoholic liquor in its original package, not for consumption on the
premises where sold. Signs shall be posted in the store displaying prohibited sale hours of alcoholic beverages. This license shall not be available for
gas stations and convenience stores.
M. Class E: A class E license shall authorize the retail sale on the specified premises of beer, wine and ale only, in their original packages, not for
consumption on the premises where sold. Signs shall be posted in the store displaying prohibited sale hours of alcoholic beverages. This license shall
not be available for gas stations and convenience stores.
N. Class E-1: A class E-1 license shall authorize the retail sale of beer, wine and ale only, in their original packages, not for consumption on the premises
where sold, at convenience stores and gas stations; provided, that such convenience store or gas station is a minimum of two thousand four hundred
(2,400) square feet; the total floor and cooler space dedicated to the retail sale of beer, wine and ale is limited to ten percent (10%) of the total square
footage of the store; signs shall be posted in the store displaying prohibited sale hours of alcoholic beverages; the percentage of window space
permitted to be used for advertising the sale of beer, wine and ale at such convenience store or gas station is limited to ten percent (10%) of the total
window space available; and no signage advertising the sale of beer, wine and ale is permitted on the outside of the building of such convenience store
or gas station or on the grounds of such convenience store or gas station except that which is permitted in the window of the establishment.
O. Class E-2: A class E-2 license shall authorize the retail sale on the specific premises of all alcoholic liquor, in its original package, not for consumption
on the premises where sold, at convenience stores and gas stations; provided, that such convenience store or gas station is a minimum of two
thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet; the total floor and cooler space dedicated to the retail sale of alcoholic liquor is limited to ten percent (10%)
of the total square footage of the store; signs shall be posted in the store displaying prohibited sale hours of alcoholic beverages; the percentage of
window space permitted to be used for advertising the sale of alcoholic liquor at such convenience store or gas station is limited to ten percent (10%) of
the total window space available; and no signage advertising the sale of alcoholic liquor is permitted on the outside of the building of such convenience
store or gas station or on the grounds of such convenience store or gas station except that which is permitted in the window of the establishment. (Ord.
2008-07, 1-17-2008)
P. Class F: A class F license shall authorize the retail sale or giving away of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the specified premises, to be issued to
a regularly organized club, as defined in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.24; such sales to be made only to members of the club, their guests and
persons attending special programs sponsored by the club. No class F license shall be used until the local liquor control commissioner is satisfied that
the club or organization applying for the license was actually and in fact organized for some purpose or object other than the sale or consumption of
alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 2008-07, 1-17-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Q. Class G: A class G license shall authorize the retail sale or giving away of beer, wine and ale for consumption only on the specified premises at any
specific event sponsored by any regularly organized club, as heretofore defined, or not for profit corporation, provided such is organized for a purpose
other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor. Such class G license shall be in effect for up to five (5) days from the date of issuance.
R. Class S: A class S license shall authorize the retail sale or giving away of beer, wine and ale for consumption only on the specified premises to be
issued in connection with village sponsored or affiliated special events which are open to the general public.
S. Class M:
1. A class M license shall authorize the retail sale of beer, ale, wine, and alcoholic liquor to be sold exclusively by an establishment in which said retail
sale of beer, ale, wine, and alcoholic liquor is done by means of mail order and telephone orders through catalog advertisements, or via the internet
for shipment of beer, ale, wine, and alcoholic liquor to members of the general public of the age of twenty one (21) years or more.
2. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a class M license shall only be issued to persons who can demonstrate that they are operating a
bona fide mail order or telephone order, internet or catalog business for retail distribution of beer, ale, wine and alcoholic liquor products with no other
type of sale at the facility.
3. Beer, ale, wine and alcoholic liquors shall be sold in sealed packages only, and shall not be for gift or consumption on the premises of the licensee.
Sales shall only be by mail order, telephone order, or internet for shipment to various locations or destinations away from the premises of the
licensee.
4. It is a condition of the class M license that at no time shall gift or consumption of beer, ale, wine and alcoholic liquors be made to the general public
on the premises of the licensee, and that the only sales of beer, ale, wine, and alcoholic liquors by the licensee shall be that of mail order, telephone
or internet sales to be delivered by the United Parcel Service or other authorized carrier, pursuant to the regulations adopted by the United Parcel
Service or other authorized carrier, pursuant to the regulations adopted by the Illinois state liquor commission, to locations and destinations away
from the premises of the licensee. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
5. a. It shall be unlawful for holders of licenses to deliver beer, ale, wine or alcoholic liquor by postal or parcel service delivery without having procured
adequate information to determine that the purchaser is qualified to receive the product sent. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
b. The provisions of this chapter concerning sale or delivery to underage persons shall apply to any postal or parcel service delivery made by a class
M license holder. Evidence of any postal or parcel service delivery shipped by a licensee in violation of this chapter shall be grounds for revocation
of the class M license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 81/618
6. It is a condition of the class M license that any alcoholic liquor sold by the licensee shall be delivered either by the licensee's own employees or by
the other authorized carriers. The provisions of this chapter concerning sale or delivery to minors shall apply to any delivery made by a class M
license holder. In addition, if the delivery is made by the licensee or its employee, the licensee or its employee shall obtain the signature of the
recipient of the delivery upon a certification that the recipient is age twenty one (21) or older. This certification shall be retained by the licensee for a
period of six (6) months and shall be made available for inspection upon request by village officials. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
T. Class M-1: A class M-1 license shall authorize the retail sale of imported wine by means of sale at the licensed premises, telephone sales orders,
catalog sales orders, or internet sales orders to the licensee's wine club members only who have attained the age of twenty one (21) years and only for
consumption not on the licensed premises.
1. Additional Conditions:
a. A class M-1 license shall authorize limited winetastings to the licensee's wine club members on the licensed premises;
b. The point of sale for all imported wines sold pursuant to a class M-1 license shall be at the licensed premises; and
c. Off premises delivery of catalog, telephone and internet sales of imported wine shall be by employees of the licensee or by an authorized
commercial delivery service, pursuant to and in compliance with the regulations adopted and approved by the Illinois state liquor control
commission.
2. Off Premises Deliveries:
a. It shall be unlawful for the holder of a class M-1 license to deliver any wine to any person without having first procured from the delivery recipient
sufficient and adequate information and identification to verify that the purchaser and/or recipient of the product is over the age of twenty one (21)
years and is qualified to receive the product delivered.
b. The provisions of this subsection T2 concerning off premises delivery of alcoholic liquor to underage persons shall apply to all employees and
agents of the licensee and to any commercial delivery made or authorized by a class M-1 license holder.
3. Verification Of Age: No off premises delivery of imported wine shall be made by the licensee, its employees or agents, unless the person delivering
the product first obtains the signature of the person receiving the delivered product and only after verifying that the recipient is at least twenty one
(21) years of age. The delivery receipt shall be retained by the licensee for a period of six (6) months after delivery and shall be made available for
inspection upon request by village officials. (Ord. 2010-71, 12-9-2010)
U. Class N: A class N license shall authorize liquor establishments with a class A, A-V, A-F, A-R, B or C license to remain open an additional hour each
year on Thanksgiving Eve and New Year's Eve. The liquor control commissioner, upon proper approval, may grant the privilege to liquor
establishments to remain open one additional hour on Thanksgiving Day and January 1 of each year. Proper application for this privilege must be
received by the liquor control commissioner on or prior to October 31 of each year. In no instance does this subsection allow a liquor establishment to
be open past two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on weekdays or past three o'clock (3:00) A.M. on Saturdays and Sundays. All such supplemental licenses shall be
granted only upon a showing by the applicant that all applicable federal and state tax stamps have been procured. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
V. Class F-S: A class F-S license shall authorize the retail sale of beer, wine, ale or champagne for consumption on the premises of a retail furniture store
greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. The consumption of beer shall be limited to two (2) glasses no greater than sixteen (16) ounces
each and the consumption of wine and champagne shall be limited to two (2) glasses no greater than six (6) ounces each. (Ord. 2016-61, 11-3-2016)
4-3-12: LICENSE FEES:
A. Established: Fees for the various classes of licenses authorized under this chapter shall be as follows:
1. Class A License:
a. The annual fee for a class A license for 2008 shall be three thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
b. The annual fee for a class A license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the federal government, for the year immediately preceding.
2. Class A-F License:
a. The annual fee for a class A-F license for 2008 shall be two thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00).
b. The annual fee for a class A-F license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the federal government, for the year immediately preceding.
3. Class A-R License:
a. The annual fee for a class A-R license for 2008 shall be six thousand dollars ($6,000.00).
b. The annual fee for a class A-R license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the federal government, for the year immediately preceding.
4. Class A-V License:
a. The annual fee for a class A-V license for 2008 shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to the fee for the underlying class A, A-1, A-F, or
A-R license.
b. The annual fee for a class A-V license, in addition to the fee for the underlying class A, A-1, A-F, or A-R license, shall be equal to the annual
percentage increase in the "Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", as published by the federal government, for the year immediately
preceding.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 82/618
5. Class A-1 License:
a. The annual fee for a class A-1 license for 2008 shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) in addition to the fee for the underlying class A, A-F,
A-R or A-V license.
b. The annual fee for a class A-1 license, in addition to the fee for the underlying class A, A-F, A-R or A-V license, shall increase by two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) each year.
6. Class A-H License:
a. The annual fee for an A-H license for 2008 shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to the fee for the underlying class A, A-F, B or C
license.
b. The annual fee for a class A-H license, in addition to the fee for the underlying class A, A-F, B or C license, shall be equal to the annual
percentage increase in the "Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", as published by the federal government, for the year immediately
preceding.
7. Class A-3 License:
a. The daily fee for a class A-3 license for 2008 shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00).
b. The daily fee for a class A-3 license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the federal government, for the year immediately preceding. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-
2007; amd. 2011 Code)
8. Class A-G License: There shall be no annual fee for a class A-G license. The class A-G license is a license issued to the Glendale Lakes Golf
Course, owned, operated and managed by the village. (Ord. 2010-72, 12-9-2010)
9. Class B License:
a. The annual fee for a class B license for 2008 shall be three thousand two hundred dollars ($3,200.00).
b. The annual fee for a class B license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the federal government, for the year immediately preceding.
10. Class C License:
a. The annual fee for a class C license for 2008 shall be one thousand nine hundred seventy five dollars ($1,975.00).
b. The annual fee for a class C license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the federal government, for the year immediately preceding.
11. Class C-1 License:
a. The annual fee for a class C-1 license for 2008 shall be one thousand nine hundred seventy five dollars ($1,975.00).
b. The annual fee for a class C-1 license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the federal government, for the year immediately preceding.
12. Class D License:
a. The annual fee for a class D license for 2008 shall be two thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($2,750.00).
b. The annual fee for a class D license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the federal government, for the year immediately preceding.
13. Class E License:
a. The annual fee for a class E license for 2008 shall be one thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00).
b. The annual fee for a class E license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the federal government, for the year immediately preceding.
14. Class E-1 License:
a. The annual fee for a class E-1 license for 2008 shall be one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00).
b. The annual fee for a class E-1 license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the federal government, for the year immediately preceding.
15. Class E-2 License:
a. The annual fee for a class E-2 license for 2008 shall be one thousand nine hundred dollars ($1,900.00).
b. The annual fee for a class E-2 license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the federal government, for the year immediately preceding.
16. Class F License: The annual fee for a class F license shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00).
17. Class G License: The daily fee for a class G license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
18. Class S License: The annual fee for a class S license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
19. Class M License:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 83/618
a. The annual fee for a class M license for 2008 shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
b. The annual fee for a class M license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the federal government, for the year immediately preceding. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-
2007; amd. 2011 Code)
20. Class M-1 License:
a. The annual license fee for a Class M-1 license for 2011 shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
b. The annual fee for a Class M-1 license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the Federal government, for the year immediately preceding. (Ord. 2010-71, 12-9-
2010; amd. 2011 Code)
21. Class N License:
a. The annual fee for a Class N license for 2008 shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in addition to the fee for the underlying Class A, A-F, AR,
B or C license for both Thanksgiving and New Year's Eve. The fee for only one of these days shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in
addition to the fee for the underlying Class A, A-F, A-R, B or C license.
b. The annual fee for a Class N license, in addition to the fee for the underlying Class A, A-F, A-R, B or C license for both Thanksgiving and New
Year's Eve, shall be equal to the annual percentage increase in the "Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", as published by the Federal
government, for the year immediately preceding. The same applies for the fee for only one of these days in addition to the fee for the underlying
Class A, A-F, A-R, B or C license. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
22. Class F-S License:
a. The annual fee for a Class F-S license for 2016 shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
b. The annual fee for a Class F-S license shall be increased in January of each year by an amount equal to the annual percentage increase in the
"Consumer Price Index - All Urban Consumers", published by the Federal government, for the year immediately preceding. (Ord. 2016-62, 11-3-
2016)
B. Additional Bar Fees:
1. Establishments with a Class A, A-V, A-1, A-F, A-R, B or C license are required to pay a fee for each additional bar, service station, outlet, portable
drink cart, or any other additional alcohol servicing station maintained under the same roof at one such address.
2. The annual fee shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per outlet in addition to the fee for the underlying Class A, A-V, A-1, A-F, A-R,
B or C license. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
3. This fee is not applicable to establishments that have only one single bar, service station, or drink cart.
C. Payment Of License Fee; Additional Fees:
1. At the time application is made to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for the issuance of a license of any class, the applicant shall pay the
Village the fee hereinabove provided for the class of license for which the application is filed. In addition to the license fee, the applicant shall, at the
time application is made, pay to the Village a nonrefundable five hundred dollar ($500.00) license application/processing fee. The
application/processing charge shall not apply to Class F and G licenses.
2. In addition to the fees provided in subsections A and C1 of this section, the applicant shall pay to the Village the fees charged to the Village by the
Illinois State Police for fingerprint cards and the investigation thereof. Such fees shall not be refundable to the applicant in any event.
D. No Refunds For Revoked Licenses: Whenever any license hereunder has been revoked as provided in this chapter, the licensee shall incur a forfeiture
of all monies that have been paid for said license. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 2019-33 - NUMBER OF LICENSES. Go to new ordinance.
4-3-13: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
A. Effective November 8, 2018, the Local Liquor Commissioner shall not issue more than the number of licenses set forth herein for each class:
Class A license 8
Class A-1 license 0
Class A-2 license 0
Class A-3 license 0
Class A-F license 3
Class A-G license 1
Class A-H license 0
Class A-R license 0
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 84/618
Class A-V license 2
Class A-V-1 license 0
Class B license 1
Class C license 8
Class C-1 license 1
Class D license 7
Class E license 1
Class E-1 license 6
Class E-2 license 6
Class F license 2
Class F-S license 0
Class G license 1
Class M license 0
Class M-1 license 0
Class N license 4
Class S license Unlimited
B. Whenever a license previously issued under the provisions of this chapter is revoked, surrendered, or terminated by dormancy as herein provided, the
maximum number of local liquor licenses in that license class shall automatically and immediately be reduced by one. Thereafter, the number of
reduced local liquor licenses for that class shall not thereafter be increased without approval by a majority vote of the President and Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 2018-75, 11-8-2018)
4-3-14: TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWALS; PRORATED FEES:
Each license issued pursuant to this chapter, except Class A-3, G, and S licenses, shall terminate on January 31 next following its issuance, and the
renewal fee therefor shall be due and payable in full on or before January 15 of each year, unless a weekend or a holiday, then the next business day. All
late renewal fees shall be assessed a one hundred dollar ($100.00) late fee and shall be paid by a certified or cashier's check. Provided, however, any
new licensee applying for an annual license after August 1 of the license year shall pay an amount equal to one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee from the
time the license is granted until its termination on January 31 next following its issuance. Any new licensee applying for an annual license from January 31
through July 31 of the license year shall pay the full annual license fee. No licensee shall receive any pro rata refund for any unused portion of the license,
and no license shall be issued for an amount less than one-half (1/2) of the annual fee. (Ord. 2014-10, 3-6-2014)
4-3-15: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked, and shall not constitute property, nor
shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee, and shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate
devolution; provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of an insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the
expiration of such license, but no longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-16: DISPLAYING LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and posted in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 2007-124,
12-6-2007)
4-3-17: MULTIPLE LOCATIONS:
Where two (2) or more locations, places, or premises are under the same roof at one street address, a separate Village retailer's liquor license shall be
obtained for each such location, place, or premises; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as to prevent any hotel operator licensed
under the provisions of this chapter from serving alcoholic liquor to his registered guests in any room or part of his hotel if such liquor so served shall be
kept in and served from a licensed location, place, or premises in the hotel. (Ord. 2008-03, 1-3-2008)
4-3-18: CHANGE IN PERSONNEL, OWNERSHIP OR LOCATION:
A. Personnel And Ownership Changes:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 85/618
1. Any changes in partnership, officers, directors, managers, or persons holding directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock or
ownership interests of establishments licensed under this chapter shall be reported in writing to the local liquor control commissioner within ten (10)
days of the change. All new personnel and/or stockholders shall meet all of the standards of this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor
license. All such changes in personnel or ownership shall be subject to review by the local liquor control commissioner within thirty (30) days of the
change. In addition to any other license fees, the cost of any background investigation conducted by the village police department shall be borne by
the new partner(s), officer(s), director(s), manager(s) or person(s) holding directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock.
2. When a license has been issued to a partnership or limited liability company and a change of ownership occurs by one or more partners/members,
then a new license application for a liquor license must be submitted pursuant to section 4-3-7 of this chapter, and the license application shall be
accompanied by the appropriate license fee pursuant to section 4-3-12 of this chapter for that class of license for which the partnership is applying.
3. When a license has been issued to a partnership or limited liability company and any partner/member is or becomes ineligible to hold a liquor
license, that license shall be terminated.
4. When a license has been issued to a corporation or limited liability company and a change takes place in officers, directors, managers, members or
shareholders of more than five percent (5%) of the stock, resulting in the holding of office or shares of stock by one who is not eligible for a license,
said license shall terminate.
5. When a license has been issued to a corporation and a transfer in stock ownership of fifty one percent (51%) or more occurs, or a transfer in stock
ownership occurs resulting in a change in the ownership of the controlling interest in the corporation by one or more persons, then a new license
application for a liquor license must be submitted pursuant to section 4-3-7 of this chapter, and the corporation shall pay the appropriate license fee
for the class of license for which it is applying pursuant to section 4-3-12 of this chapter.
6. When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer eligible for a license, said license shall terminate. (Ord. 2009-63, 11-19-2009)
7. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall subject the licensee to the suspension or revocation of its liquor license or fines and
penalties not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per each violation. (Ord. 2009-63, 11-19-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Location Change; Fee: Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall apply only to the premises described in the application and in the license issued
thereon, and only one location shall be so described in each license. After a license has been granted for a particular premises, the local liquor control
commissioner, upon proper showing, may endorse upon the license permission to abandon the premises therein described and move therefrom to
another premises approved by him, but in order to obtain such approval, the licensee shall file with the local liquor control commissioner a request in
writing and a statement under oath which shall show that the premises to which relocation is to be made complies in all respects with the requirements
of this chapter. The fee for such transfer shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), payable to the village collector upon application for change of location.
(Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-19: DAYS AND HOURS OF SALES:
A. Hours When Closed; Extensions:
1. No alcoholic liquor shall be sold, given away, offered for sale in, or consumed in, upon or about any premises licensed under this chapter during the
times specified in this subsection: (Ord. 2010-60, 10-7-2010)
a. Class A licenses: Between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. on Saturdays and Sundays. (Ord. 2014-02, 1-23-2014)
b. Class A-F licenses: Between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays, two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. on Saturdays and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays.
c. Class A-R licenses: Between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M on all days. (Ord. 2010-60, 10-7-2010)
d. Class A-V licenses: Hours as authorized by the underlying A, A-F, A-1, or A-R license. (Ord. 2010-60, 10-7-2010; amd. 2011 Code)
e. Class A-1 licenses: As a supplement to the existing class A license, between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on
weekdays, three o'clock (3:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on Saturdays and three o'clock (3:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on
Sundays.
f. Class A-3 licenses: As a supplement to an existing class A or A-F license, between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. on weekdays, two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on Saturdays and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
on a specified Sunday. (Ord. 2010-60, 10-7-2010)
g. Class A-G licenses: Between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on Saturdays and Sundays. (Ord. 2010-72, 12-9-2010)
h. Class B licenses: Between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays, two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. on Saturdays and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays, except for the sale of package goods
which shall not be sold, given away or offered for sale between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on all days.
i. Class C licenses: Between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays, two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. on Saturdays and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays. (Ord. 2010-60, 10-7-2010)
j. Class C-1 licenses: Between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. of the following days, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Fridays and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Saturdays, between
the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Saturdays and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. on Sundays and between the hours of twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on Sundays and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Mondays. (Ord. 2010-60, 10-7-2010; amd. 2011 Code)
k. Class D licenses: Between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on all days.
l. Class E licenses: Between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on all days.
m. Class E-1 licenses: Between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on all days.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 86/618
n. Class E-2 licenses: Between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on all days.
o. Class F licenses: Between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays, two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. on Saturdays and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays.
p. Class G licenses: Between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on all days and twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on all days. (Ord. 2010-60, 10-7-2010)
q. Class S licenses: Between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on all days. (Ord. 2010-60, 10-7-2010;
amd. 2011 Code)
r. Class M-1 licenses: Between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. on all days. (Ord. 2010-71, 12-9-2010)
s. Class F-S licenses: Between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on all days. (Ord. 2016-64, 11-3-2016)
2. For purposes of this subsection, it shall be considered a violation hereof if any glass or other vessel containing alcoholic liquor shall be present on
any bar or table where patrons are served or if any person shall be in possession of such glass or vessel on any premises licensed under this
chapter at any time during the closing hours specified herein when no alcoholic liquor may be sold, given away, offered for sale in, or consumed in,
upon or about any such premises.
3. The hours of operation may be extended upon the direction of the local liquor control commissioner on special occasions of villagewide, statewide or
nationwide character, or for other special events, in the discretion of the local liquor control commissioner.
B. Effect Of Daylight Saving Time: No establishment with a liquor license shall be affected by the time change that occurs with daylight saving time. For
purposes of this chapter, liquor establishments are to treat the time change as having no effect on normal business hours of operation. Liquor
establishments shall not remain open for an additional hour in the fall season when clocks fall back from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. and will not lose an hour in the spring season when clocks spring forward from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to three o'clock (3:00) A.M.
C. Sales Allowed On Election Days: Licensees may sell at retail any alcoholic liquor on the day of any national, state, county or municipal election,
including primary elections, including hours the polls are open, within the political area in which such election is being held. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-20: KEG SALES:
A. Definitions:
KEG: Any original package container capable of holding more than three (3) gallons (11 liters) of beer.
SALE OF A KEG: Any sale of beer in a keg, even though the keg is to be returned by the purchaser to the seller.
B. Identification Of Kegs Required: A liquor license holder who sells a keg shall affix to each keg sold a tag, furnished by the local liquor control
commissioner, containing an identification number enabling the purchaser to be identified.
C. Records Kept: The liquor license holder shall keep a logbook of all kegs sold, showing the identification number on the tag affixed to each keg, and the
purchaser's name, address, telephone number, driver's license/state identification number, description of second form of identification if required, date
of birth, and signature of the party purchasing the keg. The logbook shall be available for inspection by the village police department during normal
business hours.
D. Deposit Required: The liquor license holder shall require the purchaser to deposit, at the time of the sale of a keg, at least seventy dollars ($70.00) for
the sale of a keg with a pumper and at least twenty dollars ($20.00) for the sale of a keg without a pumper. The deposit shall be refunded only upon the
return of the keg with the tag properly affixed. Only one deposit fee will be required from a purchaser of more than one keg at any one time.
E. Compliance Of Purchaser; Signature Required: The liquor license holder shall require the purchaser, at the time of the sale, to sign a form, to be
provided by the local liquor control commissioner, setting forth the provisions of this section and informing the purchaser that the deposit will be
forfeited if the keg is not returned with the tag properly affixed. The licensee shall retain this form for ninety (90) days after the sale.
F. Time Limit For Return Of Keg: Any keg not returned with the tag properly affixed within sixty (60) days following the date of sale shall be considered lost,
and the deposit shall be forfeited. The licensee shall notify the village police department on a monthly basis of all deposits that are forfeited and forward
the form of all deposits forfeited. A liquor license holder may retain the forfeited deposit.
G. Violation: It shall be unlawful to possess a keg within the village which does not have a proper tag affixed or, if the keg was purchased outside the
village, without proof of purchase for the keg, including the name and address of the seller. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-21: HOTELS WITH COMPLIMENTARY COCKTAIL HOUR:
Hotels with a class A, A-F, B or C license shall be authorized to serve complimentary cocktails to registered guests between the hours of four o'clock (4:00)
P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Hors d'oeuvres or other food must be served continually during these complimentary cocktail hours. The provision of
such cocktails shall be limited to persons of the age of twenty one (21) years or over and shall take place in a room or area separate and apart from the
lobby of the hotel. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-22: SAMPLING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 87/618
It shall be unlawful for any license holder to permit the tasting or sampling of alcoholic liquor on the premises, unless said tasting or sampling is a part of a
promotion or sales device to encourage the sale of packaged liquor and no charge of any kind or character is made for such sample or tasting. (Ord. 2007-
124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-23: HAPPY HOURS PROHIBITED:
A. All retail liquor licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed
premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a class A, A-F, A-R, B or C license holder operates on its premises more than one establishment at
which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sold at retail, the license holder shall maintain at each such establishment a separate schedule of the prices
charged for such drinks at the establishment.
B. No retail liquor licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall: (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
1. Serve two (2) or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one person for consumption by that one person, except conducting product sampling
as provided in section 4-3-22 of this chapter or selling or delivering wine by the bottle or carafe; (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at
private functions not open to the general public;
3. Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any person on any one date at a reduced price other than that charged other purchasers of
drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized in subsection C7 of
this section;
4. Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the price
regularly charged for the drink on that day;
5. Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; or
6. Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsections B1, B2, B3, B4 and B5
of this section.
C. Nothing in subsection B of this section shall be construed to prohibit a liquor licensee from:
1. Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
2. Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
3. Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
4. Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract between a class A, A-F, A-R, B, or C liquor license holder and another group for the holding
of any function, meeting, convention or trade show on the premises of the licensee;
5. Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel; (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
6. Selling pitchers (or the equivalent, including, but not limited to, buckets), carafes, or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in such
manner, or selling bottles of spirits, and delivered to two (2) or more persons at one time; or (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
7. Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in whole or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment not regularly
scheduled. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
D. A violation of this section shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the retailer's liquor license as provided by subsection 4-3-35A of this chapter
and 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-5 et al. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
4-3-24: REFILLING ORIGINAL PACKAGES PROHIBITED:
No person licensed under this chapter shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind or quality
of alcoholic liquor; and it shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks or other containers of alcoholic
liquor, except in original packages. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-25: BRINGING LIQUOR INTO CERTAIN PREMISES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, carry, transport, or otherwise convey alcoholic liquor into a restaurant or eating establishment, dance club,
commercial club or lodge, pub, tavern, brewery, bar, dance hall, pool hall, bowling alley, skating rink, commercial swimming pool, indoor amusement
facility, commercial clubhouse, game room, recreational facility, health club, theater, miniature golf facility, outdoor entertainment facility, adult
entertainment cabaret, hookah lounge, or any similar establishment to those listed above ("establishments") for purpose of consumption on the
premises of said establishments regardless of whether the alcoholic liquor is consumed with a meal or regardless of whether the establishment in
question possesses a village retail local liquor license. (Ord. 2009-07, 1-22-2009)
B. It shall be further unlawful for the owner, operator, manager, or agent of said establishments, whether or not said establishments possess a village retail
local liquor license, to allow or otherwise permit any person to bring, carry, transport or otherwise convey alcoholic liquor into said establishments for
the purpose of consuming the alcoholic liquor on the premises. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 88/618
C. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction for the offense, be fined an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and each person found to have violated the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
1. Distributors who deliver alcoholic liquor to a local retail liquor licensee for the purpose of retail sale as otherwise permitted by the Illinois liquor control
act and this chapter.
2. Premises that are owned, operated, managed, or maintained by a unit of local government and that possess a valid village retail local liquor license.
(Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-26: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Churches; Schools; Hospitals; Care Centers:
1. No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school other than an institution of
higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station. In determining
the distance provided in this subsection, the boundaries of the lot or parcel of land upon which a school, hospital, home or military station is located
shall be used as the point from which measurement shall be taken. In the case of a church, the distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be
measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-
6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are
limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption
of alcoholic liquors.
B. Stores Selling School Supplies: No license shall be issued to any person for the sale of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business
where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted consists of schoolbooks, school supplies, food,
lunches or drinks for such minors. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-27: VISIBILITY OF INTERIOR OF PREMISES:
No premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the premises is licensed (other than as a restaurant, hotel or club, where the
sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on or an adult entertainment cabaret) shall be permitted to have, between the area vertically
four feet (4') above ground level and six feet (6') above ground level, running horizontally the entire length of such premises, any screen, blind, curtain,
partition, article or thing in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises or inside such premises which shall prevent a clear view into the
interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction nor any arrangement of
lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such licensed premises which shall prevent a full view of the interior of such premises from the
street, road or sidewalk, and such premises must be so located that there shall be a full view of where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises
and shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly
visible. In case the view into any such licensed premises required by this section shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee or in any manner obstructed,
then such license shall be subject to revocation. In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the local liquor control commissioner shall have the right
to require the filing of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clearance of the view as required by this section. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-28: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
A. Premises: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with the
ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. It shall be the duty of the chief of police,
and he is hereby authorized, from time to time, to inspect and examine the premises of any retail liquor business for the purpose of ascertaining
whether or not there is compliance with all health ordinances of the village relative to the carrying on of such business. Inspections shall be made at
least once every other month during the time the licensee is engaged in business. It shall be the duty of every person licensed under the provisions of
this chapter to permit such inspections to be made and to exhibit the premises to such persons making such inspections. A record of such inspections
shall be kept on file in the office of the chief of police and in the office of the local liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
B. Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ in premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with or who is a carrier of
any contagious or infectious disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such disease to work in or about
any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
4-3-29: SALES TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
A. No licensee or officer, associated member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person, except as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16.1. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-
6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
B. It shall unlawful for any holder of a liquor license, or his or her agent or employee, to suffer or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located;
provided, that this subsection shall not apply to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who is accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian, or to that portion of any licensed premises of which its principal business is a restaurant or the sale of service or commodities other than
alcoholic liquor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 89/618
C. For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any licensee, or his agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to
any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of twenty one (21) years, as
required by this chapter.
D. In addition to all other fines and penalties, the local liquor control commissioner may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license of a licensee who
violates the provisions of this section. Proof that the licensee, or his employee or agent, demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon written
evidence of identification as required by subsection 4-3-30B of this chapter in any transaction forbidden by this section is competent evidence and may
be considered in any ordinance violation prosecution or in any proceedings for the suspension or revocation of any license based on a violation of this
section. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-30: PERSONS UNDER AGE:
A. Possession, Purchase Or Consumption By Or For Underage Persons:
1. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall consume, purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her
possession within the village, provided the possession and dispensing or consumption by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years of
alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, the consumption by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years under the
direct supervision and approval of the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such underage person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home, or the
possession and delivery of alcoholic liquors pursuant to a person's employment by a licensee under this chapter as allowed in subsection D of this
section is not prohibited.
2. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of
twenty one (21) years, except as allowed in subsection A1 of this section.
3. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises located within the village to knowingly allow any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to remain on such premises while in the possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquor in violation of this subsection.
B. Identification Requirements:
1. If a licensee or his agent or employee believes, has reason to believe or should have reason to believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because the prospective recipient is underage, he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of at least two (2)
separate forms of positive identification, each containing proof of age, each issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties, and
one of those forms of identification must contain a picture of the holder thereof. A traffic citation shall not be accepted as identification or evidence of
age.
2. No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government or subdivision or agency
thereof, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false
identification.
3. No person shall purchase, accept delivery of or have possession of alcoholic liquor by the use of an altered, forged or defaced identification card or
by the use of an identification card of another person.
4. No person shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the village where alcoholic
liquor is sold at retail.
C. Required Warning Signs: In every place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold, there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed
card which shall be supplied by the local liquor control commissioner and which shall read substantially as follows:
WARNING: If you are under twenty-one (21) years of age, you are subject to a fine up to $500.00 under the Glendale Heights Village Code, if you
PURCHASE alcoholic liquor or MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor. OFFICIAL PHOTO
IDENTIFICATION will be required to prove age before purchase.
D. Employment:
1. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or
permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to tend bar and/or to draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed premises;
provided, that the provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prevent the employment of persons who are at least nineteen (19) years of
age as waiters or waitresses in restaurants, hotels, or motels for the purpose of serving food and alcoholic liquor on the licensed retail premises.
2. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or
permit any person under twenty one (21) years to sell any alcoholic liquor in any licensed premises.
E. Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer or permit any minor child of which he or she
may be the parent or guardian to violate any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-31: PROHIBITED CONDUCT ON PREMISES:
A. It shall be the duty and responsibility of each liquor license holder, his employees or agents, to maintain the premises in a peaceable and orderly
manner so as not to allow any patron, employee or member of the public on the premises to commit any act, which act is done in an unreasonable
manner so as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace or to commit an act which causes another person to become
unconscious as a result of that act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 90/618
B. Each liquor license holder shall have sufficient employees or agents on the premises to maintain the peace. Any employee, agent, or person acting on
behalf of the liquor license holder shall be suitably trained to observe and be aware of persons who may become unconscious. Any employee, agent,
or person acting on behalf of the liquor license holder shall be suitably trained to maintain the peace of the premises, and may not act in any fashion so
as to promote or aggravate situations which may result in physical altercations, fighting or other acts of an unreasonable manner so as to alarm or
disturb another and provoke a breach of the peace.
C. No liquor license holder, employee or agent shall knowingly permit any fighting, which shall consist of physical contact of an insulting or provoking
nature, or permit any action which causes physical harm to an individual; nor shall the liquor license holder, employee or agent knowingly permit the
use of any drug, item or act causing an individual on the premises to become unconscious.
D. Each liquor license holder, employee or agent who is present or observes any type of criminal activity or fighting or notes that any person is
unconscious is required to immediately notify 9-1-1 of the event. In the event an individual on the premises loses consciousness or is in a state of
stupor so as to not be competent, each liquor license holder, employee or agent who is present shall immediately call 9-1-1 and notify the police
department of the condition of the individual. In the event the liquor license holder, employee or agent receives a complaint from any person that
someone has or had been drugged on or at the premises, the liquor license holder, employee or agent shall immediately notify the police department of
the complaint and any other relevant information. The police department shall inform the local liquor control commissioner of any conduct of patrons or
other persons on the premises of a liquor license establishment which results in any reports to the police department pursuant to this subsection.
E. Failure to immediately report any incident as required under subsection D of this section shall subject the holder of a liquor license to the revocation or
suspension of the retail liquor dealer's license, as well as a possible fine from the local liquor control commissioner. In the event that more than ten (10)
incidents of similar types of activity such as drugging of persons, disorderly conduct, fighting or other criminal activity which is classified as crimes
against persons occur on any liquor license establishment within the course of one year, said violations shall constitute a public nuisance.
F. The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right and/or authority to revoke or suspend the retail liquor dealer's license as well as fine or take
any other legal steps necessary to prevent the reoccurrence of a public nuisance as hereinabove defined.
G. For the purposes of this section, the word "premises" shall mean the actual physical space wherein alcoholic beverages are sold to the public, any area
set aside for use by the general public (restrooms, lounge), any area used by agents or employees of the liquor license holder for preparation of
services (kitchen or storage facilities) and any outdoor area wherein the public is served or awaiting service or where the customers are authorized to
park any vehicles and any means of ingress and egress to the parking facility. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-31-1: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling on any premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, except as otherwise permitted by the Illinois horse racing act of
1975, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., and the video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq. For the purposes of this section,
"gambling" shall be defined in accordance with the definition ascribed thereto, from time to time, in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1 et seq. (Ord.
2013-37, 6-20-2013)
4-3-31-2: SOLICITING:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his manager or other person in charge of any licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is sold or offered for sale for
consumption thereon to engage, employ or permit the engagement or employment of any person, nor shall any person be permitted to remain on said
premises, who shall solicit any patron or customer thereof to purchase alcoholic or nonalcoholic liquor for said person, or any other person therein; nor
shall any female, or any male representing himself to be female or impersonating a female, whether employee, entertainer or otherwise, solicit any patron
or customer therein to purchase alcoholic or nonalcoholic liquor for herself or himself or any other person therein; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall prohibit any adult manager, bartender or waitress who shall be regularly employed therein from accepting and serving the order of a patron
or customer in the regular course of employment as such manager or waitress. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-31-3: IMPROPER EXHIBITIONS:
A. No person licensed under this chapter, his agent, or employee shall allow, permit or suffer any employee, entertainer, patron or any other person to
appear on the licensed premises or to engage in any live act, demonstration, wet T-shirt contest, lingerie fashion show, dance or exhibition or
performance on the licensed premises in such manner or attire which:
1. Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair region, buttocks, perineum, anus or anal region;
2. Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic area, pubic hair, pubic hair region,
buttocks, perineum, anus or anal region;
3. Exposes any portion of the female areola, or any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof;
4. Depicts human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
5. Depicts acts of human masturbation, oral copulation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, actual or simulated; or
6. Depicts fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anus or female breasts.
B. No person licensed under this chapter, his agent or employee shall allow, permit or present on the licensed premises any motion picture films, slides,
videocassettes, cable television, computer generated displays, or any other such visual media for observation by patrons therein which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 91/618
1. Exposure of a person's genitals, pubic area, pubic hair, pubic hair region, buttocks, perineum, anus or anal region;
2. Exposure of any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic area, pubic hair, pubic hair region,
buttocks, perineum, anus or anal region;
3. Exposure of any portion of the female areola, or any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof;
4. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
5. Acts of human masturbation, oral copulation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, actual or simulated; or
6. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anus or female breasts. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-32: PEDDLING LIQUOR PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-33: RECORDS KEPT:
The local liquor control commissioner shall keep a complete record of all local retail liquor dealer's licenses issued pursuant to this chapter and shall
immediately give written notice to the chief of police of the issuance, renewal, revocation or suspension of any such license. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-34: CESSATION OF BUSINESS:
Any licensee who ceases to do business or closes his place of business for a period of more than thirty (30) successive days shall be subject to having his
license declared forfeited and lapsed by order of the local liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-35: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES:
A. Suspension Or Revocation Procedures; Fines Established:
1. The local liquor control commissioner may, in accordance with the liquor control act6, revoke or suspend any license issued under the provisions of
this chapter, if he/she determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the liquor control act, this chapter or any other ordinance or
resolution enacted by the corporate authorities of the village, or any applicable rules or regulations established by the local liquor control
commissioner or the Illinois liquor control commission, or any state and/or federal statute which is not inconsistent with the law. In addition to a
suspension, the local liquor control commissioner may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the first violation within a twelve (12) month period, one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second
violation within a twelve (12) month period, and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or subsequent violation within a twelve (12)
month period. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in
fines under this subsection may be imposed against any licensee during the period of the license. However, no such license shall be revoked or
suspended nor shall any licensee be fined except after a public hearing by the local liquor control commissioner after a three (3) day written notice to
the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend the charges contained in such notice. The three (3) day notice provision shall
begin the day following delivery of a notice of hearing to the licensee, by certified or registered mail or by personal service. Any fine imposed against
a licensee pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a debt due and owing the village and shall be paid to the village within thirty (30) days after
issuance of a written order levying a fine. Failure on the part of a licensee to pay any fine within thirty (30) days shall subject the licensee to further
sanctions as herein provided. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
2. If the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten
the welfare of the community, he/she may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing,
order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period; except, that if
the licensee is also engaged in another business on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other business. (Ord. 2007-
124, 12-6-2007)
3. The local liquor control commissioner shall, within five (5) days after such hearing, if he/she determines after such hearing that the license should be
revoked or suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reasons for such determination in a written order of revocation, suspension or
fine and serve a copy of such order within five (5) days upon the licensee. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
4. 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-7, 5/7-9, 5/7-12 and 5/7-13 are incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this chapter. Review of
decisions of the local liquor control commissioner shall be limited to a review of the official record of the proceedings of the local liquor control
commissioner, as provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-9.
5. Any licensee fined pursuant to the provisions of this subsection and who fails to pay the fine within the period ordered by the local liquor control
commissioner, shall be subject to additional fines and penalties as provided by this chapter.
B. Revocation Upon Conviction Of Violation: Whenever any licensee shall have been convicted by any court of a violation of any of the provisions of the
liquor control act, or of this chapter, or of any other ordinance of the village controlling or regulating the sale of alcoholic liquors, the licensee shall, in
addition to all other penalties for such offense, incur a forfeiture of any local retail dealer's license issued pursuant to this chapter and all monies that
may have been paid therefor.
C. Use Of Premises After Revocation: When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the period
of one year thereafter for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the premises described in the revoked license unless the revocation order has been
vacated or unless the revocation order was entered as to the revoked licensee only. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 92/618
4-3-36: VIOLATION OF RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX ACT:
In addition to other grounds specified in this chapter, the local liquor control commissioner may refuse the issuance of a retail license or suspend or revoke
such license for any of the following violations of the "retailers' occupation tax act", approved June 28, 1933, as amended:
A. Failure to make a tax return.
B. The filing of a fraudulent return.
C. Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally determined to be due.
D. Failure to keep books and records.
E. Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificates of registration. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
F. Wilful violation of any rule or regulation of the department of revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-
2007; amd. 2011 Code)
4-3-37: RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE FOR EMPLOYEE ACTIONS:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by an officer, director, manager or other agent or
employee of any licensee, if such act is committed or omission is made within the scope of such agency or employment or with the authorization,
knowledge or approval of the licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee and such employer and licensee, shall be
punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by him personally. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-38: INSTRUCTIONAL TRAINING FOR PERSONNEL; ATTENDANCE REQUIRED:
A. All applicants shall submit proof of completion of a state certified beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training (BASSET) program for all
persons who sell or serve alcoholic beverages, all management personnel working on premises, and anyone whose job description entails the
checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages, pursuant to that license.
B. A "state certified BASSET training program" shall be defined as a BASSET program licensed by the state of Illinois liquor commission (ILCC) as
required by 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-12(11.1) and 5/6-27 and title 77 of the Illinois administrative code, chapter XVI, section 3500. All licensed
BASSET providers shall be required to have on file all licenses and certificates to prove current qualifications and provide a certificate of course
completion and a card (a picture type ID is optional) to participants as proof of completion.
C. Any new owner, manager, employee, or agent requiring BASSET training shall, within ninety (90) days from the beginning of his or her employment with
that licensee, complete an ILCC BASSET approved seller/server training program and shall, until completion of the BASSET program, work under the
supervision of a person who has completed BASSET training.
D. A photocopy of the certificate of completion for all owners, managers, employees, or agents required by this section to have BASSET training shall be
maintained by the establishment in a manner that will allow inspection, upon demand, by any designee of both the state or local liquor control
authorities. In addition, all owners, managers, employees or agents of the licensee involved in the retail sale, delivery or serving of alcoholic liquor shall
at all times, while engaged in the performance of their duties for the licensee, have on their person a BASSET card issued to that person evidencing
successful completion of the BASSET course.
E. Not for profit corporations engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages are exempt from the mandatory requirements of this section. (Ord.
2007-124, 12-6-2007)
4-3-39: PENALTIES:
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition to any other penalty, a
licensee convicted of violating any provision of this chapter may be subject to having his license revoked, suspended or not renewed by the local liquor
control commissioner. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
B. The penalty provision in this section shall not be applicable to nor shall this section be construed to limit the authority of the local liquor control
commissioner to impose such fines or penalties as set forth in subsection 4-3-35A of this chapter against a licensee appearing before the local liquor
control commissioner in any hearing held in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois liquor control act and/or this chapter. (Ord. 2007-124, 12-6-
2007)
Chapter 4
BUILDING CONTRACTORS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 93/618
4-4-1: LICENSE AND BOND REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. No person shall engage within the village in any of the businesses described in section 4-4-2 of this chapter without first obtaining a license therefor and
furnishing the required corporate surety bond. (1978 Code § 3-3-1)
B. Any person licensed as a general building contractor need not be licensed as a subcontractor or any other kind of contractor under this chapter.
C. Electrical and plumbing contractors registered as such in another village or city in this state shall be required to register with the village but shall be
exempt from paying the annual fee established in this chapter. (1978 Code § 3-3-2)
4-4-2: LICENSE FEES AND BONDS:
The fee for a license required by this chapter and the amount of the bond to be filed shall be as follows:
Licensed Contractor License Fee Bond
General building contractor $100.00 $20,000.00
Bituminous paving contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Carpenter contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Cement or concrete contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Drain laying contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Electrical contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Excavation contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Fence contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Floor sanding and finishing contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Heating, air conditioning and refrigeration contractor 50.00 20,000.00
House moving contractor 50.00 20,000.00
House wrecking contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Insulation contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Masonry contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Painting contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Plastering and lathing contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Roofing contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Sewer contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Sheet metal contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Storm window contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Structural iron contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Tile, marble and mosaic contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Tuck pointing and building cleaning contractor 50.00 20,000.00
Waterproofing contractor 50.00 20,000.00
(Ord. 98-50, 8-20-1998; amd. 2011 Code)
4-4-3: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses required by this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance. (1978 Code § 3-3-3)
4-4-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF CONTRACTORS:
A. Site Maintenance: Contractors licensed under this chapter shall, at least once each week, remove or cause to be removed from the site of the
licensee's activities all trash, refuse and waste materials. Licensees shall at all times keep the site of activities in an orderly condition, free from
stagnant water, unguarded dangerous implements and health and safety hazards, and licensees shall not obstruct traffic on streets or sidewalks or
permit dirt or waste materials to fall or be carried onto such public ways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 94/618
B. Street Designation Signs:
1. Any building contractor who applies for building permits for more than fifty percent (50%) of the lots in any one block or is responsible for the
construction of more than fifty percent (50%) of the dwelling units in any one block shall cause a street designation sign to be placed at each end of
the block. (1978 Code § 3-3-4)
2. The street designation signs shall be placed within the public right of way at such points as the village director of community development shall
reasonably designate, and they shall be constructed of such materials and be of such proportions as the director of community development may
reasonably designate. (1978 Code § 3-3-4; amd. 2011 Code)
3. The village clerk shall at all times keep a record of the location at which the signs are to be placed and shall keep a record of the size and material
specifications for the signs.
4. Street designation signs shall be erected as soon as is practicable after the commencement of construction. (1978 Code § 3-3-4)
Chapter 5
ELECTRONIC MACHINES AND DEVICES
4-5-1: COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
A. License Required; Gambling Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, display, keep or maintain for public patronage any marble
machine, pinball machine, skill ball machine, target shooting machine, mechanical grab machine and any other similar mechanical or electronic
amusement machine or device which may be operated by the public generally upon the insertion or deposit of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk in any
public place within the village without first having obtained a license therefor; nor shall any such coin operated amusement machine or device be
operated or permitted to be used in such a manner as to violate the gaming laws of the village and of the state of Illinois.
B. Application For And Issuance Of License: Such license to operate a coin operated amusement device or devices shall be issued in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 1 of this title, and in addition to the information required by section 4-1-2 of this title for application for such license, the applicant
shall include on such application the applicant's telephone number and state sales or occupation tax number; the names, addresses and telephone
numbers of all owners, partners or officers of any proprietorship, partnership or corporation serving as applicant; the number of amusement devices to
be operated by the applicant and the denomination of coin used to operate each such device; and a sworn statement that the applicant, its owners,
partners or officers, have never been convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude or a crime involving consumer fraud, misrepresentation or
illegal and unscrupulous business activities. (1978 Code § 3-1-23)
4-5-2: TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, display, keep or maintain for public patronage any cigarette, cigar or tobacco vending machine which may be
operated by the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill or other currency or a token, plate, ticket, disk or similar item in any public place within the village without
first having obtained a license therefor. (1978 Code § 3-1-23)
4-5-3: JUKEBOXES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, display, keep or maintain for public patronage any jukebox which may be operated by the insertion or deposit
of a coin, bill or other currency or a token, plate, ticket, disc or similar item in any public place within the village without first having obtained a license
therefor. (1978 Code § 3-1-23)
4-5-4: OTHER MACHINES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, display, keep or maintain for public patronage any electronic or mechanical vending machine other than a
cigarette, cigar or tobacco machine, jukebox or coin operated amusement device which dispenses food, candy, ice, gum, milk, soft drinks, other
beverages, toys, novelties or other similar items which may be operated by the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill or other currency or a token, plate, ticket,
disk or similar item in any public place within the village without having first obtained a license therefor. (1978 Code § 3-1-23)
4-5-5: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or other officer designated by the village board of trustees to make inspections as are necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state of Illinois relating to sales from vending machines. (1978 Code § 3-1-23)
ARTICLE A. BUSINESSES CONTAINING AMUSEMENT DEVICES; VIDEO GAMING
TERMINALS
4-5A-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 95/618
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine, game, table or other device designed, intended, displayed or kept as an amusement game or test of skill and for
the playing of which a charge is made. The term shall include, but not be limited to, devices commonly known as pinball machines, shuffleboards, bowling
machines and coin operated games of skill but shall not include regulation bowling alleys or pool or billiard tables. The term amusement device shall
include any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game,
entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. The term shall include, but not be limited to, such devices as marble machines, electronic
games, skill ball, mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated.
GAME ROOM: Any business establishment wherein twenty (20) or more amusement devices are located on the premises, whether or not said amusement
devices are a primary source of revenue for said business.
INDOOR RECREATIONAL CENTER: Any business establishment where the primary source of revenue of said business is derived from patron fees for
recreational activities, including, but not limited to, bowling alleys, roller and ice skating rinks, tennis and racquetball clubs and pool and billiard rooms. The
separate area wherein amusement devices are located within an indoor recreational center shall be referred to herein as "indoor recreational center
amusement device area".
MANAGER OR ATTENDANT: Any person acting for and in behalf of an operator.
OPERATOR: Any person, firm, corporation or association in immediate control of the premises, including an owner or lessee thereof, within or upon which
any amusement devices are displayed or located.
PERSON, FIRM, CORPORATION OR ASSOCIATION: Shall include the following: Any person, firm, corporation, or association which owns or operates
any amusement device or video gaming terminal, or the person, firm, corporation, or association in whose place of business any such device or video
gaming terminal is placed for use by the public; and the person, firm, corporation, or association having control over such device or video gaming terminal.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in the video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., as amended.
(1978 Code § 3-12-1; amd. Ord. 2013-37, 6-20-2013)
4-5A-2: OPERATOR'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. No person shall operate a game room or indoor recreational center without having first obtained a license. Application for license shall be submitted to
the proper village official, and an investigation shall be conducted wherein approval or disapproval of said application will be determined pursuant to
chapter 1 of this title.
B. No person, firm, corporation or association shall, as owner, lessee, agent or otherwise, display or permit the display of or operate or permit the
operation of more than three (3) amusement devices on the premises leased or owned by him, unless: 1) a game room or indoor recreational license
has been obtained; or 2) such person has a class A or class B liquor license; or 3) such amusement devices are located on business premises and the
use of said devices are restricted to employees of said business. (1978 Code § 3-12-2)
4-5A-3: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No license required by this article shall be issued to:
A. A person who is not a resident of the village.
B. A person who is not of good moral character and reputation in the community in which he resides.
C. A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of any state.
D. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a house of ill fame.
E. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor pertaining to decency or morality.
F. A person whose license issued under this article has been revoked for cause less than one year prior to application.
G. A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.
H. A partnership, unless all of the members of the partnership are qualified to obtain a license.
I. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such
corporation would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the village.
J. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
K. A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be
issued. (1978 Code § 3-12-6)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 96/618
4-5A-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
The application for such license shall contain the following information:
A. Corporation:
1. Corporate name and address and the address of the premises for which the license is applied.
2. Date and place of incorporation.
3. Corporate purposes as set forth in the articles of incorporation.
4. Names, dates of birth and addresses of all corporate officers and directors.
5. Statement of principal kind of business in which the corporation engages.
6. Statement of whether the corporate business will be conducted by a manager, and the name, address and authority of any such manager or agent.
7. Statement whether any officer, manager, director or five percent (5%) shareholder of the corporation has ever been convicted of a felony or has ever
forfeited an appearance bond on a felony charge.
8. Names, dates of birth and addresses of all persons, firms, and organizations owning five percent (5%) or more of the corporation's stock.
9. Names, dates of birth and addresses of all persons, firms and organizations entitled by verbal or written agreement to a beneficial share of corporate
earnings.
10. A ten (10) year history of the corporation's addresses and the residence addresses of the corporation's president.
11. A statement of the number of machines and a description of the various machines intended to be located in the licensed premises.
12. Photographs and fingerprints of the corporation's president and secretary.
13. An affidavit attesting to the veracity of the statements contained herein, signed by the corporation's president and secretary and bearing the
corporate seal.
14. A statement of personal history by a manager or agent conducting business for corporation.
15. A statement denoting legal ownership of the amusement devices which will be located on the premises.
B. Individual Or Partnership:
1. Name and address and date of birth of the applicant(s).
2. Location of place of business.
3. Principal kind of business in which engaged.
4. A statement of whether the business will be conducted by a manager or agent, and the name and address and date of birth of any such manager or
agent.
5. A statement of other licenses of the village held by the applicant.
6. Names, dates of birth and addresses of all persons, firms and organizations entitled by verbal or written agreement to a beneficial share of the
earnings of the business.
7. Personal information relating to all persons named in subsection B6 of this section.
8. A ten (10) year history of the applicant's business and residence addresses.
9. A statement of the number of machines and a description of the various machines intended to be located in the licensed premises.
10. Photographs and fingerprints of the applicant and the applicant's partners, managers or agents.
11. An affidavit attesting to the veracity of the statements contained in the application, signed by the applicant.
12. A statement of personal history by the manager or agent conducting business for the applicant.
13. A statement of the owner of the amusement devices which will be located on the premises. (1978 Code § 3-12-5)
4-5A-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; FEE:
The application for a game room or indoor recreational center license hereunder shall be examined in the same manner as other applications submitted
under chapter 1 of this title, except a nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged by the village to each applicant to cover the
cost of investigation. Said fee shall be applied to the license fee if a license is granted. (1978 Code § 3-12-9)
4-5A-6: LICENSE FEE:
In addition to all other fees specified in this code and made applicable to game rooms and amusement devices, an annual license fee for the privilege of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 97/618
owning and operating a game room or indoor recreation center in the village shall be as provided in section 4-2-2 of this title for each license issued. (1978
Code § 3-12-4; amd. 2011 Code)
4-5A-7: TERM OF LICENSE:
The operator's license for a game room or indoor recreational center issued pursuant to this article shall terminate on December 31 of each year. (1978
Code § 3-12-3)
4-5A-8: DISPLAY OF STATE LICENSES:
The licensee shall display on the premises all licenses required by the state of Illinois. (1978 Code § 3-12-12)
4-5A-9: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OPERATORS AND LICENSEES; TRANSFER OF MACHINE LICENSES:
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to relieve an operator or licensee of the responsibility of obtaining an annual license and of paying the fee
required for each and every amusement device and vending machine allowed in the licensed premises as provided in section 4-2-2 of this title. Said
individual machine licenses may be transferred without fee from one machine or device to another similar machine upon application to the village clerk to
such effect and giving a description and the serial number of the new machine or device. (1978 Code § 3-12-11)
4-5A-10: NUMBER OF MACHINES:
A. In all game rooms, indoor recreational centers, amusement device areas or premises of class A or class B liquor licenses wherein amusement devices
are located, there shall be a maximum of one amusement device for each twenty five (25) square feet of floor area, exclusive of aisles and exit areas.
B. No more than ten (10) amusement devices shall be allowed in an indoor recreational center. The location of such amusement devices within the indoor
recreational center shall be restricted to a separate divided area located on the premises and supervised by the operator, manager or attendant of the
indoor recreational center. (1978 Code § 3-12-7)
4-5A-11: OPERATION OF BUSINESS:
A. Attendant Required: An operator, manager or attendant of twenty one (21) years of age or older shall be present on the premises of any game room,
indoor recreational center or class A or class B liquor license wherein amusement devices are located at all times in which the business is open to the
public and shall be in such a position to have a clear view of all of the amusement devices and activity taking place on the premises.
B. Payoffs: Games or amusement devices in the licensed premises shall not pay off in money, prizes or awards but may grant free games to the player
upon the player reaching a certain score or scores. (1978 Code § 3-12-7)
C. Gambling And Gambling Devices Prohibited:
1. It shall be unlawful to permit gambling and video gaming on those premises wherein amusement devices are located, except as otherwise permitted
by the Illinois horse racing act of 1975, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq., and the video gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et
seq. For the purposes of this subsection, "gambling" shall be defined in accordance with the definition ascribed thereto, from time to time, in 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1 et seq. Any operator, manager or attendant who observes any gambling on the premises or has reasonable
grounds to suspect that gambling is taking place shall immediately notify the police of such activity.
2. Nothing contained in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever or any mechanism
that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to any law or that may be contrary to any future laws of the state
of Illinois. If the chief of police shall have reason to believe any game room or amusement device is used as a gambling device, such machine may
be seized by the police and impounded pending a judicial determination. (Ord. 2013-37, 6-20-2013)
D. Persons Under Influence Of Liquor Or Drugs Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or attendant to permit any individual under the influence of
alcohol or drugs on the premises where amusement devices are in use. Any operator, manager or attendant who observes any individual on the
premises who is under the influence of alcohol or drugs or who reasonably suspects such person to be under such influence shall immediately cause
the removal of said person or persons from the premises.
E. Persons Under Seventeen: It shall be unlawful for the adult operator, manager or attendant to allow anyone under the age of seventeen (17) to operate
an amusement device after curfew unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. (1978 Code § 3-12-7)
4-5A-12: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. Clean And Sanitary Premises: The licensee shall cause the premises to remain in a clean and sanitary condition at all times and shall place such waste
receptacles in and around the premises so as to accomplish the above.
B. Parking; Unobstructed Public Ways: A licensee shall provide adequate and orderly parking for all motor vehicles and shall keep the storefront
unobstructed so that the sidewalks are clear and open to pedestrian traffic.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 98/618
C. Location: No game room shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of any church or school or within one hundred feet (100') of any retail
establishment offering beer, wine or liquor for sale to the public. In determining the distance provided in this subsection, the closest point of such
church, school or retail establishment offering beer, wine or liquor for sale to the public shall be used as a point from which measurement shall be
taken. (1978 Code § 3-12-7)
4-5A-13: INSPECTIONS:
The director of community development shall inspect or cause to be inspected all wiring and proposed electrical connections to the amusement devices to
determine whether the same comply with the electrical code in effect. In addition, the director of community development shall inspect or cause to be
inspected the premises in order to determine whether or not the game room complies with the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person
to commence operation of a game room without first having written authorization from the director of community development. (1978 Code § 3-12-10;
amd. 2011 Code)
4-5A-14: VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS:
A. License Required: Any person who displays any video gaming terminal to be played or operated by the public at any place owned or leased by any
such person shall, before such person displays such terminal, file with the village clerk or its designee, an application for a license for each terminal.
Any person who displays any video gaming terminal to be played or operated by the public shall as a prerequisite to receiving any license from the
village have a valid license from the state of Illinois/Illinois gaming board for each such terminal, and the loss or suspension of any such license by the
state of Illinois/Illinois gaming board shall automatically result in the same status for the license issued hereunder without refund of any license fee.
B. License Application; Issuance; Limitation On Video Gaming Terminals: Any person desiring to display in the village any video gaming terminal shall
make application for the appropriate license to the village clerk, or its designee. Each such application shall be accompanied by the required license
fee and shall set forth such applicant's name and address, with a brief description of each video gaming terminal to be displayed on the premises,
where such terminal will be located, together with such other relevant data or information as the village clerk, or its designee, may require. The
applicant shall include a copy of the license from the state of Illinois/Illinois gaming board for each video gaming terminal on the premises. Upon receipt
of the proper application and upon the payment of the license fee as herein provided, the village clerk, or its designee, shall issue the appropriate
license for each such terminal, which such license shall be issued for a period of one year from January 1 to December 31.
C. Display Of License; Transfer: The license for each video gaming terminal shall be in the form of a gummed sticker, which shall be serially numbered
and shall be securely affixed in plain view to the terminal for which it is issued. A video gaming terminal license is not transferable.
D. License Fee: Each applicant for a license required by this section shall pay such amount for such license as is set forth and established in section 4-2-2
of this title. There shall be no proration of the video gaming terminal license fee.
E. Illegal Video Gaming Terminals Prohibited; Inspections: No license shall be issued for any video gaming terminal which violates the laws or regulations
of the state of Illinois or the ordinances and regulations of the village of Glendale Heights. All video gaming terminals shall be available for inspection
by the proper village authorities for the purpose of ascertaining and declaring whether such laws, regulations, and ordinances are complied with. (Ord.
2013-37, 6-10-2013)
Chapter 6
CARNIVALS AND AMUSEMENT RIDES
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
AMUSEMENT ATTRACTION: An enclosed building or structure, including electrical equipment which is an integral part of the building or structure, through
which people walk without the aid of any moving device, that provides amusement, thrills or excitement at a fair or carnival, except any such enclosed
building or structure which is subject to the jurisdiction of the local building code.
AMUSEMENT RIDE: Any mechanized device or combination of devices, including electrical equipment which is an integral part of the device or devices,
which carries passengers along, around, or over a fixed or restricted course for the primary purpose of giving its passengers amusement, pleasure, thrills,
or excitement.
CARNIVAL: An enterprise, the principal business of which is offering amusement or entertainment to the public by means of amusement attractions or
amusement rides.
DEPARTMENT: Department of labor of the state of Illinois.
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: The director of community development of the village of Glendale Heights, Illinois, or his designee.
DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT OF LABOR: The director of the department of labor of the state of Illinois, or his designee.
FAIR: An enterprise principally devoted to the exhibition of products of agriculture or industry in connection with which amusement rides or amusement
attractions are operated.
OPERATOR: A person, or the agent of a person, who owns or controls or has the duty to control the operation of an amusement ride or an amusement
attraction at a carnival or fair. "Operator" shall include an agency of the state or any of its political subdivisions. (1978 Code § 3-14-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 99/618
4-6-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The director of community development shall administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter and all codes, rules and regulations promulgated by the
village board of trustees relating to amusement rides and amusement attractions. (1978 Code § 3-14-2)
4-6-3: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to operate any amusement ride or amusement attraction at a carnival or fair in the village without the owner or
operator of such equipment first having obtained from the director of community development a permit for the operation of such equipment. (1978 Code
§ 3-14-3)
B. Application For Permit; Proof Of State Inspection: No permit for the operation of an amusement ride or an amusement attraction shall issue from the
director of community development until such time as any person required to obtain a permit shall apply to the director of community development for a
permit on a form issued by said director, which form shall contain such information as the director may require. No permit shall issue from the director
of community development until such time as the owners or operators of any amusement ride or amusement attraction provide to the director
satisfactory proof that said amusement ride or amusement attraction has been currently inspected by the director of the department of labor or his
designee pursuant to 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 85/2-1 et seq., and that pursuant to said inspection, the amusement ride or amusement attraction
has been determined to be in safe operating condition, and the amusement ride or amusement attraction will provide protection to the public using such
equipment.
C. Permit Fee: The permit fee for the operation of any amusement ride or amusement attraction in the village shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per ride
or attraction per carnival or fair. (1978 Code § 3-14-3; amd. 2011 Code)
4-6-4: INSURANCE OR BOND REQUIRED:
No person shall be issued a permit under this chapter unless, at the time of application, there is in force: a) a liability insurance policy or policies in an
aggregate amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident and subject to the limit
for one person; in an amount of not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for bodily injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one
accident; and in an amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury to or destruction of property of others in any one
accident, insuring the operator against liability for injury or death suffered by a person attending a fair or carnival; or b) a bond in like amount, the
aggregate liability of the surety of which shall not exceed the face amount thereof. (1978 Code § 3-14-5; amd. 2011 Code)
4-6-5: INSPECTIONS:
A. Order To Cease Operation For Failure To Obtain Inspections; Appeal:
1. The director of community development, his designee, or inspector hired by the director of community development may order, in writing, a
temporary and immediate cessation of amusement ride or amusement attraction if it has been determined after inspection that said amusement ride
or amusement attraction has not been inspected pursuant to 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 85/2-1 et seq., except as hereinafter provided. Operation
of the amusement ride or attraction shall not resume until the ride or attraction has been inspected pursuant to 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 85/2-1
et seq., and a permit for the ride or attraction obtained pursuant to this chapter. (1978 Code § 3-14-4; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Appeal of action of the director of community development under this subsection may be brought to the village board of trustees by filing with the
village clerk, within ten (10) days after the action sought to be reviewed, a written statement under oath setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The
village board of trustees shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal. The decision of the village board of trustees shall be
final. (1978 Code § 3-14-4)
B. Waiver Of Inspection: The director of community development may waive the requirement that an amusement ride or amusement attraction or any part
thereof be inspected before being operated pursuant to 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 85/2-1 et seq., if an operator or owner gives satisfactory proof to
the director of community development that the amusement ride or amusement attraction or any part thereof has passed an inspection conducted by a
public or private agency whose inspection standards and requirements are at least equal to those requirements or standards established by the
carnival-amusement safety board of the state of Illinois. The annual permit fees shall be paid before the director of community development may waive
this requirement. (1978 Code § 3-14-7; amd. 2011 Code)
4-6-6: AUTHORITY TO DENY ENTRY:
The owner or operator of an amusement ride or amusement attraction may deny entry to a person to the amusement ride or amusement attraction if, in the
owner's or operator's opinion, the entry may jeopardize the safety of such person or the safety of any other person. Nothing in this section will permit an
owner or operator to deny the director of community development or his designee access to an amusement ride or amusement attraction when such
director of community development or designee is acting within the scope of his duties under this chapter. (1978 Code § 3-14-8)
4-6-7: FREQUENCY OF CARNIVALS:
No license shall be issued for a carnival that is to be held forty five (45) or fewer days prior to a carnival previously permitted under the provisions of this
chapter. (1978 Code § 3-1-23)
4-6-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 100/618
A. Any person who operates an amusement ride or an amusement attraction at a carnival or fair without having first obtained a permit from the director of
community development or who violates any order issued by the director of community development under this chapter is guilty of a class A
misdemeanor. Each day shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
B. Any person who interferes with, impedes, or obstructs in any manner the director of community development or his designee in the performance of their
duties under this chapter is guilty of a class A misdemeanor. (1978 Code § 3-14-6)
Chapter 7
RAFFLES
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial
and civic interests of a community.
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported
schools.
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to
provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in each pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation. The term nonprofit shall include the village of Glendale Heights and other units of local government.
ORGANIZATION: Shall include an auxiliary or affiliate of a licensee.
POLITICAL COMMITTEE: An organization composed of individuals who act on behalf of or in opposition to a political candidate or candidates as more
fully defined by section 5/9-1.9 of the election code1.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the criminal code of 19612, conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance.
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the
part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except, that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way
as to confer a public benefit. (1978 Code §§ 3-13-1, 3-13-14; amd. Ord. 2004-66, 9-2-2004; Ord. 2007-90, 9-20-2007; 2011 Code; Ord. 2012-61, 9-20-
2012)
4-7-2: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; AUTHORITY TO ISSUE; JURISDICTION:
A. License And Compliance Required: No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle without having first obtained a license pursuant to this chapter.
Each raffle shall be authorized by a license pursuant to this chapter, and shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
foregoing notwithstanding, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to political committees for which a raffle license has been issued by the Illinois
state board of elections pursuant to section 8.1 of the raffles act3. (Ord. 2012-61, 9-20-2012)
B. Authority To Issue: The village administrator, or his or her designee(s), shall have the authority to issue licenses for raffles subject to the limitations set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2007-90, 9-20-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Jurisdiction: A license issued by the village shall authorize the sale of raffle chances only within the boundaries of the village. (Ord. 2007-90, 9-20-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 101/618
4-7-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF LICENSEE; INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
A. Licenses for raffles shall be issued only to bona fide nonprofit charitable, educational, religious, fraternal, veterans, labor, and business organizations
which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making application for a license, and have had, during that
entire five (5) year period, a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out its objectives, or to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the village
determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster. (Ord. 2012-61, 9-20-2012)
B. No raffle license shall be issued to:
1. Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
2. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter.
3. Any person who is not of good moral character.
4. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which
such person is active or employed.
5. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether for compensation or
not.
6. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection B1, B2 or B3 of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a "raffle" as
defined in section 4-7-1 of this chapter. (1978 Code § 3-13-7)
4-7-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Application for a license shall be made in writing and, generally speaking, must be made no fewer than thirty (30) days before the intended sale of raffle
chances, on forms provided by the village. Applications for licenses that are less than thirty (30) days before the intended sale of raffle chances may be
made upon a showing of good cause and submittal of a written request for a waiver on forms provided by the village. The village administrator
maintains the exclusive authority to grant such waivers and issue said licenses. Each license and application for license shall contain the following
information:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The location within the village in which the raffle chances will be sold and issued;
3. The area within the location in which the raffle chances will be sold and issued;
4. The time period or periods during which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
5. The date(s), time(s), manner, and locations of determining the winning chances;
6. A sworn statement attesting to the nonprofit character of the applicant signed by its presiding officer and secretary;
7. A copy of the applicant's articles of incorporation and/or charter; and
8. Such other information as the village may require.
B. The village administrator, or his or her designee(s), shall act on a license application within thirty (30) days from the date of application. (Ord. 2007-90,
9-20-2007)
4-7-5: CLASSES OF LICENSES; NO FEE:
A. The classification for each raffle shall be as set forth in the following schedule:
1. Class A: Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
2. Class B: Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle is greater than five hundred dollars ($500.00), but does not exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
3. Class C: Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle is greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), but does not exceed fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
4. Class D: Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle is greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
B. No fee shall be required for the issuance of a license under this chapter. (Ord. 2007-90, 9-20-2007)
4-7-6: EFFECT OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one raffle or for a specified number of raffles to be conducted during a specified period, not to
exceed one year. (Ord. 2007-90, 9-20-2007)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 102/618
4-7-7: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles in the village is subject to the following:
A. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
B. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
C. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
D. The maximum fee which may be charged for each raffle chance sold or issued shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). All such fees shall be
paid in currency or by check. (1978 Code § 3-13-8)
E. A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization or committee which is also
licensed under this chapter. (Ord. 2007-90, 9-20-2007)
F. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license. (1978 Code § 3-13-8)
G. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or guardian.
A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his
parent or guardian. (1978 Code § 3-13-8; amd. 2011 Code)
4-7-8: TICKETS AND PRIZES:
A. Tickets:
1. Each raffle ticket, chance or other raffle token shall state on its face the name and address of the licensee, the date or dates of the drawings and the
prize or prizes to be awarded; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply to any raffle in which prizes in aggregate value under fifty
dollars ($50.00) are awarded, or to any raffle in which raffle chances are sold only on the date of the drawing during the event at which the drawing is
to be conducted. No such ticket, chance or token shall be sold or issued more than two hundred forty (240) days before the determination of the
winning chance or chances.
2. If any raffle for which a license is issued under this chapter is canceled, or if any such raffle is not conducted on the date contained in the application
for license, the licensee shall refund all monies paid for any raffle chances issued or sold to the persons to whom such raffle chances were issued or
sold within forty five (45) days after the date on which the raffle was to be conducted or within forty five (45) days after cancellation of the raffle,
whichever is sooner. (1978 Code § 3-13-10)
B. Prizes: The maximum cash prize awarded in any raffle shall be one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); the maximum retail value of a noncash
prize awarded in any raffle shall be one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle shall not
exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). (1978 Code § 3-13-11)
4-7-9: GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting or operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than a
raffle provided for herein. (1978 Code § 3-13-16)
4-7-10: RAFFLE MANAGER:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager shall
give a fidelity bond in the sum of an amount determined by the village in favor of the organization conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his
duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the village not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation. The village
administrator, or his or her designee(s), may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the license; provided, that a request for such
waiver has been made by unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization and proof of said vote is provided to the village. (1978 Code § 3-
13-9; amd. Ord. 2007-90, 9-20-2007)
4-7-11: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A. Records Kept:
1. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the count, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction and
the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to the payee, amount and date of payment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 103/618
2. Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts if
bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state of
Illinois and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization. (1978
Code § 3-13-12)
B. Reports Required: Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to its membership and the village its gross receipts, expenses and
net proceeds from raffles and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section. Such reports shall be filed in writing with the village
on the fifteenth day of the month following the conclusion of the individual raffle. Subsequent raffles or requests for raffle licenses may be denied by the
village administrator should the raffle holder fail to file this report. (Ord. 2007-90, 9-20-2007)
C. Preservation Of Records; Open Records: Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3) years, and organizations shall make
available their records relating to the operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. (1978 Code § 3-13-12)
4-7-12: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Licenses may be suspended or revoked by the village administrator for any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-90, 9-20-2007)
4-7-13: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). (1978 Code § 3-13-15; amd. 2011 Code)
4-7-14: PUBLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The village administrator, or his or her designee(s), may publish rules and regulations consistent with this chapter or Illinois law governing the conduct of
raffles licensed hereunder. (Ord. 2007-90, 9-20-2007)
Chapter 8
ADOLESCENT DANCE FACILITIES
4-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
ADOLESCENT DANCE FACILITY: A. Commercial premises which is open to the public, the primary function of which is to offer, provide, procure, make
available, allow, suffer or permit entertainment to patrons under the age of twenty one (21) years an opportunity to engage in social activities such as
dancing, or the enjoyment of live or prerecorded music, or the enjoyment of entertainment provided by dancers or other performers. As an incidental
function, an adolescent dance facility may sell and serve food and beverages (excluding alcoholic beverages) to its patrons.
B. The term "adolescent dance facility" does not include the following: premises which serve alcoholic beverages as defined by state and local laws;
theaters which the patrons sit in parallel rows of fixed seats; full service restaurants where the only entertainment consists of background music
which is incidental to the primary function of serving food; outdoor performances; a banquet, party or celebration conducted for invited guests which
is not open to the public; or dances or events sponsored and operated by a governmental entity, an educational institution, or a nonprofit or
charitable group duly licensed with the state and having a five (5) year history in the village.
PERSON: One or more natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations or other entities capable of having an action of law brought against such
entity.
PREMISES: Any place where an adolescent dance facility is operated or maintained, including all hallways, bathrooms, parking areas and other adjacent
portions of the premises which are accessible to the public during operating hours.
SPECIAL EVENT: An activity at an adolescent dance facility which is marketed to patrons or prospective patrons as being of a temporary or nonroutine
nature.
VILLAGE: Village of Glendale Heights. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
4-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; OCCUPANCY:
A. It is unlawful for any person to own, operate, manage or maintain an adolescent dance facility in the village without first obtaining an adolescent dance
facility license from the village. The license fee shall be based on the permitted occupancy of the adolescent dance facility as provided in section 4-2-2
of this title. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Those establishments holding a license for occupancy to six hundred (600) may, after operating for a minimum of three (3) months, apply for an
increased occupancy of up to two hundred (200) patrons without the payment of any additional licensing fee. The additional occupancy shall be
permitted if the establishment otherwise complies with other ordinances and codes of the village and there have been no previous revocation or
suspension of the licensee's license within the preceding three (3) months.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 104/618
C. Those establishments holding a license for occupancy of up to six hundred (600) people who have received an increase of occupancy of up to two
hundred (200) patrons may, following a period of three (3) months after the licensee who had occupancy for up to eight hundred (800) patrons has
operated at such level, receive an additional increase of occupancy by applying for an increase of occupancy of up to two hundred (200) more patrons
without paying any additional fee. The additional occupancy shall be permitted if the establishment otherwise complies with other ordinances and
codes of the village and there have been no previous revocation or suspension of the licensee's license within the preceding six (6) months. No further
occupancy increases shall be permitted.
D. All adolescent dance facilities shall have an occupancy limit established by providing a minimum of ten (10) square feet of floor space per person within
the licensed premises. For the purpose of this subsection, licensed premises shall not include kitchen area, storage areas, hallways, or any area used
by the licensee and/or his employees and not open to the licensees' patrons. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
4-8-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. An application for a license shall be made in writing to the village clerk, upon forms provided, and shall include the following:
1. The name, birth date, and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a partnership, the persons entitled to share in the
profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation, the date of incorporation (in the case of a foreign corporation, the state where it was incorporated
and the date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois business corporation act to transact business in the state of Illinois), and the objects for which
it was organized. The names, dates of birth, and addresses of any partner, any officer and any director, and if a majority in interest of the stock of a
corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the name, date of birth, and address of such person.
2. The location of the adolescent dance facility.
3. A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant as provided in this section. If the applicant is a corporation, such statement shall include
applicant's officers and directors thereof, and any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock
of such corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, such statement shall include all general partners, and any limited partner owning more than
twenty percent (20%) of the aggregate limited partner interest in such partnership. Such listing shall include the following: (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
a. Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other sex offenses as defined in title III, part B, article 11 of the criminal code of 1961, as
amended. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
b. A felony based upon conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity, within the past ten (10) years; or
c. A felony unrelated to conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity, but which felony involved the use
of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against another person, including rape, within the past five (5) years; or
d. A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation based upon conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or
activity, within the past two (2) years.
4. A description of the proposed adolescent dance facility, including the anticipated age and number of patrons, hours of operation and all activities and
business conducted at the same location, and the physical facilities to be used.
5. A written statement setting forth all measures proposed to ensure that adequate traffic control, crowd protection and security, both inside and outside
the licensed premises, will be maintained, and that the ages of the patrons admitted to the adolescent dance facility will be monitored.
6. A statement of whether the business will be conducted by a manager. In such case, the manager's name, address, telephone number and age shall
be provided, along with a statement of any convictions as set forth under subsection A3 of this section.
7. A statement whether the applicant has made similar application for a similar other license at a location other than described in this application and
the disposition of such application.
8. A current certificate of inspection for the location from the county board of health, if applicable.
9. The license fee as provided in section 4-2-2 of this title.
10. A site plan for the licensed premises, including a floor plan showing all entrances, exits and public areas.
11. The operation and training manuals to be used for the establishment setting forth procedures for complying with this chapter, including, but not
limited to, security and age verification.
12. A certificate of insurance evidencing that the applicant has secured commercial general liability insurance issued by one or more companies
authorized to do business in the state of Illinois providing the following minimum coverage:
a. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person, per occurrence; and
b. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) annual aggregate.
B. In the event the applicant is made aware that any information or document submitted as part of this application process is inaccurate or incomplete, the
applicant shall immediately notify the village and provide appropriate corrections. Failure to accurately and completely provide, or as necessary update,
required information may delay the processing of such application or result in its denial. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
C. In addition to the requirements of subsections A and B of this section, the applicant and, if applicable, the manager shall submit their fingerprints to be
used in completing the investigation. Applicants are required to present themselves for fingerprints to be taken by the police department as provided by
the chief of police. If the applicant is a corporation, fingerprints shall be required of the applicant's officers, directors, and any stockholder or
stockholders owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock of such corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, fingerprints
shall be required of all general partners, and any limited partner owning more than twenty percent (20%) of the aggregate limited partner interest in
such partnership. The applicant shall pay the fingerprint fee as set by the Illinois bureau of identification, plus twenty five dollars ($25.00), for each
person required to submit fingerprints. Provided, in the case of a renewal application, fingerprints and the fingerprint fee shall not be required from a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 105/618
renewal applicant whose fingerprints are on file, unless the chief of police determines that there may be reason to believe that the renewal applicant
may have unreported convictions. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
4-8-4: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
After receiving a complete application for an adolescent dance facility license, as specified in section 4-8-3 of this chapter, the village shall follow the
following procedures:
A. The village clerk shall forward copies of the application to appropriate village officials for their comments regarding compliance with regulations under
their jurisdiction. The village administrator shall consider all materials and comments submitted and issue or deny the license within thirty (30) working
days after the date on which a completed application was filed unless the applicant agrees to an extension of the time period in writing. In the event
that the village administrator fails to act upon any application within the time period set forth herein, such inaction shall be deemed a denial of the
application.
B. The issuance or renewal of an adolescent dance facility license shall be denied by the village administrator for any one or more of the following
reasons:
1. The applicant has been convicted of one or more of the following offenses: (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
a. Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other sex offenses as defined in title III, part B, article 11 of the criminal code of 1961, as
amended; or (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
b. A felony based upon conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity, within the past ten (10) years; or
c. A felony unrelated to conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or activity, but which felony involved the use
of a deadly weapon, traffic in narcotic drugs, or violence against another person, including rape, within the past five (5) years; or
d. A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation based upon conduct or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or
activity, within the past two (2) years.
2. The applicant whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for cause.
3. The applicant who, at the time of application for renewal of any license issued under this chapter, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
4. The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
5. Where grounds for revocation of the license exist.
6. If the applicant is a partnership and any general partner, or any limited partner owning more than twenty percent (20%) of the aggregate limited
partner interest in such partnership, would not be eligible to receive a license under this chapter.
7. If the applicant is a corporation and any officer or director, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent
(20%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license under this chapter.
8. If the applicant is a corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the "business
corporation act of 1983" to transact business in Illinois.
9. If the business of the adolescent dance facility is to be conducted by a manager, unless the manager possesses the same qualifications required by
the licensee.
10. If the applicant is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the licensee.
11. If the premises does not comply with all applicable village ordinances and state laws.
12. If the application is incomplete or if it contains any material misrepresentation.
13. If the application does not show adequate measures for the protection of persons or property, security, both inside and outside the premises, and
the monitoring of the ages of patrons admitted to the adolescent dance facility.
C. If the village administrator denies a license, written notice of the denial stating the reasons why shall be sent to the applicant within five (5) working days
after the denial. The applicant shall have a period of ten (10) working days after the date of license denial to appeal to the village board. Said appeal
shall be in writing and shall be scheduled for hearing within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of the appeal for a regular meeting occurring not more
than thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice and after at least five (5) days' notification of the hearing date to the appellant. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
4-8-5: TERM OF LICENSE:
A license shall be effective from the date of its issue until December 31 of each year. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
4-8-6: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
A license granted under the provisions of this chapter is nontransferable. The sale, lease or transfer of substantially all of the assets of a business holding
an adolescent dance facility license or a sale or transfer of a controlling interest in a corporation or partnership holding an adolescent dance facility license
shall result in the termination of the license granted herein. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 106/618
4-8-7: OPERATING RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Age Restrictions:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of fourteen (14) years to enter or remain on the premises of an adolescent dance facility unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person twenty one (21) years of age or older to enter or remain on the premises of an adolescent dance facility except for
bona fide employees or independent contractors hired by the licensee to work in the adolescent dance facility, a parent or guardian of a person under
twenty one (21) years of age present in the adolescent dance facility or a governmental employee in the performance of his duties.
3. It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit a person to enter or remain on the premises of an adolescent dance facility who is under the age of fourteen
(14) years or twenty one (21) years of age or older unless such person is a bona fide employee or independent contractor hired by the licensee to
work in the adolescent dance facility, a parent or guardian of a person under twenty one (21) years of age present in the adolescent dance facility or
a governmental employee in the performance of his duties.
B. Identification Requirements:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent his age for the purpose of gaining admission to an adolescent dance facility.
2. The licensee shall require each person admitted or seeking to be admitted to display to a supervisory security person of the adolescent dance facility
an identification card showing the photo and age of the person seeking admission. In addition, all patrons shall be required to pass through a metal
detection device or pass a scanning by a metal detection wand.
C. Restrictions On Reentry: A patron, once admitted to the premises, shall not be permitted to reenter the premises sooner than the following business
day.
D. Days And Hours Of Operation:
1. Adolescent dance facilities which permit persons under the age of seventeen (17) years to enter or remain on the premises shall be operated only
between four o'clock (4:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., Monday through Thursday, and between six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eleven thirty
o'clock (11:30) P.M. on Friday and Saturday.
2. Adolescent dance facilities which do not permit persons under the age of seventeen (17) years to enter or remain on the premises shall be operated
only between four o'clock (4:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight each day Sunday through Thursday, and between four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
Friday and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. Saturday, and between twelve o'clock (12:00) noon Saturday and one o'clock (1:00) A.M. Sunday. Adolescent
dance facilities shall be closed at all other times.
E. Personnel:
1. Security Personnel:
a. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to employ qualified supervisory security personnel at a ratio of one such person for every fifty (50) patrons
or fraction thereof (based upon the maximum occupancy of the premises), who shall be present on the premises during all operating hours to
maintain peace and order and to ensure compliance with all applicable laws of the state and of the village. All supervisory security personnel shall
have been trained in crowd control, drug awareness and gang awareness. The names, addresses and birth dates of all such security personnel
must be on file with the chief of police at least forty eight (48) hours before their employment.
b. Each licensee shall provide at least one supervising security person for every fifty (50) persons or fraction thereof who are waiting to gain
admittance to the licensed premises. Such supervising security personnel may be from among those required in the premises referenced in
subsection E1a of this section until the actual occupancy of the premises reaches the maximum occupancy allowed, at which time, the required
number of such supervising security personnel shall be present within the premises, and additional supervising security personnel shall be
provided for those waiting to gain admittance to the licensed premises.
2. Background Checks: All employees and independent contractors hired by the licensee to work in the adolescent dance facility who will be present on
the premises during hours of operation shall submit to criminal background checks. No person shall be permitted to be employed who has been
convicted of a felony violation of any section of the following: (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
Article 8 solicitation, conspiracy and attempt;
Article 9 homicide;
Article 10 kidnapping and related offenses;
Article 11 sex offenses;
Article 12 bodily harm;
Article 18 robbery;
Article 19 burglary;
Article 33A armed violence; or
Article 33D contributing to the criminal delinquency of a juvenile of title III of the Illinois criminal code of 1961, as amended, or any section of the
Illinois controlled substances act, as amended, or any violation of similar federal laws or laws of any other state. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999; amd. 2011
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 107/618
F. Alcohol, Tobacco And Controlled Substances Prohibited: The licensee and its agents shall not permit or allow alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, or
controlled substances to be consumed or be present on any adolescent dance facility premises. The presence of any prohibited item upon the licensed
premises shall be deemed a violation of this subsection.
G. Certain Persons Prohibited: It shall be the obligation of the licensee to refuse admittance and to remove from the adolescent dance facility any person
who is, or appears to be, under the influence of, or affected by the use of, alcohol or drugs, or whose conduct poses a physical danger to the safety of
others present.
H. Loitering, Public Nuisances And Disturbing The Peace Prohibited: It shall be the obligation of the licensee to prevent loitering, the creation of public
nuisances or disturbances of the peace by any patrons of the adolescent dance facility on the premises or in the immediate vicinity. "Loitering" shall not
include walking between the premises and a patron's vehicle, nor shall it include the act of waiting in line to gain admission to the premises.
I. Premises Requirements:
1. Illumination:
a. It shall be the obligation of the licensee to provide proper and adequate illumination of all portions of the premises which are available for public
use. Such illumination shall be not less than five (5) foot-candles at floor level at all times when the premises is open to the public or when any
member of the public is permitted to enter and remain on the premises.
b. All off street parking areas within one hundred feet (100') of any entrance shall be illuminated during all hours of operation after sunset with a
lighting system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of greater than one foot-candle of light on the parking surface
and/or walkway.
2. Cleanup: It shall be the obligation of the licensee to clean up all litter resulting from its operations. The cleanup shall occur within two (2) hours after
the end of each day's operation and shall extend for a one thousand foot (1,000') radius around the premises.
3. Public Telephone: Each licensee shall provide at least one public telephone for outgoing calls only for each one hundred twenty five (125) patrons
(based upon the maximum occupancy of the premises). No licensee shall permit sound or vibration exceeding ninety (90) decibels measured with a
standard meter "A" scale within two feet (2') of any public telephone receiver or audible at such level on the outside of any exterior wall of the
premises located more than ten feet (10') from a doorway of the licensed premises. No public telephone shall be provided on the premises for
incoming calls.
J. Occupancy Limits: It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit: 1) a greater number of patrons into the premises at any time than the permitted
occupancy; or 2) any greater number of patrons to remain upon the premises than the permitted occupancy. All adolescent dance facilities shall
provide seating for thirty percent (30%) of the maximum permitted occupancy.
K. Improper Conduct:
1. No licensee, his agent or employee shall allow or permit any person to perform acts of or acts which simulate: a) sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; b) the actual or simulated touching, caressing or
fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; c) the actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; d) the actual or
simulated displaying of the breast so as to expose the nipple of the female breast; e) the displaying of films or pictures depicting acts, a live
performance of which is prohibited by a, b, c or d herein.
2. No licensee, his agent or employee shall allow or permit any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes in public view any
portion of his or her genitals or anus.
L. Advertisements And Required Information: The licensee shall deliver to the chief of police, no later than seventy two (72) hours before any scheduled
special event occurring at a licensed premises, true and accurate copies of any and all advertisements of whatever nature used to advertise or promote
the event. The licensee shall also include, prior to any such advertised event:
1. The number of employees and/or performers to be used for the event.
2. Designation of the individual who will be available prior to and during the event and who shall have authority to accept complaints, notice of
violations, or take corrective action as required by proper officials of the village.
3. A security plan with an acknowledgment that any changes to the security plan must be submitted to the chief of police in writing one business day
before the event, and the security plan must be followed without any changes unless such change has been submitted to the chief of police in writing
and he has approved it prior to the event being opened.
4. Security personnel shall be required for the maximum capacity of the event as determined by the maximum occupancy of the premises under village
ordinance unless attendance is limited to a lesser number.
5. Approximately one-half (1/2) hour prior to the opening, a preopening inspection may be conducted by the village to ensure compliance with its codes
and ordinances.
6. No members of the general public shall be allowed admittance prior to the opening of the event.
7. Only one such event per evening shall be allowed.
8. Automatic counters are required to be used prior to entry into the licensed premises to determine the occupancy of the premises.
9. Tickets may be sold before the event with the number of tickets sold limited to the occupancy limit of the premises for patrons, and after all said
tickets have been sold, the licensee shall post a sign stating that the event is "Sold Out". (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 108/618
4-8-8: ACCESS BY POLICE:
All police officers of the village shall be permitted access to all adolescent dance facilities, at all times that the premises is open to the patrons, for the
purpose of inspection and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
4-8-9: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Grounds For And Effect Of Suspension:
1. The village administrator may, at any time, suspend an adolescent dance facility license whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director,
agent or employee of the licensee has caused, permitted or knowingly done any of the following:
a. Failed to keep the building, structure or equipment of the licensed premises in compliance with the applicable health, building, fire or safety laws,
regulations or ordinances in a way which relates to or affects the public health or safety on the adolescent dance facility premises.
b. Failed to comply with the provisions of adolescent dance facilities specified in this chapter.
2. Such suspension shall remain in effect until the conditions causing the suspension are cured and reasonable measures are taken to ensure that the
same will not reoccur as determined by the village administrator.
B. Grounds For Revocation: The village administrator may, at any time, revoke an adolescent dance facility license on any one or more of the following
grounds:
1. Whenever the village learns that the licensee made a material false statement or representation, or failed to disclose any material information to the
village, in connection with any application for the adolescent dance facility license or any license renewal.
2. Whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director, agent or employee of the licensee fails, within a reasonable time, to cure a condition that
would cause a license suspension.
3. Whenever the licensee or any manager, officer, director, agent or employee of the licensee knowingly permits conduct on the licensed premises that
violates any federal, state or village criminal or penal statute, law or ordinance.
4. Whenever the operation of the adolescent dance facility becomes the proximate cause of a significant increase in criminal activity on the premises or
in the immediate vicinity in such a way as to endanger persons or property.
5. Upon the cessation of business for a period in excess of sixty (60) days. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
C. Appeals:
1. The suspension or revocation of a license may be appealed to the village board within five (5) days of said suspension or revocation. The appeal
shall be taken by filing with the village administrator and the village clerk a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The village administrator
shall transmit to the village board a report and the entire record upon which the appeal was taken. From and after five (5) days after the appeal is
filed, any suspension or revocation shall be stayed unless the village administrator certifies to the village board that, by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In this event, the suspension or revocation shall not be stayed
otherwise than by the village board. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
2. The village board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the appeal within a
reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The village board may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the suspension or revocation as in its opinion ought to be made. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
4-8-10: NUISANCE VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. Violation A Nuisance; Injunction: Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this chapter, the
village attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this chapter. The
application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction or permanent injunction. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999)
B. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. (Ord. 99-88, 10-21-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 9
ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS
4-9-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, the term "athletic exhibition" shall mean any race between persons or vehicles or any baseball, football, basketball, softball,
boxing, wrestling, fighting, or other athletic contest for which the public is admitted to participate or view. (Ord. 2008-82, 11-6-2008)
4-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 109/618
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an athletic exhibition, either by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, without first having obtained
a license as herein provided. However, this requirement shall not apply to those athletic exhibitions conducted by elementary and high schools located
within the village or conducted by the village. (Ord. 2008-82, 11-6-2008)
4-9-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license under this chapter shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this title relating to applications for licenses.
Such application shall also specify the seating capacity of the premises where such athletic exhibition is to be performed or presented. (Ord. 2008-82, 11-
6-2008)
4-9-4: CLOSING HOURS:
No athletic exhibition shall be conducted during the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 2008-82, 11-6-2008)
4-9-5: PRESENCE OF POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS:
The proprietor of such an athletic event shall, when determined necessary by the village, allow sufficient on duty members of the police department and
fire department to be admitted free of charge to all such exhibitions for the purpose of providing for the life, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 2008-82,
11-6-2008)
4-9-6: ORDER:
The audience of any athletic exhibition must be orderly at all times. (Ord. 2008-82, 11-6-2008)
4-9-7: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police and the fire chief, or their designees, to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary
to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and this code. (Ord. 2008-82, 11-6-2008)
Chapter 10
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
4-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
PEDDLER: Every person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter or exchange any goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or produce by traveling
from place to place on, along or upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the village, or who shall sell and deliver any such items from any wagon, pushcart,
automobile or other vehicle going from place to place, or who shall go about from place to place selling and delivering any such items.
SOLICITOR: Any person engaged in any one or more of the following activities:
A. Seeking to obtain orders either for immediate or future delivery, for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, or services of any kind,
character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever;
B. Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character;
C. Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
D. Going upon any premises and ringing the doorbell upon or near any door, or creating any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of
the occupant of such residence, for the purposes of engaging in any of the activities described in subsections A, B and C of this definition. (1978
Code § 3-5-1)
4-10-2: EXEMPTIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "solicitor" or "peddler" shall not include any person engaged in the following activities:
A. Seeking to obtain contributions on behalf of any charitable, religious, civic, local fire or police auxiliary, school or scouting organization or any other not
for profit organization in good standing in the state;
B. Seeking to obtain signatures to petitions on political or public policy questions or matters; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 110/618
C. Seeking to conduct any of the activities enumerated in the definition of "solicitor" in section 4-10-1 of this chapter when undertaken by any person
pursuant to a previous appointment or invitation of the party being contacted. (1978 Code § 3-5-2)
4-10-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall do business as a solicitor or peddler in the village without having obtained a license as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2000-87, 10-19-
2000)
4-10-4: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a forcible felony or crimes of fraud or deceitful misrepresentation;
or who has been convicted of the commission of a felony or act of prostitution under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United
States within five (5) years of the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;
nor to any person whose license issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided. (1978 Code § 3-5-9)
4-10-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; APPROVAL OR DENIAL; RECORDS KEPT:
A. Licenses can be obtained by application to the village clerk and payment of an annual fee as provided in section 4-2-2 of this title. Application for a
license shall be made upon a form provided by the village. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the application: (1978
Code § 3-5-9; amd. 2011 Code)
1. Name and address of the present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also the business address if other than the residence
address.
2. Address of the place of residence during the past three (3) years if other than the present address.
3. Age of the applicant.
4. Physical description of the applicant.
5. Name and address of the person, firm, corporation or association by whom the applicant is employed or represents, and the length of time of such
employment or representation.
6. Name and address of employer during the past three (3) years, if other than the present employer.
7. Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage.
8. Period of time for which the license is applied.
9. The date, or approximate date, of the most recent previous application for license under this chapter, if any.
10. If a license issued to the applicant under this chapter has ever been revoked.
11. If the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United States.
12. Types of product, merchandise or service to be offered.
13. Names of the three (3) most recent communities where the applicant has solicited house to house.
14. Proposed method of operation.
15. Signature of applicant.
16. Driver's license and vehicle license numbers.
B. All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath.
C. The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the village police department in connection with the application for the license. (1978 Code § 3-5-9)
Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall pay the village a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover the cost of fingerprinting and a
background check in order to verify the information provided in the application for license. (Ord. 2011-61, 9-1-2011)
D. The village clerk shall cause to be kept an accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all other information and data
pertaining thereto and all licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of the application. Applications for licenses shall be
numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every license issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be identified with the duplicate number of the
application upon which it was issued. No license shall be granted until the signed application has been approved by a designated officer of the police
department, whose duty it shall be to examine the background of the applicant. A license may be denied for good cause when the applicant is not
found to be a person of good character and reputation or when the goods or services which the applicant intends to offer for sale threaten the public
health, safety, welfare or morals. (1978 Code § 3-5-9)
4-10-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 111/618
When an application is approved, the village clerk shall issue the license, together with an identification badge which the solicitor must display prominently
when calling at any residence or other premises. The badge shall have printed prominently thereon in red:
This identification badge is not an endorsement of the solicitation by the Village of Glendale Heights or any of its officers or employees.
(1978 Code § 3-5-10)
4-10-7: UNINVITED SOLICITING OR PEDDLING:
A. No person shall engage in soliciting or peddling upon any premises or in any dwelling house, apartment or other residence located thereon within the
village after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises or residence, nor shall any person engage in soliciting or
peddling upon any premises or in any dwelling house, apartment or other residence located thereon if such premises or building is posted against
soliciting or peddling by means of a notice prominently displayed, upon which is printed one of the following:
NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS
or
NO TRESPASSING
B. The above notice shall be posted or exhibited at or near the main entrance to the premises, or on or near the main door to any dwelling or to the
premises, or on or near the main door to any dwelling or residence thereon, or at any point of approach or entry thereto. (1978 Code § 3-5-3)
4-10-8: DAYS AND HOURS SOLICITING AND PEDDLING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in soliciting or peddling at any time prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after five o'clock (5:00) P.M., local time,
of any weekday or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday. (1978 Code § 3-5-4)
4-10-9: UNLAWFUL SOLICITING OR PEDDLING:
No person shall solicit or peddle except for the purpose shown on the license application. Cheating, deception or fraudulent misrepresentation by solicitors
and peddlers are expressly prohibited. (Ord. 2000-88, 10-19-2000)
4-10-10: STREET INTERSECTION CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS:
A. Permitted Streets: Notwithstanding the exemption provisions of section 4-10-2 of this chapter, solicitation of contributions for charitable or other not for
profit purposes by certain organizations defined in article A of this chapter shall be allowed only at the following street intersections where all traffic is
required to come to a full stop:
Army Trail and Bloomingdale Road - all corners
North Avenue and Bloomingdale Road - all corners
North Avenue and Glen Ellyn Road - all corners
(1978 Code § 3-5-5)
B. Organizations Qualifying: No charitable or not for profit organization or other person shall conduct solicitation activities on or within any of the above
designated street intersections within the village unless such organization shall be:
1. Registered with the attorney general as a charitable organization in the manner provided by law.
2. Engaged in statewide fundraising activities.
3. Liable for any injuries to any person or property during such solicitation activity which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
4. Liable for any increase in the cost of liability insurance taken by the village with respect to said street intersection solicitation activity.
5. Restricted in its solicitation activities to representatives or agents who shall be eighteen (18) years of age or more and who shall be wearing a high
visibility vest, with no more than four (4) such persons being allowed to actually solicit on or within an intersection at any one time.
6. Able to first furnish a valid certificate of liability insurance with an insurer approved by the village naming the village as an additional insured with
respect to such solicitation activities.
7. Able to first execute a hold harmless and indemnification agreement to the village with respect to such solicitation activities. (1978 Code § 3-5-6)
C. Permit Requirements: Any organization eligible to conduct solicitation activities within those street intersections designated in subsection A of this
section shall obtain a permit for such solicitation from the village chief of police, and shall pay the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) to cover the cost
of processing and issuing such permit. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to see that the applicant complies with eligibility requirements contained
in subsection B of this section, and in addition, the chief of police must also find that the locations, times and durations of the proposed solicitation
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 112/618
activity and the number of proposed solicitors shall not result in an interference with the flow of vehicular traffic or otherwise create a hazardous and
unsafe condition at any such street intersection. (1978 Code § 3-5-7)
4-10-11: PENALTIES:
A. Fines: Any person, corporation, association or other entity violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each occurrence; each day on which a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. (1978 Code § 3-
5-12; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Revocation Of License: Any license issued hereunder shall be revoked by the village president if the holder of the license is convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the village president to the holder of the
license in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his or her residence address set forth in the application. Immediately upon the giving
of such notice, the license shall become null and void. (1978 Code § 3-5-12)
ARTICLE A. CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
4-10A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CHARITABLE PURPOSE: A. Philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives, including the benefit of poor, needy, sick, or refugee persons or persons
with disabilities; the benefit of any church or religious society, sect, group or order; the benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the
benefit of any fraternal, social or civic organization; or the benefit of any educational institution.
B. The term "charitable purpose" shall not be construed to include the direct benefit of the individual making the solicitation.
C. The term "charitable purpose" shall not be construed to include the benefit of any political group or political organization which is subject to financial
disclosure under state or federal law.
INDIVIDUAL: A natural person only.
PERSON: Means and includes any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or association.
SOLICIT FUNDS OR SOLICITATION OF FUNDS: Any request for the donation of money, property, or anything of value, or the pledge of a future donation
of money, property, or anything of value; or the selling or offering for sale of any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, whether of value or not,
including, but not limited to, goods, books, pamphlets, tickets, publications or subscriptions to publications, or brochures, upon the representation, express
or implied, that the proceeds of such sale will be used for a "charitable purpose" as such term is defined in this section. Expressly excluded from the
meaning of "solicit funds" or "solicitation of funds" is any offer of membership in any organization. A solicitation of funds is complete when the solicitation is
communicated to any individual then located within the corporate limits of the village. (1978 Code § 3-5A-1; amd. 2011 Code)
4-10A-2: UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through an agent or employee, to solicit funds for charitable purposes within the corporate limits of the
village unless such person shall have first obtained a certificate of registration from the village clerk, as hereinafter provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for any individual, as the agent or employee of another, to solicit funds for charitable purposes in the village unless his principal or
employer has received a certificate of registration as hereinafter provided.
C. It shall be unlawful for an individual to solicit for charitable purposes without visibly displaying an identification card issued to that individual by the
village clerk, as hereinafter provided.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to alter an identification card issued by the village clerk without the express approval thereof.
E. It shall be unlawful for an individual to solicit for charitable purposes while displaying an identification card issued by the village clerk in the name of
another individual. (1978 Code § 3-5A-2)
F. It shall be unlawful to solicit for charitable purposes between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on all days. (1978 Code
§ 3-5A-2; amd. 2011 Code)
G. It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through an agent or employee, to solicit funds for charitable purposes within the corporate limits of the
village after the expiration of any certificate of registration issued, as hereinafter provided.
H. It shall be unlawful for the person registering, or the agents or employees thereof, to solicit funds for a charitable purpose other than that set out in the
registration statement upon which the certificate of registration was issued.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 113/618
I. It shall be unlawful for any person who shall solicit funds for charitable purposes in the village to represent in connection with such solicitation of funds
that the issuance of a certificate of registration or an identification card by the village constitutes an endorsement or approval of the purposes of such
solicitation of funds by the village or any officer or employee thereof.
J. It shall be unlawful for any person issued a certificate of registration hereunder to fail to file with the village clerk within thirty (30) days from the
expiration of the certificate of registration a sworn financial statement, as provided in section 4-10A-7 of this article, showing the total amount collected
from the solicitation of funds and the amounts and purpose for which such funds were disbursed.
K. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation upon any premises or in any dwelling house, apartment or other residence located thereon
within the village after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises or residence, or to engage in solicitation upon any
premises or in any dwelling house, apartment or other residence located thereon if such premises or building is posted against solicitation or peddling
by means of a notice prominently displayed, upon which is printed one of the following:
NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS
or
NO TRESPASSING
The above notice shall be posted or exhibited at or near the main entrance to the premises, or on or near the main door to any dwelling or to the
premises, or on or near the main door to any dwelling thereon, or at any point of approach or entry thereto. (1978 Code § 3-5A-2)
4-10A-3: REGISTRATION STATEMENT:
All persons desiring to solicit funds for charitable purposes in the village shall file with the village clerk a registration statement, on forms provided by the
village clerk, containing the following information:
A. The name of the person registering and desiring to solicit funds for charitable purposes.
B. Whether the person registering is a natural person, partnership, corporation or association, and:
1. If a natural person, the business or residence address and telephone number must be given.
2. If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and telephone number of each partner must be given.
3. If a corporation, the person registering must state whether it is organized under the laws of Illinois or is a foreign corporation, and must show the
mailing address, business location, telephone number, name of the individual in charge of the local office of such corporation, and the names of all
officers and directors or trustees of said corporation, and if a foreign corporation, the place of incorporation.
4. If an association, the registration statement shall show the association's principal business address and telephone number, if any, and shall show
names and principal business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of all members of the association unless they exceed ten (10) in
number, in which case, the application shall so state, and the person registering may alternatively list the names and principal business or residence
addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and directors or trustees of the association. If the association is part of a multistate organization or
association, the mailing address and business location of its central office shall be given, in addition to the mailing address and business location of
its local office.
C. A brief description of the person registering, the charitable purpose for which the funds are to be solicited, and an explanation of the intended use of the
funds toward that purpose.
D. The names of all individuals authorized to disburse the proceeds of the solicitation.
E. The names, mailing addresses and telephone numbers of all individuals who will be in direct charge or control of the solicitation of funds.
F. The time period within which the solicitation of funds is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of solicitation and its projected conclusion.
G. A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation of funds is to be accomplished.
H. The total amount of funds proposed to be raised.
I. A projected schedule of salaries, wages, fees, commissions, expenses and costs to be expended and paid in connection with the solicitation of funds or
in connection with their disbursement, and an estimated percentage of the total projected collections which the costs of solicitation will comprise.
J. The names of any other cities in which the person registering has solicited funds for charitable purposes within the past five (5) years, but in the event
that the person registering has solicited funds for charitable purposes in more than ten (10) other cities, the person registering may list the ten (10)
cities in which the most recent solicitations occurred.
K. A statement to the effect that if a certificate of registration is granted, such certificate will not be used as or represented to be an endorsement by the
village or any of its officers or employees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 114/618
L. The name of any officer, director, trustee, partner, or any current agent or employee engaging in solicitation of funds who has been convicted of a felony
or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past seven (7) years, and the nature of the offense, the state where the conviction occurred, and
the year of such conviction.
M. An explanation of the reasons, if the person registering is unable to provide any of the foregoing information, why such information is not available.
N. The registration statement must be signed by the applicant, if the person registering is an individual; if the person registering is a partnership, by the
partner charged with disbursing funds solicited; if a person registering is a corporation or an association, by its officer charged with disbursing the funds
solicited. The individual signing the registration statement shall sign the statement and swear before an officer authorized to administer oaths that he
has carefully read the registration statement and that all the information contained therein is true and correct. (1978 Code § 3-5A-3)
4-10A-4: REGISTRATION FEE:
Every registration statement shall be accompanied by a registration fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) to compensate the village for the cost of administering
this article, and such fee will not be refunded if a certificate of registration is not issued. (1978 Code § 3-5A-4)
4-10A-5: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF CERTIFICATE:
A. After a review of the registration statement to determine its compliance with section 4-10A-3 of this article, and within ten (10) working days of the
receipt of the registration statement, the village clerk shall either issue a certificate of registration, as provided in subsection B of this section or notify
the person registering that the registration statement does not comply with the requirements of section 4-10A-3 of this article and specifically point out
what information or explanation has not been furnished that is required before a certificate of registration can be issued. (1978 Code § 3-5A-5)
B. The village clerk shall prescribe the form of the certificate of registration. However, each such certificate of registration shall be printed in black; except,
that the following shall be printed prominently thereon in red:
The issuance of this certificate of registration is not an endorsement by the Village of Glendale Heights or any of its officers or employees.
Each certificate of registration shall bear a registration number which is the same as the file containing the registration statement filed by the registrant.
(1978 Code § 3-5A-6)
4-10A-6: IDENTIFICATION CARDS:
A. The village clerk shall prescribe the form for identification cards for solicitors. However, each such identification card shall bear the name of the person
registering, the registration number, the name of the solicitor or agent, a picture of the solicitor or agent, and the expiration date of the certificate of
registration, and it shall have printed prominently thereon in red:
This identification card is not an endorsement of the solicitation by the Village of Glendale Heights or any of its officers or employees.
B. The person registering shall provide, by a separate list, the names and addresses of all agents or employees for whom identification cards are desired,
along with the social security number and driver's license number, if any, for each person. Each person listed shall appear at the office of the village
clerk and produce identification and be photographed for the purpose of preparing and issuing the solicitor's photo identification card. The registrant
shall pay to the village its actual cost for these identification cards.
C. No person who has been convicted of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past seven (7) years shall be issued a solicitor's
photo identification card. Every person who appears at the office of the village clerk in order to obtain a solicitor's photo identification card shall be
required to sign a statement under oath to that effect. (1978 Code § 3-5A-7)
4-10A-7: EXPIRATION OF CERTIFICATE; FINANCIAL STATEMENT REQUIRED:
A. Every certificate of registration and identification card issued by the village clerk shall expire at the termination of the solicitation period specified in the
registration statement or one year from the date of issuance, whichever is less.
B. Not later than thirty (30) days from the expiration date of the certificate of registration, the person registering shall file with the village clerk, on forms
provided thereby, a closing statement regarding the solicitation of funds, which shall be a sworn financial statement showing the total funds collected
from the solicitation of funds and the purpose and amount for which such funds were disbursed by the person registering and any incurred but unpaid
expenses resulting from the solicitation of funds. (1978 Code § 3-5A-8)
4-10A-8: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are excepted from the operation of this article:
A. The solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by any organization or association from its members.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 115/618
B. The solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by a person when such solicitation occurs on premises owned or controlled by the person soliciting
funds or with the permission of the person who owns or controls the premises.
C. The issuance of any announcement or advertisement that such solicitation as described in subsections A and B of this section will occur or which
announces or advertises an event at which unannounced solicitation as described in subsections A and B of this section occurs. (1978 Code § 3-5A-9)
Chapter 11
RESERVED
(Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
Chapter 12
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
4-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
HOLD ORDER: A written legal instrument issued to a pawnbroker by a law enforcement officer commissioned by the village of Glendale Heights, ordering
the pawnbroker to retain physical possession of pledged goods in the possession of the pawnbroker or property purchased by and in the possession of the
pawnbroker, and not to return, sell, or otherwise dispose of such property as such property is believed to be misappropriated goods.
JUNK/SCRAP: Manufactured articles or parts that have been discarded and are useful only as material for reprocessing or recycling.
LICENSEE: The owner, operator, and all employees of a business licensed under this chapter.
PAWN: To pledge an item of personal property as security for a loan, with the property left with the pawnbroker.
PAWNBROKER: Every owner, operator or employee engaged in the business of receiving property in pledge or as security for money or other things
advanced to the pawner or pledger shall be deemed to be a pawnbroker.
PLEDGE: A bailment or delivery of personal property to a creditor as security for a debt or for the performance of an act.
SECONDHAND DEALER: Every owner, operator or employee engaged in the business of the purchase, sale or barter of secondhand articles, including,
but not limited to, antiques, junk, recyclable materials, scrap, electronics, video game systems/video games/video game accessories, jewelry, valuable
and/or precious metals and stones, or household goods, shall be deemed to be a secondhand dealer, whether such dealer operates from a fixed storefront
business, or is conducting business on a temporary, short term basis from a nonfixed location. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-2: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to the purchase or sale of used motor vehicles, including motorcycles and motor driven cycles, as defined in the Illinois vehicle
code, nor shall it apply to charitable organizations that accept donated goods for resale as a fundraising program for the charity, nor shall it apply to the
purchase of clothing offered for resale in an authorized retail clothing store. This exemption, however, does not apply to retail stores purchasing precious
metals, jewelry, electronic media or other nonclothing items of value. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-3: ELECTRONIC REPORTING OF TRANSACTIONS:
The village of Glendale Heights police department shall enter into and maintain a contract for service with LeadsOnline, or a similar entity as designated by
the chief of police, in order to enhance its investigative services to protect both pawnbrokers/secondhand dealers and members of the general public. In
the event of a change to its electronic reporting system, the village of Glendale Heights will notify all impacted licensees of the change within a reasonable
time prior to such change.
Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall operate and maintain a computer system with internet access and photographic or video capability sufficient
for the electronic reporting requirements described in this chapter. Any failure or malfunction of such equipment on the part of the licensee shall not
exempt the licensee from the recording/reporting requirements outlined in section 4-12-4 of this chapter. The licensee shall immediately notify the village of
Glendale Heights police department of any such failure or malfunction, and shall have such resolved as soon as practicable. Failure by the licensee to
resolve any failure or malfunction of equipment in a reasonable amount of time will lead to license revocation proceedings under section 4-12-24 of this
chapter. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-4: RECORD OF TRANSACTIONS:
Throughout the term of the license, every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall report/upload to LeadsOnline, or the village of Glendale Heights' current
electronic reporting system, the information listed below. The information shall be reported/uploaded on a daily basis by the end of the business day, and
all information shall be recorded in the English language.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 116/618
A. A transaction shall consist of all articles brought into a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer for sale, barter, trade, pledge or pawn by an individual
(pawner/seller) at the same time and date, and includes the sale of non-junk/scrap articles by a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to another person.
Articles brought into a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer by an individual (pawner/seller) for sale, barter, trade, pledge or pawn at different times on the
same date shall be considered separate transactions, regardless of how short the difference in time is between those transactions. Separate
transactions, either from the same person or different persons, shall not be combined and reported collectively.
1. Non-Junk/Scrap Articles:
a. Purchases/Receipts By Licensees:
(1) All non-junk/scrap articles brought into a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer by an individual (pawner/seller) for sale, barter, trade, pledge or
pawn during a single transaction shall be itemized separately. Licensees shall not lump non-junk/scrap articles together (e.g., "5 gold chains")
and must individually itemize and describe each individual article.
(2) Each non-junk/scrap article brought into a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer by an individual (pawner/seller) for sale, barter, trade, pledge or
pawn during a transaction shall be associated with the person (pawner/seller) who brought the article in. The licensee shall record/report the
following information for each such transaction:
(A) A digital photographic image of a photo ID card of the pawner/seller, sufficiently clear to allow the information on the ID to be read. The photo
ID must be a currently valid (not expired) card issued by a government entity of the United States, and must include the pawner/seller's first
and last name, current address, date of birth, and physical descriptors. In the event the card is valid but does not contain the pawner/seller's
current address, the licensee must separately record and report the current address.
(B) If the pawner/seller is pawning or selling on behalf of a company or business, the name, address, and telephone number of such company or
business shall also be recorded/reported.
(C) The date and time of the transaction.
(D) A complete and thorough description of each non-junk/scrap article including, but not limited to, the following:
(i) Type of article.
(ii) Brand name/make/manufacturer (if applicable).
(iii) Model number (if applicable).
(iv) Serial number (if applicable).
(v) Color/finish.
(vi) Any other identifying marks, writing, engraving, etc.
(E) A digital photograph(s) of each non-junk/scrap article purchased or received as trade, barter, pledge or pawn by a pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer, sufficiently detailed to allow reasonable identification of each article. If the article contains any identifying numbers, marks,
writing, engraving, etc., or any other distinguishing characteristics, the digital image(s) shall capture same.
b. Sales By Licensees:
(1) All non-junk/scrap articles sold by a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to an individual shall be itemized separately. Licensees shall not lump
non-junk/scrap articles together (e.g., "5 gold chains") and must individually itemize and describe each individual article.
(2) Each non-junk/scrap article sold by a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall be associated with the person to whom it was sold. The licensee
shall record/report the following information for each such transaction:
(A) The name and current address of the purchaser must be recorded/reported; a photographic image of a government issued photo ID card is
not necessary.
(B) A digital photograph of non-junk/scrap articles sold by a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to an individual is not required.
2. Junk/Scrap Articles:
a. Purchases By Licensees:
(1) Junk/scrap articles may be recorded/reported in bulk, but must specify the weight, type (e.g., steel, copper, aluminum, etc.) and form (e.g.,
sheet, cans, pipe, wire, etc.) of the bulk material.
(2) Each different type and form of junk/scrap bulk material brought into a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer by an individual for sale during a
transaction shall be associated with the person who brought the material in. Licensees shall record/report the following information for each such
transaction:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 117/618
(A) A photographic image of a photo ID card of the seller, sufficiently clear to allow the information on the ID to be read. The photo ID must be a
currently valid (not expired) card issued by a government entity of the United States, and must include the pawner/seller's first and last name,
current address, date of birth, and physical descriptors. In the event the card is valid but does not contain the seller's current address, the
licensee must separately record and report the current address.
(B) If the seller is selling on behalf of a company or business, the name, address, and telephone number of such company or business shall also
be recorded/reported.
(C) If the junk/scrap is brought by motor vehicle to a licensee for sale, the make, model, color, and license plate number of that vehicle shall be
recorded/reported. This subsection does not apply to persons bringing scrap precious metals into pawnshops or secondhand stores.
(D) The date and time of the transaction.
(E) A digital photograph or, if the licensee has a video system, a video segment of each individual type and form of bulk material purchased by
the licensee shall be linked to the record of that transaction.
b. Sales By Licensees:
(1) Licensees do not need to record/report any information pertaining to the sale of junk/scrap material.
B. In the event the electronic reporting system malfunctions or is otherwise not operational, the licensee shall, at all times during such malfunction or
nonoperation, be required to keep written records of any and all transactions made during the period of malfunction or nonoperation, to include all
information required by this section. These written records shall be reported/uploaded to LeadsOnline, or the village of Glendale Heights' current
electronic reporting system, as soon as practicable after the electronic reporting system is functional. No such written records shall be erased,
mutilated or changed. Written records shall be open and available for review upon request by the village of Glendale Heights finance director or any
peace officer during regular business hours. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-5: PAWNBROKERS; ISSUANCE OF SIGNED RECEIPT:
Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of making any advancement or loan, deliver to the person pawning or pledging any property a signed receipt
containing an accurate account and description, in the English language, of all the goods, articles or other things pawned or pledged, the amount of
money, value or thing loaned thereon, the time of pledging the same, the rate of interest to be paid on such loan, and the name and residence of the
person making the pawn or pledge. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-6: PAWNBROKERS; EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE:
No pawnbroker shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to take pledges or pawns. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-7: SECONDHAND DEALER NOT TO ACT AS A PAWNBROKER:
No secondhand dealer shall receive any article or thing by way of pledge or pawn, nor shall it loan or advance any sum of money on the security of any
article or thing, unless also separately licensed as a pawnbroker under this chapter. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-8: WAITING PERIODS:
No articles received on pawn or pledge by any pawnbroker, shall be permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of business of such pawnbroker
for forty eight (48) hours after the delivery of the signed receipt required by section 4-12-5 of this chapter. No articles pawned or pledged shall be sold or
disposed of by any pawnbroker within one year from the time the pawner or pledger is in default in the payment of interest on the money so advanced by
the pawnbroker, unless by the written consent of the pawner or pledger.
No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall expose for sale, or sell or barter, or melt, crush/compact, destroy, or otherwise dispose of, any non-scrap/junk
article within thirty (30) days of the time of purchasing or receiving the same, nor until the same has been in or upon the premises where the same are
offered, exposed, bartered or sold, at least thirty (30) days.
Scrap/junk articles must be held for seventy two (72) hours prior to being melted, crushed/compacted, destroyed or otherwise disposed of. (Ord. 2012-69,
11-15-2012)
4-12-9: PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS:
A. No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, in the course of conducting business, shall receive any articles for pawn, pledge, advancement of money, loan,
resale, or personal use from:
1. Minors who are under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Any person appearing to be intoxicated or under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
3. Any person known to the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to have been convicted of theft, residential burglary, burglary, home invasion, vehicular
invasion, armed robbery, robbery or electronic fencing under the laws of the state of Illinois, or the equivalent laws of any other state. A peace officer
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 118/618
may provide such criminal conviction information to a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, and a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer may also access
the LeadsOnline "no buy" list prior to making a transaction to ensure that the prospective pawner/seller has not been convicted of any such crime.
4. Any person bringing such articles to the premises in a shopping cart.
5. Any person presenting a serial numbered non-scrap/junk article from which the serial number has been removed or obliterated.
B. In the event that any of the above enumerated persons shall attempt to conduct a prohibited transaction, a representative of that business shall notify
the village of Glendale Heights police department of the incident while the person is still present in the business if safe to do so, or otherwise as soon
as the person has left the business. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-10: REPORT OF FALSE/FICTITIOUS/FORGED/ALTERED ID CARD:
In the event that a person seeking to sell or pawn any item presents to the owner/operator/employee of a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer what is
reasonably believed to be a false/fictitious/forged/altered ID card, a representative of that business shall notify the village of Glendale Heights police
department of the incident while the person is still present in the business if safe to do so, or otherwise as soon as the person has left the business. (Ord.
2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-11: REPORT OF LOST OR STOLEN ARTICLES TO POLICE:
Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things under circumstances which would lead a
reasonable person to conclude that they have been lost or stolen, or which have been alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen shall immediately
notify the village of Glendale Heights police department of such receipt and, forthwith on demand, exhibit the same to any member of the village of
Glendale Heights police department. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-12: RETURN OF STOLEN PROPERTY:
Upon written notice from a law enforcement officer indicating that property in the possession of a pawnbroker is subject to a hold order and is needed for
the purpose of furthering a criminal investigation and prosecution, the pawnbroker shall release the property subject to the hold order to the custody of the
law enforcement officer for such purpose, and the officer shall provide a written acknowledgment that the property has been released to the officer. The
release of the property to the custody of the law enforcement officer shall not be considered a waiver or release of the pawnbroker's property rights or
interest in the property. Upon completion of the criminal investigation, the property shall be returned to the pawnbroker who consented to its release;
except that, if the law enforcement officer has not completed the criminal investigation within one hundred twenty (120) days after its release, the officer
shall immediately return the property to the pawnbroker or obtain and furnish to the pawnbroker a warrant for the continued custody of the property.
The pawnbroker shall not release or dispose of the property except pursuant to a court order or the expiration of the holding period of the hold order,
including all extensions. In cases where criminal charges have been filed and the property may be needed as evidence, the prosecuting attorney shall
notify the pawnbroker in writing. The notice shall contain the case number, the style of the case, and a description of the property. The pawnbroker shall
hold such property until receiving notice of the disposition of the case from the prosecuting attorney. The prosecuting attorney shall notify the pawnbroker
and claimant in writing within fifteen (15) days after the disposition of the case. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-13: INSPECTION OF RECORDS BY POLICE:
The books and computer records, as well as every article or other thing of value so pawned or pledged, shall at all times be open to inspection by the
village of Glendale Heights police department. In addition, the village of Glendale Heights police department shall be authorized to inspect the books or
records of any business it has reasonable cause to believe is conducting transactions which should be licensed under this chapter.
The books and computer records, pawn receipts, or any other records required by this chapter or any rule promulgated in accordance with this chapter
shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years after the date on which the record or receipt was prepared. These records and receipts shall be open to
inspection by the village of Glendale Heights police department at all times during the three (3) year period. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-14: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No business licensed under this chapter shall purchase or accept as pawn or pledge, or otherwise, any goods, articles or things whatsoever, from any
person, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-15: SOLICITATION OF ARTICLES:
No person licensed under this chapter shall be permitted to solicit business of any nature upon any street or public highway in the village of Glendale
Heights.
Enforcement of this section shall be by the village of Glendale Heights police department, with a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense,
and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any subsequent offenses. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-16: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, carry on, or conduct the business of a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer within the village of Glendale Heights, unless licensed
to do so. A pawnbroker's license and secondhand dealer's license are separate from each other. A person may hold more than one license under this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 119/618
section.
Each license issued pursuant to this chapter, shall terminate on December 31 next following its issuance, and the renewal fee shall be due and payable in
full on or before February 1 of each year. Provided, however, any new licensee applying for an annual license after August 1 of the license year shall pay
an amount equal to one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee from the time the license is granted until its termination on December 31 next following its
issuance. Any new licensee applying for an annual license from February 1 through July 31 of the license year shall pay the full annual license fee. No
licensee shall receive any pro rata refund for any unused portion of the license, and no license shall be issued for an amount less than one-half (1/2) of the
annual fee.
Violations of this section will result in proceedings to revoke any and all village of Glendale Heights issued business licenses held by a licensee under this
chapter. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-17: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring a license as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall make application in writing to the village of Glendale Heights clerk, setting out
in the application the full name and residence of the applicant, if an individual, and if a corporation, the name and residence of each of its officers. Such
application shall also set out the location at which it is intended or desired to conduct such business, and such other information as the village of Glendale
Heights clerk shall from time to time deem appropriate.
The chief of police, or his designee, or any other officer or agent designated by the village of Glendale Heights board of trustees, shall investigate each
license applicant and shall report in writing whether or not such applicant is a person of good character. No license shall be issued to any person,
partnership, corporation or other entity, if any owner, manager, partner, officer, director or shareholder owning more than five percent (5%) of the shares of
stock in the corporation has been convicted of any felony offense or convicted of the offense(s) of possession of stolen goods, burglary, robbery, or who
has been convicted of any criminal offense involving dishonesty or moral turpitude.
Every applicant for a license under this chapter, as well as every owner, partner, manager, officer, director, employee, and, in this case, of a corporate
applicant, every shareholder owning more than five percent (5%) of the shares of stock in the corporation shall undergo a criminal background
investigation, which investigation may include fingerprinting, prior to the issuance of a license under this chapter. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-18: PERSONNEL AND OWNERSHIP CHANGES:
A. Any changes in partnership, officers, directors, managers, or persons holding directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock or
ownership interests of establishments licensed under this chapter shall be reported in writing to the village of Glendale Heights clerk within ten (10)
days of the change. All new personnel and/or stockholders shall meet all of the standards of this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a license
under this chapter. All such changes in personnel or ownership shall be subject to review by the village of Glendale Heights clerk within thirty (30) days
of the change. In addition to any other license fees, the cost of any background investigation conducted by the village of Glendale Heights police
department shall be borne by the new partner(s), officer(s), director(s), manager(s) or person(s) holding directly or beneficially more than five percent
(5%) of the stock.
B. When a license has been issued to a partnership or limited liability company and a change of ownership occurs by one or more partners/members, then
a new application for a license under this chapter must be submitted and the license application shall be accompanied by the appropriate license fee.
C. When a license has been issued to a partnership or limited liability company and any partner/member is or becomes ineligible to hold a license under
this chapter, that license shall be terminated.
D. When a license has been issued to a corporation or limited liability company and a change takes place in officers, directors, managers, members or
shareholders of more than five percent (5%) of the stock, resulting in the holding of office or shares of stock by one who is not eligible for a license,
said license shall terminate.
E. When a license has been issued to a corporation and a transfer in stock ownership of fifty one percent (51%) or more occurs, or a transfer in stock
ownership occurs resulting in a change in the ownership of the controlling interest in the corporation by one or more persons, then a new license
application for a license under this chapter must be submitted and the corporation shall pay the appropriate license fee.
F. When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer eligible for a license, said license shall terminate.
G. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall subject a licensee to the suspension or revocation of a license issued under this chapter. Fines
and penalties under this section shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day, per violation.
Any false information provided on an application shall result in the denial or revocation of a license issued under this chapter. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-
2012)
4-12-19: LICENSE TO STATE LOCATION OF BUSINESS:
Every license granted under this chapter shall designate the place in which the licensee shall be authorized to carry on such business. Such business shall
not be carried on or conducted in any other place than that designated by the license. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-20: CHANGE OF LOCATION OF BUSINESS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 120/618
In case any licensee under this chapter shall remove his place of business from the place designated on such license, no business shall be carried on or
engaged in at the new location under such license until written notice of such change has been given by the licensee to the village of Glendale Heights
clerk, and such change has been noted by the village of Glendale Heights clerk upon such license. The address of the place of business shall thereupon
be changed on the sides of any vehicle used by such licensee under this chapter, and made to correspond with such new place of business. (Ord. 2012-
69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-21: LICENSE TO BE PUBLICLY POSTED:
Every license granted under this chapter shall be conspicuously posted for public viewing so as to be seen by anyone entering the place of business,
whether that place of business is a fixed storefront or temporary, nonfixed location, or in/on any vehicle licensed under this chapter. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-
2012)
4-12-22: BOND:
Every person licensed under this chapter shall at the time of receiving a license, execute a bond to the village of Glendale Heights in the sum of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with good and sufficient sureties, conditioned for the due observance of the ordinances of the village of Glendale Heights
respecting business activities regulated under this chapter. The bond will be returned upon sale or closure of business, or expiration of the license,
whichever comes last. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-23: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; FEE:
The village of Glendale Heights clerk shall grant licenses to applicants under this chapter that pass a background check conducted by the village of
Glendale Heights police department, to conduct business at the place designated in the application for and during the period of such license, upon
payment by the applicant to the village of Glendale Heights of an annual license fee in the amount set forth in section 4-2-2 of this title.
Any person employed by or providing volunteer work for the licensee at the business at any time during the period of the license, shall also be required to
pass a background check conducted by the village of Glendale Heights police department, if that employee or volunteer engages in the collection, receipt,
purchase or sale of articles regulated by this chapter.
The results of all background checks shall be provided to the village of Glendale Heights clerk, who shall determine if the applicant and all
employees/volunteers of the business for which the license is sought meet satisfactory standards of good character. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-24: REVOCATION:
It shall be the duty of the village of Glendale Heights police chief to report to the village of Glendale Heights clerk of any failure of a licensee to comply with
any provision of this chapter, and the village of Glendale Heights clerk shall then commence administrative hearing procedures to revoke the license of
such person. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
4-12-25: PENALTY PROVISIONS:
Unless otherwise specifically recited in a given section of this chapter, the penalty for violations of this chapter shall be as provided in the general penalty
provisions of this code and/or revocation of a license issued under this chapter. (Ord. 2012-69, 11-15-2012)
Chapter 13
HOTELS AND MOTELS
4-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
The terms "hotel" and "motel", when used in this chapter, include every building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public
to be a place where lodging, or lodging and food, or suites, or other accommodations are offered for a consideration to guests, in which ten (10) or more
rooms or suites, or other accommodations are used for the lodging, or lodging and food, for such guests. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-1996)
4-13-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct, keep, manage or operate, or cause to be conducted, kept, managed or operated, a hotel or a motel without having obtained a
license. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-1996)
4-13-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a hotel or motel license shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this title relating to applications for licenses. The
application shall also state the proposed premises where such hotel or motel is located, the number of rooms in such building, which of such rooms in the
building are to be occupied as sleeping rooms, and the number of persons proposed to be accommodated or allowed in each room. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-
1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 121/618
4-13-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF LICENSE:
The director of community development shall make or cause to be made such investigations as deemed necessary to determine whether the applicant's
proposed premises complies with all the applicable provisions of this code. No license shall be issued to any applicant whose proposed premises does not
comply with the applicable provisions of this code. Village officials shall indicate on the application for a license the results of their investigation and their
approval or disapproval of the application. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
4-13-5: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
No house, building or accessory structure hereafter constructed or erected in the village shall be used as a hotel or motel, and no house, building or
accessory structure hereafter erected and not now used for such purpose, or any building, house, structure or portion thereof which is now used or
intended to be used or occupied for hotel or motel purposes, shall be converted into, used as, or leased for a hotel or motel unless such building and every
part thereof shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and to such other applicable requirements of the building, zoning, housing, fire prevention,
health and sanitation regulations of this code. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-1996)
4-13-6: INSPECTIONS:
The director of community development shall inspect or cause to be inspected, as often as deemed necessary, in accordance with the housing regulations
of this code, every hotel and motel in the village to determine whether there is compliance with all applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 96-73, 7-25-
1996)
Chapter 14
SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, TOBACCO ACCESSORIES, AND ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCTS
4-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as provided in this section:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS: A product or device not consisting of or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of
nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. The definition of an alternative nicotine
product shall include any cartridge used with or any component of an alternative nicotine product. Alternative nicotine products exclude cigarettes,
smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products as these terms are defined in this chapter and any product approved by the United States food and drug
administration as a nontobacco product for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is
being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
TOBACCO ACCESSORIES: Cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and other items designed
primarily for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products or of substances made illegal under any statute of the state of Illinois or of substances whose
sale, gift, barter, or exchange is unlawful under any statute of the state of Illinois.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or
dipping tobacco.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products. (Ord. 2007-106, 11-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2013-67, 11-7-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
4-14-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver, or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away, or delivering,
tobacco products, tobacco accessories, or alternative nicotine products within the village without having first obtained a tobacco dealers' retail sale of
tobacco license pursuant to chapter 1 of this title. Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by this code.
B. In addition, it shall be unlawful to permit smoking at an establishment which also sells tobacco products, tobacco related products, tobacco accessories,
or alternative nicotine products without having first obtained a tobacco dealers' retail sale of tobacco and smoking license pursuant to chapter 1 of this
title. Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by this code. (Ord. 2013-67, 11-7-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
4-14-3: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES:
A. Applications for licenses hereunder shall be made in writing and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of chapter 1 of this title. (Ord.
2007-106, 11-1-2007)
B. The applicant shall comply with all health and sanitation regulations of the village and the regulations of the village police department. (1978 Code § 3-
11-5)
4-14-4: LICENSE FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 122/618
The license fees for tobacco dealers' licenses shall be as set forth in section 4-2-2 of this title. (Ord. 2007-106, 11-1-2007)
4-14-5: SALES TO MINORS; REQUIRED SIGNAGE:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, or any licensee, including its principal, clerk, agent or servant, to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver
tobacco products, tobacco accessories, alternative nicotine products, or any cartridge or component of an alternative nicotine product to any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years. Provided, however, that delivery of tobacco products, tobacco accessories, alternative nicotine products, or any
cartridge or component of an alternative nicotine product to a person over the age of sixteen (16) years shall not be a violation of this subsection when
such delivery is to an employee of a holder of a tobacco dealers' license for the purpose of resale by the tobacco dealer.
B. Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided herein shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products,
tobacco accessories, or alternative nicotine products and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products, tobacco accessories, or
alternative nicotine products for sale. Each sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, TOBACCO ACCESSORIES, OR ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER
EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, and the lettering shall be at least one inch (1") high. (Ord. 2013-67, 11-7-2013, eff.
1-1-2014)
4-14-6: PURCHASE, POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED:
A. Purchase; False Identification: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase tobacco products, tobacco
accessories, alternative nicotine products or any cartridge or component of an alternative nicotine product, or to misrepresent his identity or age, or to
use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products, tobacco accessories, alternative nicotine products, or any
cartridge or component of an alternative nicotine product.
B. Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any tobacco products, tobacco accessories, alternative
nicotine products, or any cartridge or component of an alternative nicotine product. Provided, however, that the possession of tobacco products,
tobacco accessories, or alternative nicotine products by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years under the direct supervision of the parent or
guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited. (Ord. 2013-67, 11-7-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
4-14-7: PRESENCE OF MINORS ON PREMISES PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a tobacco dealers' retail sale of tobacco and smoking license, his or her agent or employee to suffer or permit any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain in, within, or upon the premises where the sale of tobacco products, tobacco accessories,
or alternative nicotine products are licensed. This subsection shall not apply to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is accompanied
by his or her parent or guardian.
B. For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any licensee, his agent or employee may refuse to allow entry to the premises or refuse to
sell tobacco products, tobacco accessories, or alternative nicotine products to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of
identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of eighteen (18) years, as required by this section. (Ord. 2013-67, 11-7-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
4-14-8: AGE OF EMPLOYEES:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit
any person less than eighteen (18) years of age to sell tobacco products, tobacco accessories, or alternative nicotine products in any licensed premises.
(Ord. 2013-67, 11-7-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
4-14-9: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products, tobacco
accessories, or alternative nicotine products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee or person, in the course of such licensee's or person's
business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco products, tobacco accessories, or alternative nicotine products free of charge to any person on any
right of way, park, playground or other property owned by the village, any school district, any park district or any public library; except, the sale of
tobacco products, tobacco accessories, or alternative nicotine products to persons twenty one (21) years of age or older may occur upon the issuance
of a special license by the village president for distribution or sale in a specific recreation area for a designated time period not to exceed seven (7)
days.
B. 1. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products, tobacco accessories, or alternative nicotine products
within fifty feet (50') of any school, childcare facility or other building used for educational or recreational programs for persons under the age of
eighteen (18) years. The reference points for measuring the distance between the educational or recreational facility and the facility selling tobacco
products, tobacco accessories, or alternative nicotine products are as follows:
a. Educational or recreational building: The point of the building closest to the business selling the tobacco products, tobacco accessories, or
alternative nicotine products.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 123/618
b. Business: All entrances to the particular business selling the tobacco products, tobacco accessories, or alternative nicotine products to which the
general public has access. This does not include service entrances or entrances used only by employees. If the business is open to the public on
all sides, for example a kiosk or stand, the surface of the structure closest to the educational or recreational building will be used.
2. Any premises where access by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not
permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of that business located at such premises shall be exempt from the
requirements of this subsection. (Ord. 2013-67, 11-7-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
4-14-10: VISIBILITY OF INTERIOR OF PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for the premises upon which the sale of tobacco products, tobacco accessories, or alternative nicotine products are licensed to have,
between the area four feet (4') vertically above ground level and six feet (6') vertically above ground level, running horizontally the entire length of such
premises, any screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing in the window or upon the doors of such licensed premises or inside such premises, which
shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times. No booth, screen, partition or other
obstruction, nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such licensed premises which shall prevent a full view of
the interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk, and such premises must be so located that there shall be a full view of where tobacco
products, tobacco accessories, and alternative nicotine products are sold. The premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural
light or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises are clearly visible. In the event the view into any such licensed premises is wilfully
obscured by the licensee, or any employee or agent of any such licensee, or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation. In
order to enforce the provisions of this section, the village president shall have the right to require the licensee to file plans, drawings and photographs
showing the clearance of the view as required by this section. (Ord. 2013-67, 11-7-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
4-14-11: RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE FOR EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by an officer, director, manager or other agent or
employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such licensee. Such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or
omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. 2007-106, 11-1-2007)
4-14-12: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Administration And Enforcement Official: The village president shall be charged with the administration of this chapter.
B. Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses; Fines In Lieu: The village president may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter if he or she determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the
village president may instead levy a fine on the licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each
violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Notice Of Suspension Or Revocation; Public Hearing Required: No such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except
after seven (7) days' written notice to the licensee affording the licensee a public hearing before the village president and giving the licensee an
opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven (7) day notice provision shall begin the day following
delivery by certified mail or by personal service.
D. Grounds For Determination: The village president shall, within seven (7) days after such hearing and the imposition of a suspension, revocation, or fine,
state in a written order the reason for such determination. The written order shall also state: 1) the duration of any suspension; 2) whether the license
has been revoked; or 3) the amount of any fine. A copy of the written order shall be served upon licensee within the same period.
E. Additional Costs:
1. Any licensee determined by the village president to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the village the costs of the hearing
before the village president for such violation. The village president shall determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but
not limited to, court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts of records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the village president may allow.
2. The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the village president. Failure to pay said costs
within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this chapter and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the imposition of a fine.
(Ord. 2009-37, 4-16-2009)
F. Reissuance Of License After Revocation: When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to said licensee for a
period of six (6) months thereafter to conduct the business of selling "tobacco products", "tobacco accessories", or "alternative nicotine products", as
defined in section 4-14-1 of this chapter, within the premises described in such revoked license. (Ord. 2013-67, 11-7-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
4-14-13: SALE OF BIDI CIGARETTES PROHIBITED:
No person shall sell, give away, barter, exchange or otherwise furnish to any other person a bidi cigarette. As used in this section, "bidi cigarette" means a
product that: a) contains tobacco that is wrapped in tembumi or tendu leaf, or that is wrapped in any other material identified by the United States secretary
of the treasury because the material is similar in appearance or other characteristics to the tembumi or tendu leaf; b) does or does not contain a smoke
filtering device. (Ord. 2000-55, 8-3-2000)
4-14-14: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 124/618
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for the first offense and succeeding offenses
during the same calendar year, and each day that such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 2000-55, 8-3-2000;
amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 15
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
4-15-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To encourage the best possible public passenger vehicle service under a competitive system with regulation only to the extent necessary to protect the
safety and welfare of the citizens.
B. To adopt a system of regulation which takes into account and consideration the present day method and operation of public passenger vehicle service
in the area including the use of owner operated vehicles, agency agreements and other contractual relationships between owners and drivers of public
passenger vehicles and companies with dispatching facilities.
C. To assure that public passenger vehicles are clean, comfortable and safe and are operated in accordance with reasonable standards and regulations
for the protection of all passengers.
D. To provide flexibility in the number of public passenger vehicles eligible to service the village provided same comply with the safety standards
established herein.
E. To accomplish the above purposes by licensing of public passenger vehicle dispatching companies and owners of all vehicles for hire with a principal
place of business within the village. (Ord. 2015-04, 1-22-2015)
4-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
AGENCY AGREEMENT: A contract or agreement between a dispatching company and a public passenger vehicle owner relating to the use of a public
passenger vehicle in a licensed service area and dispatching services therefor.
CERTIFICATE: A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the village authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a vehicle for hire business
in the village.
DISPATCHER: A person, firm or corporation licensed to dispatch public passenger vehicles within the village and control the interrelationship of public
passenger vehicles which have a contractual relationship with their dispatching service company.
HOLDER: A person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued.
INSPECTION STATION: Official state of Illinois testing station or such other facility designated by the chief of police to conduct inspections required by this
chapter.
LIMOUSINE/LIVERY VEHICLE: Any privately owned vehicle intended to be used for the transportation of persons for compensation as a result of
individual contract, when the payment is not based on a meter charge, but is prearranged for a designated destination on a trip or hourly basis.
MANIFEST: A daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by the driver showing the time and place of origin, destination, number of
passengers and the amount of fare of each trip.
OPEN STAND: A public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the village which has been designated by the village as being reserved
exclusively for the use of taxicabs.
PUBLIC PASSENGER VEHICLE: Vehicles for hire used for transportation of passengers.
PUBLIC PASSENGER VEHICLE DISPATCHER'S LICENSE: A license issued to any person, firm or corporation who operates a public passenger vehicle
dispatching service under a designated name and which dispatches public passenger vehicles for transportation purposes, whether such public passenger
vehicles are owned by the dispatching company, or by third parties who have agency agreements with the dispatching company.
PUBLIC PASSENGER VEHICLE DRIVER: Any person who drives a public passenger vehicle.
PUBLIC PASSENGER VEHICLE OWNER: Any person owning a public passenger vehicle.
RECIPROCAL LICENSING LIST: A list prepared by the chief of police or his designated agent setting forth the names of municipalities who license and/or
inspect public passenger vehicles which licensing and inspection process is deemed acceptable to the village therefore permitting a holder to obtain a
certificate from the village without the need for extensive or duplicate investigations or inspections.
TAXICAB: A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for compensation, having a seating capacity of less than six (6)
persons and not operated on a fixed route.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 125/618
TAXIMETER: A meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures, mechanically, the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the
fare is based.
VEHICLE FOR HIRE: A "taxicab", "livery vehicle", or "limousine" as defined in this section. (Ord. 2015-04, 1-22-2015)
4-15-3: CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY:
A. Certificate Required: No person shall conduct, engage in, maintain, or operate a public passenger vehicle, including a home occupation, or a public
passenger vehicle dispatching service, with a principal place of business within the village without first having obtained a certificate of public
convenience and necessity under this chapter.
B. Application For Certificate: An application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be filed with the village clerk upon forms provided
by the village containing such information as is generally required by the village for all business licenses, and in addition, the following information shall
be furnished:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts
giving rise to such judgments;
3. The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;
4. The number of public passenger vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant or agency agreement with the applicant, the vehicle
identification numbers for each public passenger vehicle, proof that each public passenger vehicle has passed the required safety inspections, and
the location of proposed depots and terminals;
5. The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the applicant's public passenger vehicles;
6. Names and addresses of all public passenger vehicle drivers controlled by the applicant or having an agency agreement with a dispatcher;
7. Certification that all public passenger vehicle drivers meet the requirements of this chapter; and
8. Such further information as the village clerk may require.
Such application shall be verified under oath.
C. Public Hearing; Time; Notice: Upon the filing of an application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity, the village clerk shall submit the
same to the village board of trustees, and said board shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant. Due notice shall also be given to the general public by posting a notice of such hearing in the village hall. Any interested person may file with
the village clerk a memorandum in support of or in opposition to the issuance of a certificate.
D. Approval Or Denial Of Application:
1. Approval; Issuance Of Certificate:
a. If the village board of trustees finds that additional public passenger vehicles are required in the village by the public convenience and necessity
and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform such public transportation, and to conform to the provisions of this chapter, then the board
shall direct the village clerk, upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions hereof, to issue a certificate stating the name and address of the
applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under the certificate and the date of issuance.
b. If the village board of trustees finds from the investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity justify the issuance of a
certificate, it shall notify the applicant of its findings, and within sixty (60) days thereafter, the applicant shall comply with the further provisions of
this chapter for the issuance of a certificate.
2. Denial: If the village board of trustees finds from its investigation and hearing that the public convenience and necessity do not justify the issuance of
a certificate, the board shall forthwith notify the applicant of such finding.
E. Proof Of Financial Responsibility: No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless the applicant has complied with all the provisions of the
Illinois vehicle code requiring proof of financial responsibility in the form of an indemnity bond or liability insurance of operators of motor vehicles used
for the transportation of passengers1. Before a certificate is issued, the applicant shall submit to the village clerk a certificate from the Illinois secretary
of state for each motor vehicle to be operated or controlled by the applicant evidencing that proof of financial responsibility for each of such motor
vehicles has been submitted to the Illinois secretary of state.
F. Fee: No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless the applicant or the holder has paid an annual fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00);
however, in the case of certificates issued on or after July 1, the applicant shall be required to pay only one-half (1/2) of the fee specified above. The fee
shall, after the initial issuance of the certificate, be paid by January 1 of each year.
G. Transfer Of Certificate: No certificate may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the village board of trustees.
H. Renewal: The issuance of a certificate shall be based on all evidence presented at the public hearing and shall be in the sole discretion of the village
board of trustees. Once issued, the certificate shall automatically be annually renewed (with receipt of annual renewal fee) and remain in existence until
such time as revoked or suspended. (Ord. 2015-04, 1-22-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 126/618
4-15-4: LIMOUSINE/LIVERY VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Certificate Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in, maintain, own, or operate a limousine/livery vehicle either by himself or
through an agent, employee or partner, without first having obtained a certificate as herein provided. Any limousine/livery vehicle licensed, housed and
operated in a municipality other than Glendale Heights is exempt from the provisions of this section.
B. Dispatcher Affiliation: No certificate shall be issued to any livery without an agency agreement with a dispatcher. The agency agreement shall identify
the livery as one under the control and operation of the dispatcher and acknowledge the joint and several obligations imposed upon the holder and the
dispatcher as set forth in this chapter.
C. Drivers: It shall be the responsibility of the holder to immediately update the village with the name and address of all his or its new limousine/livery
vehicle drivers. All drivers must have all required licenses issued by the state of Illinois. A holder shall be responsible for each driver being properly
licensed and their compliance with the regulations and conditions of this chapter.
D. Identification: Each limousine/livery vehicle must display an emblem or certificate issued by the village as an indication of compliance with the licensing
provisions of this chapter. The emblem or certificate shall be displayed as designated by the chief of police.
E. Inspections:
1. Inspection Required: A holder shall submit each limousine/livery vehicle to an inspection station for inspection prior to the issuance of a certificate or
the renewal thereof and shall also submit said vehicle for reinspections during the certificate year. The frequency of reinspections shall be within the
discretion of the chief of police; provided that each limousine/livery vehicle shall be inspected no less than two (2) times per year. Upon notification
from the chief of police or his designated agent, the holder shall submit said vehicle to an inspection station within seven (7) days from the date of
notification.
2. Inspection Stations:
a. The inspection station shall comply with established procedures and criteria for conducting inspections and the minimum standards in order to
approve a vehicle. Said criteria are hereby incorporated by reference into the provisions of this section.
b. A holder may use an inspection station of his choice.
c. A holder is responsible for inspection and reinspection fees.
d. All inspections shall include, but need not be limited to, the following:
(1) Vehicle make, year and vehicle identification number.
(2) State license number and year.
(3) Village vehicle license number and year.
(4) Vehicle color.
(5) Vehicle number.
(6) Company name.
(7) Service brakes.
(8) Emergency brakes.
(9) Horn.
(10) Rearview mirror.
(11) Windshield wipers and washers.
(12) Headlights.
(13) Taillights.
(14) Stoplights.
(15) Turn signals.
(16) Speedometer.
(17) Steering.
(18) Interior condition.
(19) Exterior condition.
(20) Windows.
(21) Tires.
(22) Current bond sticker.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 127/618
Any limousine/livery vehicle failing to pass the inspection will be given a period of five (5) working days to allow for repairs. The vehicle cannot
be used as a limousine/livery vehicle until repairs have been completed and it passes reinspection. If the limousine/livery vehicle does not pass
reinspection within the five (5) working day period, or such longer period as the chief of police, in his discretion, may determine, the
limousine/livery vehicle may not be used as a public passenger vehicle.
e. In lieu of a certificate from an inspection station, a certificate from the reciprocal licensing list will be accepted.
F. Violations: Any holder who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to having his or its certificate suspended or revoked, or be
subject to the payment of a fine, as set forth in section 4-15-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-04, 1-22-2015)
4-15-5: MISCELLANEOUS LIMOUSINE/LIVERY REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall apply to the owners and/or operators of all limousine/livery vehicles. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or
operator of said vehicles, as well as the dispatcher to ensure compliance with the following provisions:
A. Condition Of Vehicle: In addition to the inspection requirements of the proceeding section, each limousine/livery vehicle shall be safe for operation at all
times and shall not be damaged, deteriorated or otherwise be in a condition so as to render said vehicle unfit for use as a public passenger vehicle.
B. Number Of Passengers: No limousine/livery vehicle shall carry more than the rated passenger load per vehicle.
C. Receipts: On request, any person paying a fare shall be entitled to a receipt indicating the amount paid.
D. Conduct Of Driver: It shall be unlawful for any on duty driver or operator of a limousine/livery vehicle to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs or to
use any profane or obscene language to or in the presence of any passenger.
E. Advertising: It shall be unlawful for any limousine/livery vehicle to advertise or affix signs to said vehicle for the purpose of advertising businesses or
commercial uses unrelated to said livery company. This includes any limousine/livery vehicle stored or parked within the village regardless of whether it
is regulated under this chapter.
F. Holding Areas: Limousine/livery vehicles shall not park in open stands.
G. Scope Of Operations: Limousine/livery vehicles shall not pick up or solicit passengers from the streets, but are limited in scope of operation to carrying
passengers on a contract basis at a price agreed upon prior to employment and by arrangement of the parties at the time of initial contact.
H. Prohibited Material Conveyance: It shall be unlawful for any limousine/livery vehicle to convey toxic, hazardous or biological waste material at any time.
(Ord. 2015-04, 1-22-2015)
4-15-6: TAXICAB VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Certificate Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or lease a taxicab within the corporate limits of the village without first having
obtained a certificate in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Dispatcher Affiliation: No certificate shall be issued to any taxicab without a dispatcher or agency agreement with a dispatcher. The agency agreement
must identify the taxicab as one under the control and operation of the dispatcher and acknowledge the joint and several obligations imposed upon the
holder and dispatcher as set forth in this chapter.
C. Insurance: It shall be the responsibility of the holder to ensure that each taxicab has a policy of insurance or certificate of insurance indicating coverage
for personal injury in an amount of not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per person, five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) per accident, and not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage in full force and effect during the certificate
period or a portion thereof subject to notification of renewal. In the event that such policy or certificate of insurance becomes ineffective or expires or in
the event a holder has failed to deposit a currently valid certificate or policy of insurance, the certificate herein provided for shall automatically terminate
without further notice.
D. Drivers: It shall be the responsibility of a holder to immediately update the village with the name and address of his or its new taxicab drivers. All drivers
must have all required licenses issued by the state of Illinois. A holder shall be responsible for each driver being properly licensed and their compliance
with the regulations and conditions of this chapter.
E. Identification: Each side of every taxicab shall have, in letters identifiable from a minimum distance of twenty feet (20'), the name of the taxicab
company which the taxicab is associated with, the telephone number of said company, and the number which the company has assigned to the
taxicab. In addition, each taxicab must display an emblem or certificate issued by the village as an indication of initial compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. The emblem or certificate shall be displayed as designated by the chief of police or his designated agent.
F. Taximeter: Each taxicab shall be equipped with an approved, accurate and inspected taximeter to register, in plain view of the passenger and with
proper illumination, the fare as accumulated while said taxicab is in operation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 128/618
G. Inspections:
1. Inspection Required: A holder shall submit each taxicab for inspection to an inspection station prior to the issuance of a certificate or the renewal
thereof and shall also submit said vehicle for reinspections during the certificate year. The frequency of reinspections shall be within the discretion of
the chief of police; provided that each taxicab will be inspected no less than one time per year. Upon notification from the chief of police or his
designated agent, a holder shall submit said vehicle to an inspection station within seven (7) days from the date of notification.
2. Inspection Stations:
a. The inspection station shall comply with established procedures and criteria for conducting inspections and the minimum standards in order to
approve a vehicle. Said criteria are hereby incorporated by reference into the provisions of this section.
b. A holder may use inspection stations of his choice.
c. A holder is responsible for inspection and reinspection fees.
d. A list of inspection stations shall be given to each holder, together with the notice that taxicabs must be inspected.
e. All inspections shall include, but need not be limited to, the following:
(1) Vehicle, make, year and vehicle identification number.
(2) State license number and year.
(3) Village vehicle license number and year.
(4) Vehicle color.
(5) Vehicle number.
(6) Company name.
(7) Service brakes.
(8) Emergency brakes.
(9) Horn.
(10) Rearview mirror.
(11) Windshield wipers and washers.
(12) Headlights.
(13) Taillights.
(14) Stoplights.
(15) Turn signals.
(16) Speedometer.
(17) Taximeter.
(18) Rates displayed.
(19) Steering.
(20) Interior condition.
(21) Exterior condition.
(22) Windows.
(23) Tires.
(24) Current bond sticker.
Any taxicab failing to pass the inspection will be given a period of five (5) working days to allow for repairs. The vehicle cannot be used as a
taxicab until repairs have been completed and it passes reinspection. If the taxicab does not pass reinspection within the five (5) working day
period, or such longer period as the chief of police, in his discretion, may determine, the taxicab may not be used as a public passenger vehicle.
f. In lieu of a certificate from an inspection station, a certificate from the reciprocal licensing list will be accepted.
H. Violations: Any holder who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to having his or its certificate suspended or revoked, or be
subject to the payment of a fine, as set forth in section 4-15-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-04, 1-22-2015)
4-15-7: MISCELLANEOUS TAXICAB REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall apply to the owner and/or operators of all taxicabs. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or operators of said
vehicles, as well as the dispatcher to ensure compliance with the following provisions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 129/618
A. Condition Of Vehicle: In addition to the inspection requirements of the preceding section, each taxicab shall be safe for operation at all times and shall
not be damaged, deteriorated or otherwise be in a condition so as to render said vehicle unfit for use as a public passenger vehicle.
B. Number Of Passengers: No taxicab shall carry more than the rated passenger load per vehicle.
C. Established Rates And Charges: All rates and charges for taxicab service in the village of Glendale Heights provided by dispatcher and taxicabs shall
be fair, reasonable and competitive. The dispatcher shall provide the village with a schedule of its rates, including meter rates and fixed rates for trips to
O'Hare and Midway Airports. The village shall be notified of any change in the designated rates in writing thirty (30) days in advance of the date the
change occurs. The village shall have the right to publish the rates to its residents in such form or manner as deemed appropriate by the village.
D. Posting Established Rates And Charges: There shall be affixed on the inside of each taxicab in a conspicuous place and in such manner that the same
may be easily and conveniently read by any person riding in such taxicab, a card in a frame covered by glass or other transparent material setting forth
the rates of fare as prescribed by the preceding subsection.
E. Inspection Of Taximeters:
1. No taximeter shall be attached to a taxicab unless it has been inspected by an inspector approved by the chief of police and found to be accurate
and sealed by such inspector. A holder shall keep certificates of accuracy issued by the inspector for each taximeter in each taxicab and provide the
same for inspection by a passenger or any police officer upon request. The expense for such inspections shall be that of the holder.
2. Each taximeter shall be inspected annually not more than thirty (30) days prior to December 31, or such other date set by the chief of police or his
designee, and a certificate of accuracy, as provided above, shall be submitted by the holder to the village prior to the renewal of the certificate. In the
event a complaint is made that any taximeter registers improperly or inaccurately, the chief of police or his designee shall immediately examine and
inspect or cause such examination and inspection of such taximeter complained of. Upon request by the chief of police, the holder shall submit any
taximeter installed on a taxicab to an inspection to determine its accuracy.
F. Demand For Service: Each holder is responsible for each taxicab operating under its control to regularly and daily operate taxicabs in the village to the
extent reasonably necessary to meet the public demand for such taxicab service, including a twenty four (24) hour telephone service. Reasonable
service shall be further interpreted to require a thirty (30) minute maximum response time for each call for taxicab service.
G. Passenger Service: It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as a passenger any person who seeks taxicab service, provided such
person is not intoxicated and conducts himself in an orderly manner. No person shall be admitted to a taxicab already occupied by a passenger without
the consent of said passenger. The driver shall transport his passenger to the point of destination by the most direct available route from the point of
origin.
H. Receipts: On request, any person paying a fare shall be entitled to a receipt indicating the amount paid.
I. Conduct Of Driver: It shall be unlawful for any on duty driver or operator of a taxicab to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs or to use any profane
or obscene language to or in the presence of any passenger.
J. Taxicab Stands: Taxicabs without passengers and waiting for a dispatched assignment must do so at an open stand.
K. Exclusive Permission Granted/Interurban Operations: Subject to the conditions and limitations of this chapter, exclusive permission and authority are
hereby granted to holders to operate a taxicab upon the public streets and other public ways within the corporate limits of the village unless suspended
or revoked.
L. Advertising: It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to advertise or affix signs to said vehicle for the purpose of advertising businesses or commercial uses
unrelated to said taxicab company. This subsection includes any taxicabs stored or parked within the village regardless of whether it is regulated under
this chapter.
M. Prohibited Material Conveyance: It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to convey toxic, hazardous or biological waste material at any time.
N. Manifests:
1. Every taxicab driver shall maintain a manifest. All such completed manifests shall be returned to holder by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of
duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the holder and shall be of a character approved by the village board of trustees.
2. A holder shall retain and preserve all manifests in a safe place for one calendar year. The manifests shall be available to the police department.
O. Advance Payment: A holder or taxicab driver shall have the right to demand his fare of the person so employing him upon entering his vehicle, and may
refuse to convey any person who shall not comply with the demand.
P. Refusal Of Passenger To Pay Fare: It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any public passenger vehicle operating pursuant
to this chapter after having hired the same, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any public passenger vehicle with intent to defraud the person
from whom it is hired of the value of such service. (Ord. 2015-04, 1-22-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 130/618
4-15-8: DRIVERS:
A. Driver Meets Requirements: No holder shall permit its public passenger vehicles to be operated in the village unless the holder or public passenger
vehicle driver has first certified, under oath, to the village that the public passenger vehicle driver meets the requirements set forth in this chapter.
B. Qualifications: Public passenger vehicle drivers shall meet the following qualifications:
1. Be twenty one (21) years of age or over;
2. Be of sound health with good eyesight, and not subject to any disease or infirmity of body or mind which might render him unfit for the safe operation
of a public passenger vehicle;
3. Be able to read, write and speak the English language;
4. Be clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of drugs or intoxicating liquors;
5. Not have been convicted of a felony, class A misdemeanor, or crime of moral turpitude;
6. Have a secretary of state's driving abstract showing no convictions for any of the following offenses:
a. Driving under the influence of a controlled substance, cannabis or an intoxicating compound2 or similar provision of a local ordinance or any like
offense of another state or country within the past five (5) years;
b. Reckless driving3 or a similar provision of a local ordinance or any like offense of another state or country, within the past five (5) years;
7. Must not have had his driver's license suspended or revoked in any state within the past three (3) years as a consequence of violations of law
concerning his operation of a motor vehicle; and
8. Possess all valid licenses issued by the state of Illinois.
C. Conduct And Appearance:
1. No on duty public passenger vehicle driver shall use any profane or obscene language or gestures, shout or call to prospective passengers, or
engage in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous, or unreasonably loud conduct.
2. Every public passenger vehicle driver shall maintain a reasonable degree of personal hygiene and be dressed in clean clothing that is not soiled or
otherwise offensive. (Ord. 2015-04, 1-22-2015)
4-15-9: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, FINE:
Any holder or public passenger vehicle driver who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to having his certificate or privileges suspended or
revoked, or having a fine imposed subsequent to the procedures set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article A of this code. At such hearing, the chief of police or
his designated agent shall provide evidence relative to the cited violation and the accused may provide such testimony, evidence or explanation as the
accused deems necessary. After hearing the evidence presented, the hearing officer may suspend, revoke and/or fine up to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) any person which the hearing officer finds liable of violating any provision of this chapter; or in the alternative render a finding of not liable as
the case may be. In cases where the public health, safety and welfare is jeopardized by such violation, the chief of police may temporarily suspend said
certificate or privileges pending a hearing before the hearing officer. In addition, the chief of police or his designated agent is authorized to resolve or abate
minor violations without the need for a hearing and without the imposition of suspension, revocation or fine. Notwithstanding the above, a certificate or
privileges shall automatically be suspended for violations relating to ineffective insurance or upon the finding of false information submitted on any
application form. Appeals of automatic suspensions may be made to the village board of trustees and shall be held in accordance with the provisions of
this section. (Ord. 2015-04, 1-22-2015)
Chapter 16
AUCTIONS
4-16-1: CONDUCT OF AUCTIONS:
A. No person, other than an auctioneer or employee named in the license application for operation of an auction, may conduct an auction. Each auctioneer
may have no more than two (2) employees on the same license.
B. No action shall be conducted on the public streets or ways of the village.
C. This section shall not apply to public officers acting within their official capacity pursuant to judicial orders or ordinances or resolutions of any public
body politic nor to sale of real estate pursuant to a mortgage or trust deed. (1978 Code § 3-1-23)
Chapter 17
HOUSE AND GARAGE SALES
4-17-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 131/618
No person shall sell, offer for sale or conduct the sale of any junk, secondhand, antique or other used or discarded items of personal property from any
residence in the village or from any area classified as residential in the village zoning ordinance without first obtaining a permit therefor. Included within the
terms of this section shall be sales commonly known as "house sales", "attic sales", "garage sales" and "basement sales". The provisions of this section
shall not apply to bankruptcy, estate or other sales under judicial process and sales conducted from church, school, homeowner association or civic
property by not for profit organizations. (1978 Code § 3-6-1)
4-17-2: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; FEE AND CONTENTS:
The village clerk is authorized to issue a permit required by this chapter to any resident upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
payment of a ten dollar ($10.00) fee. Said permit shall list, in addition to the applicant, all other persons participating in such sales by name and address,
and the village clerk shall keep a record of all participants which shall be checked prior to the issuance of a permit. (Ord. 2002-81, 10-3-2002; amd. Ord.
2011-53, 8-18-2011)
4-17-3: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF PERMITS PER YEAR:
No person shall be permitted to conduct a house or garage sale from his premises or participate in a garage or house sale conducted by another resident
more than four (4) times during any calendar year. No more than four (4) permits shall be issued to any person as a permit holder or permit participant
during any calendar year for the purpose of conducting or participating in such house or garage sale. (Ord. 2002-81, 10-3-2002)
4-17-4: PERMIT FOR DESIGNATED SALE ONLY; POSTING REQUIRED; NONTRANSFERABILITY:
A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only for the particular sale and premises designated on the permit. The permit shall be posted in the
front yard area so as to be easily seen by the police and shall be nontransferable. (1978 Code § 3-6-3)
4-17-5: DAYS AND HOURS OF SALES:
Sales regulated by this chapter shall be limited to a period of three (3) consecutive days and shall be conducted only during the period from nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (Ord. 2002-81, 10-3-2002)
4-17-6: ADVERTISING SIGNS:
A. Location: All signs advertising any sale held pursuant to this chapter shall be located on private property and shall comply with all pertinent ordinances
of the village relating to signs. No such sign or other advertising matter shall be located or posted in any public park or building in the village. (Ord.
2002-81, 10-3-2002; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Information Required: The garage sale signs must contain the following information:
1. The day of the sale;
2. The hours of the sale; and
3. The address where the sale is to take place.
C. Removal: All garage sale signs authorized under this chapter shall be removed no later than eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on the last day of the sale. In the
event all garage sale signs authorized under this chapter are not removed prior to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on the last day of the sale as provided in
this subsection, the village shall impose a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per sign for each day the sign is displayed beyond the last day of the sale
on each garage sale permit applicant. (Ord. 2002-81, 10-3-2002)
4-17-7: PROHIBITIONS:
A. Sales Held By Other Than Owner/Occupant: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a sale pursuant to this chapter who is not the owner of the
premises where such sale is held.
B. Selling Business: It shall be unlawful for anyone to conduct a retail selling business pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter or to engage in any
sales other than those of junk, secondhand, antique or other used or discarded items of property.
C. Location: No sales regulated by this chapter and no sale items shall be located in the front yard area of any residence or on any public sidewalk or
parkway area.
D. Use Of Loudspeakers And Amplifiers: No sale held pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted with the use of outdoor loudspeakers or other
amplification equipment. (1978 Code § 3-6-3)
4-17-8: REVOCATION OF PERMIT OR RIGHT TO PERMIT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 132/618
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the immediate revocation of the permit under which said person is a
permit holder or permit participant, and shall be further subject to the loss of the privilege of obtaining a permit or of having the right to participate in such
permit in the future. (1978 Code § 3-6-4)
Title 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
Chapter 1
FOOD AND FOOD SERVICE
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
FOOD: Beverages, other than alcoholic liquor, as well as food.
FOOD DEALER: Every person engaged in the sale of food or beverages, other than intoxicating liquor, intended for human consumption.
RESTAURANT: Any place where food or drink, other than alcoholic liquor, is prepared or served to the public for consumption on the premises or is sold in
a fully prepared form. (1978 Code § 9-1-1)
5-1-2: SALE OF UNWHOLESOME, ADULTERATED FOODS PROHIBITED:
A. Unwholesome Food: No person shall offer for sale, or keep for the purpose of selling or offering for sale, any food of any kind intended for human
consumption which is spoiled or tainted or is unwholesome and unfit for human consumption for any reason.
B. Adulterated Food: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, or keep for such purpose, any food or drink intended for human consumption which has
been adulterated by any material harmful in any way, or which does not comply with state law governing the same. (1978 Code § 9-1-2)
5-1-3: EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD OR DRINK:
Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken and examined by the director of community development or other officer designated by the
village board of trustees as often as may be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The director of community development or
other officer designated by the village board may condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is
unwholesome or adulterated. (1978 Code § 9-1-3; amd. 2011 Code)
5-1-4: PERSONS HANDLING FOOD:
A. All persons engaged in handling food or coming in contact with food intended for sale for human consumption shall keep themselves clean, both as to
person and clothing.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any infectious or contagious disease to handle or be engaged in the care or
preparation of any food. It shall be unlawful to permit any such person to be employed in or about any premises where food is stored, prepared or sold,
or to deliver such food. (1978 Code § 9-1-4)
ARTICLE A. FOOD DEALERS
5-1A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEE:
It shall be unlawful for any food dealer to engage in or do business in the village without first having secured a license therefor. Application for such license
shall be made in compliance with the general provisions of this code relating thereto, and shall state the kind of food intended to be sold or handled. Such
license shall not be issued by the village unless the applicant presents, or has presented on his behalf, to the village clerk, satisfactory evidence of the
possession of a valid permit from the county board of health. The license fee shall be determined by the square footage area of the business as provided
in section 4-2-1 of this code. (1978 Code § 3-8-1)
5-1A-2: GENERAL SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
Premises used for the sale or storage of food intended for human consumption must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to permit
any accumulation of refuse or waste of any kind to remain therein for more than twenty four (24) hours, and it shall be unlawful to permit any decaying
animal or plant material to remain on such premises. No dogs, cats or other animals shall be permitted on such premises. Premises used for the storage,
preparation or sale of food intended for human consumption shall also be kept free from flies, vermin and rodents. (1978 Code § 3-8-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 133/618
5-1A-3: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the director of community development or other officer designated by the village board of trustees, in conjunction with the county
health department, to make as many inspections as are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. (1978 Code § 3-8-4; amd. 2011
Code)
5-1A-4: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any food dealer's license may be suspended or revoked by the village president and board of trustees for repeated violations of the provisions of this
article, or for any continued violation of the county food sanitation ordinance or county health department food handling regulations, or for any violation of
any other provision of this code relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of the premises, the articles sold or the license required. In the event
a license is suspended, the holder of the license shall request an inspection prior to the end of the suspension period, such inspection to be made by the
director of community development. If such inspection shows that such violation or violations have been removed or cured, a suspension order shall be
terminated on that date. If such inspection shows that such violations have not been removed or cured, then such license may be revoked by the village
president and board of trustees. (1978 Code § 3-8-2; amd. 2011 Code)
ARTICLE B. RESTAURANTS
5-1B-1: VILLAGE LICENSE AND COUNTY PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant in the village without first obtaining a license therefor or without full compliance with the
provisions of this article. Application for such license shall be made in writing to the village clerk on a form to be provided by the clerk, and shall comply
with the general provisions of this code relating to licenses. Such license shall not be issued by the village unless the applicant presents, or has presented
on his behalf, to the village clerk, satisfactory evidence of the possession of a valid permit from the county board of health. The license fee shall be
determined by the square footage of the business as provided in section 4-2-1 of this code. (1978 Code § 3-9-1)
5-1B-2: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; RECOMMENDATION:
All applications for a license required by this article shall be referred to the director of community development, or other officer designated by the village
board of trustees, who shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the premises to be used and report his findings thereon, recommending or
advising against the issuance of the license. (1978 Code § 3-9-2; amd. 2011 Code)
5-1B-3: FOOD AND DRINK REGULATIONS:
A. Wholesomeness Of Food And Drink:
1. All milk, fluid milk products, ice cream, and other frozen desserts served shall be from approved sources. Milk and fluid milk products shall be served
in the individual containers in which they were received from the distributor or from a bulk container equipped with an approved dispensing device;
however, this requirement shall not apply to cream which may be served from the original bottle or from a dispenser approved for such service. (1978
Code § 3-9-4-8)
2. All oysters, clams and mussels shall be from approved sources and, if shucked, shall be kept in the containers in which they were placed at the
shucking plant until used. (1978 Code § 3-9-4-9)
B. Refrigeration: All readily perishable food and drink shall be kept at or below fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) except when being prepared or served.
Wastewater from refrigeration equipment shall be disposed of properly. (1978 Code § 3-9-4-7)
C. Storage, Display And Serving Of Food And Drink: All food and drink shall be so stored, displayed and served to be protected from dust, flies, vermin
depredation and pollution by rodents, unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage and other contamination. No animal or fowl shall be
kept or allowed in any room in which food or drink is prepared or stored. All means necessary for the elimination of flies, roaches and rodents shall be
used. (1978 Code § 3-9-4-1)
5-1B-4: EMPLOYEES:
Adequate locker or dressing rooms shall be provided for employee clothing and shall be kept clean. Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be kept in
containers provided for this purpose. (1978 Code § 3-9-4-11)
5-1B-5: USE OF PREMISES RESTRICTED:
None of the operations connected with a restaurant shall be conducted in any room used as living or sleeping quarters. (1978 Code § 3-9-4-10)
5-1B-6: LAVATORY FACILITIES:
Adequate and convenient handwashing facilities shall be provided including hot and cold running water, soap and approved sanitary towels. The use of a
common towel is prohibited. No employee shall resume work after using the toilet room without first washing his or her hands. (1978 Code § 3-9-4-4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 134/618
5-1B-7: WATER SUPPLY:
Every restaurant shall be provided with running water under pressure which shall be easily accessible to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are
washed, and the water supply shall be adequate and of a safe and sanitary quality. (1978 Code § 3-9-4-3)
5-1B-8: UTENSILS AND EQUIPMENT:
A. Construction And Materials: All multiuse utensils and all show and display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating equipment, sinks
and other equipment or utensils used in connection with the operation of a restaurant shall be so constructed as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept
in good repair. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium or lead shall not be used; provided, that solder containing lead may be used for jointing.
B. Cleaning And Bactericidal Treatment:
1. All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods and sinks, shall be kept clean and free
from dust, insects and other contaminating material. All cloths used by waiters, chefs and other employees shall be clean. Single service containers
shall be used only once.
2. All multiuse eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process after each usage.
All multiuse utensils used in the preparation or serving of food and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved
process immediately following the day's operation. Drying cloths, if used, shall be kept clean and shall be used for no other purpose.
3. No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide preparation or other poisonous material shall be used for the cleaning or polishing of
utensils.
C. Storage And Handling: After bactericidal treatment, utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place protected from flies, dust and other contamination, and
shall be handled in such a manner as to prevent contamination as far as practicable. Single service utensils shall be purchased only in containers, shall
be stored therein in a clean, dry place until used and shall be handled in a sanitary manner. (1978 Code § 3-9-4-5)
5-1B-9: LITTER, GARBAGE AND WASTE:
A. Accumulation Prohibited: The premises of all restaurants shall be kept clean and free of litter and rubbish. (1978 Code § 3-9-4-2)
B. Storage And Disposal Of Wastes: All wastes shall be properly disposed of, and all garbage and trash shall be kept in suitable receptacles in such a
manner as not to become a nuisance. (1978 Code § 3-9-4-6)
5-1B-10: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the director of community development or other officer designated by the village board of trustees, in conjunction with the county
health department, to make as many inspections as are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. (1978 Code § 3-9-5; amd. 2011
Code)
5-1B-11: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
A. Revocation: Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article may be revoked by the village president and board of trustees for repeated
violations of the provisions hereof or for any continued violation of the county food sanitation ordinance or county health department food handling
regulations, or for any violation of any other provisions of this code relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of the premises, the articles
sold or to the license required. (1978 Code § 3-9-3)
B. Suspension: In the event a license is suspended, the holder of the license shall request an inspection prior to the end of the suspension period, such
inspection to be made by the director of community development. If such inspection shows that such violations have been removed or cured, the
suspension order shall be terminated on that date. If such inspection shows that such violations have not been removed or cured, then such license
may be revoked by the village president and board of trustees. (1978 Code § 3-9-3; amd. 2011 Code)
ARTICLE C. FOOD DELIVERY VEHICLES
5-1C-1: VEHICLE LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit the use of any vehicle, including wagons and motor vehicles and vehicles propelled by human power,
for the storage or carrying of any meats, poultry, fish, cheese, butter and dairy products, eggs, lard, vegetables, bread and bakery products and any other
provisions intended for human consumption in the village for the purpose of delivering any such foodstuffs to any place in the village for use and
consumption, unless a license for such vehicle is first secured and there is full compliance with the provisions of this article. Application for such license
shall be made to the village clerk and shall state thereon the name and address of the owner of each vehicle, the name of the person making food
deliveries and the nature of the goods carried. (1978 Code § 3-10-1)
5-1C-2: LICENSE FEE AND TERM:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 135/618
The annual license fee for each vehicle licensed pursuant to this article shall be as provided in section 4-2-2 of this code, and such license fee shall be for
one year beginning January 1 of each calendar year. However, no license fee shall be required for any vehicle used to deliver foodstuffs from any
establishment which is licensed and inspected as a food handling establishment in the village. (Ord. 2004-91, 11-18-2004; amd. 2011 Code)
5-1C-3: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any vehicle regulated by this article, such goods shall be carried in a portion of the vehicle which is screened
and protected against dust and insects.
B. All vehicles regulated by this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they are used. It shall be
unlawful to permit stale food, decaying matter or other waste material to accumulate in or on any such vehicle while it is in use. (1978 Code § 3-10-3)
5-1C-4: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the director of community development, or other officer designated by the board of trustees, to make or cause to be made such
inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. (1978 Code § 3-10-4; amd. 2011 Code)
ARTICLE D. ICE CREAM VENDING
5-1D-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ICE CREAM VENDING: The act of selling, or offering to sell, any ice cream or similar frozen confections for human consumption from an ice cream
vending vehicle.
ICE CREAM VENDING VEHICLE: A vehicle from which the retail sale of ice cream or similar frozen confections for human consumption is conducted from
a roadway.
ICE CREAM VENDOR: Any person who physically operates an ice cream vending vehicle or any person who physically conducts ice cream vending from
such a vehicle.
OWNER: The titleholder of an ice cream or similar frozen confections vending vehicle.
RETAIL SALE: The sale of ice cream or similar frozen confections to the consumer thereof.
VEHICLE: Every device which is mechanically propelled, motorized and designed to transport one or more persons. (Ord. 99-62, 7-8-1999)
5-1D-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate an ice cream vending vehicle or act as an ice cream vendor within the village without first having complied with the provisions of
this article. (Ord. 99-62, 7-8-1999)
5-1D-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Business License:
1. License Required: No corporation, partnership, sole proprietor or other business entity shall: a) operate an ice cream vending vehicle; or b) employ a
person as an ice cream vendor within the village; or c) rent, lease or otherwise provide an ice cream vending vehicle to an ice cream vendor within
the village without having first obtained an ice cream vending vehicle business license.
2. License Fee And Maximum Number Of Licenses: The fee shall be as provided in section 4-2-2 of this code. The maximum number of business
licenses for the operation of an ice cream vending vehicle business is three (3). (Ord. 99-62, 7-8-1999)
B. Vending Vehicle License:
1. Maximum Number Of Licenses: The holder of a valid ice cream vending vehicle business license may apply for a maximum of four (4) ice cream
vending vehicle licenses.
2. Sanitation Inspections: Prior to the issuance of an ice cream vending vehicle license and not less often than every thirty (30) days thereafter, the
applicant shall submit the vehicle for a sanitation inspection by the community development director.
3. Insurance Requirements: Every ice cream vending vehicle operated within the village shall be covered by a policy of public liability insurance issued
by a solvent and responsible insurance company authorized to do business in Illinois in a minimum amount of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for bodily injury or death to a person and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for damage to property. Each vendor shall
provide the village with a certificate of insurance naming the village as an additional party insured.
4. State Certificate Of Inspection Posted: No vehicle shall be operated within the village as an ice cream vending vehicle unless there is affixed to the
vehicle a valid state of Illinois certificate of safety inspection sticker.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 136/618
C. Vendor License:
1. License Required: No person shall operate or act as an ice cream vendor within the village without having first obtained an ice cream vendor license.
2. Ineligibility For License: No ice cream vendor license shall be issued to a person who is a "sex offender" as defined in the sex offender registration
act1.
3. Application For License: Applications for an ice cream vendor license shall be made to the village clerk, in writing, signed by the applicant under
oath, or by affidavit to its truthfulness and accuracy, and shall contain the following information and statements:
a. The applicant's name, address and telephone number.
b. The applicant's date of birth, social security number, and driver's license number.
c. The applicant's fingerprints.
d. A statement that the applicant is not a sex offender as defined in the sex offender registration act.
e. A current passport size photograph of the applicant.
4. Investigation Of Applicant: An application received by the village clerk shall be forthwith forwarded to the police chief who shall determine whether
the applicant complies with this subsection. (Ord. 2000-71, 9-7-2000)
Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall submit to fingerprinting and a background check and pay the village a fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) to cover the cost of fingerprinting and the background check in order to verify the information provided in the application for license.
(Ord. 2011-62, 9-1-2011)
5. Issuance Of License: Upon receipt of confirmation from the police chief that the applicant complies with this subsection, the village clerk shall issue
the license. The license shall be in the form of a photograph identification card. The photograph identification card shall be worn on the outer clothing
of all ice cream vendors at all times while ice cream vending. (Ord. 2000-71, 9-7-2000)
5-1D-4: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
Ice cream vending vehicles shall be equipped with the following equipment which shall be maintained in good working order at all times:
A. Signs:
1. A sign on the front and back of the ice cream vending vehicle which shall consist of reflective letters no less than three inches (3") in height which
shall state "Caution - Children Crossing".
2. A foldout, diamond shaped sign on the left side of the ice cream vending vehicle which shall consist of black on yellow reflective letters no less than
five inches (5") in height which shall state "Slow". This sign shall be located at a height of between three feet (3') and five feet (5') above ground level
and shall be displayed at a ninety degree (90°) angle to the left side of the vehicle whenever it is stopped for the purpose of vending.
3. A sign on the side of the ice cream vending vehicle which shall consist of letters no less than five inches (5") in height which shall state the name,
telephone number of the owner of the vehicle, and an identification numeral distinguishing the truck.
B. Trash Container: A litter or trash container, visible and available to customers of the ice cream vending vehicle.
C. Refrigeration Unit: A mechanical refrigeration unit which will keep all perishable ice cream or similar frozen confections at a temperature of zero
degrees (0°) to minus ten degrees Fahrenheit (-10°F). The use of ice or dry ice for refrigeration is prohibited. (Ord. 2000-71, 9-7-2000)
5-1D-5: PROHIBITED CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
The following shall not be performed from a vending vehicle:
A. Vending from the left, or driver's side, of the vehicle.
B. Vending from the ice cream vending vehicle directly to another vehicle.
C. The emission of any amplified music intended to advertise the presence of the vehicle. Amplified mechanized bells or chimes are permitted only while
the ice cream vending vehicle is in motion.
D. Vending if the vehicle is not parked with the right side thereof to the curb or right side of the roadway.
E. Vending in a no parking area.
F. Vending within a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the nearest intersecting roadway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 137/618
G. Vending before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. any day or after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. any day.
H. Vending on any of the following roadways:
Army Trail Road
Bloomingdale Road
Glen Ellyn Road
North Avenue
Schmale Road
I. Conducting a sale to any customer who is standing on a roadway.
J. Vending of ice cream or other similar confections in other than sealed packages.
K. Conducting ice cream vending within a village park when concession stands are open or during any village organized event.
L. Vending of products other than ice cream or similar frozen confections. (Ord. 2006-22, 4-20-2006)
5-1D-6: OPERATOR RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is the carrier of any infectious or contagious disease capable of being transmitted by contact with
food products to conduct ice cream vending. (Ord. 2000-71, 9-7-2000)
5-1D-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and each violation
shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2000-71, 9-7-2000; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 2
NUISANCES
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning(s) ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the village of Glendale Heights or his/her designee.
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: Any property located within the village upon which three (3) or more nuisance activities within a six (6) month period
have occurred as a result of separate factual events that have either: a) been independently investigated and verified by any law enforcement agency
and/or the village's community development department, or b) for which citations or criminal complaints for offenses defined as a nuisance activity
occurring within a six (6) month period have been adjudicated with findings of liable or findings of guilty having been entered either by a village of Glendale
Heights administrative hearing officer or by a court of competent jurisdiction.
CONTACT: Includes any communication made by a tenant, landlord, guest, neighbor, or other individual to police or other emergency services.
CONTROL: The ability or legal duty to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract, or govern conduct that occurs on that property either directly or by
intervention of any governmental authority or by virtue of parent/child relationship or guardian/ward relationship. For all purposes of this chapter, a parent
or guardian shall be conclusively deemed to have control over his or her respective child or ward, as the case may be.
DISABILITY: With respect to a person:
A. A physical or mental impairment, which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities;
B. A record of having such an impairment; or
C. Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance as
defined in the federal controlled substance act, 21 USC 802.
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE: "Abuse" as defined in section 103 of the Illinois domestic violence act of 1986 by a "family or household member" as defined in
section 103 of the Illinois domestic violence act of 19861.
DWELLING: A building that contains one or two (2) dwelling units used, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for
living purposes.
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 138/618
LANDLORD: The owner of a building or the owner's agent with regard to matters concerning landlord's leasing of a dwelling.
NUISANCE ACTIVITIES: Any of the following building code violations, property maintenance code violations, ordinance violations or criminal activities,
behavior or conduct, as defined by state law or similar provisions of this code:
A. Disorderly conduct, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1 or section 6-6A-3 of this code;
B. Unlawful use of weapons, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq., or section 6-6D-1 of this code;
C. Mob action, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1 or section 6-6A-7 of this code;
D. Discharge of a firearm, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.2 and 1.5, or section 6-6D-4 of this code;
E. Gambling, as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1, or section 6-6C-1 of this code;
F. Possession, manufacture, or delivery of controlled substances, as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401 et seq., or section 6-6C-5 of this
code;
G. Public indecency, as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-30 or section 6-6C-2 of this code;
H. Assault, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-1 or section 6-6A-1 of this code;
I. Aggravated assault, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-2;
J. Battery, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-3 or section 6-6A-2 of this code;
K. Aggravated battery, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-3.05;
L. Reckless conduct, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-5;
M. Hate crime, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-7.1;
N. Sexual abuse or related offense, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1.50 or 5/11-1.60;
O. Prostitution, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14 et seq., or lewdness public nuisance act, as defined in 740 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 105/0.01 et seq.;
P. Criminal damage to property, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-1 et seq., or section 6-6B-2 of this code;
Q. Possession, cultivation, manufacture, or delivery of cannabis, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., or section 6-6C-5 of this
code;
R. Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years, as defined in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et
seq., or section 4-3-30 of this code;
S. Criminal housing management, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-5.1;
T. Nuisance, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/37-1;
U. Two (2) or more separate violations of the village's building code, title 10, chapter 2 of this code, or property maintenance code, title 10, chapter 9 of
this code, which continue after a disposition by a finding of guilty by the circuit court of DuPage County for those violations, or similar finding of
liability by the village administrative hearing officer.
OWNER: Any person, partnership, land trust, or corporation having any legal or equitable interest in the property. In addition, owner includes, but is not
limited to:
A. A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 139/618
1. All or part of the legal title to the property.
2. All or part of the beneficial ownership and the rights to the present use and enjoyment of the premises.
B. An occupant who can control what occurs on the property.
C. Any person acting as an agent of an "owner" as defined herein.
PERMIT: To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or attempt to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
PERSON: Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, or other entity capable of owning, occupying, or using property in the village.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person in actual or constructive possession of a property, including, but not limited to, an owner, property manager, tenant or
occupant of the property in question under his or her ownership or control.
PROPERTY: Any real property, including its land and that which is affixed, incidental, or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to, any premises, room,
house, building, or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof, whether occupied or leased for residential purposes, owned, leased or used for
commercial purposes, whether under written or oral agreement.
RENTAL OR LEASE AGREEMENT: All written and oral agreements of whatever duration, which embody the terms and conditions of the use and
occupancy of a residential dwelling unit or commercial property.
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Residential structures or dwelling units, not owner occupied, intended to be rented or leased, including single-family
detached structures containing only one dwelling unit, condominium units, townhouse units, and multiple-family dwelling residential structures and
intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more persons who maintain a household, together with all land, appurtenances,
buildings and common areas whether rented or leased with or without compensation to tenants, including family members.
SEXUAL VIOLENCE: Has the meaning provided under section 10 of the safe homes act2.
SHALL: Mandatory and not merely directory or permissive.
TENANT: A person who has entered into an oral or written lease with a landlord whereby the person is the lessee under the lease, or otherwise entitled to
possession of the property whether or not payment is provided for the tenancy.
VILLAGE: The village of Glendale Heights, DuPage County, Illinois.
VILLAGE CODE: The village code of ordinances of the village of Glendale Heights, from time to time in effect, including all codes adopted by specific
reference. (Ord. 2016-54, 10-6-2016)
5-2-2: VIOLATION:
A. Chronic nuisance property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit property within the village to become or remain a chronic nuisance property in violation of this
chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for any landlord(s), manager(s) or person(s) in charge, or tenant in possession to:
1. Encourage, aid, abet or permit a property to become a chronic nuisance property; or
2. Allow a property to continue as a chronic nuisance property after receipt of notice to abate the nuisance activity.
D. Each day that a violation of this section continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
E. The owner(s), manager(s) or other persons in charge of the property, or tenant(s) in possession thereof may raise any affirmative defense delineated in
section 5-2-8 of this chapter.
F. This chapter is not intended to deter those persons in need of police, fire, paramedic or other public services from calling for those services. (Ord. 2016-
54, 10-6-2016)
5-2-3: COMPLAINTS OF NUISANCE ACTIVITY; REVIEW:
Whenever the chief of police of the village receives any combination of three (3) or more police reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activity,
as set forth in section 5-2-1, definition of "nuisance activities", subsections A through T of this chapter, or community development department reports
documenting the occurrence of nuisance activity, as provided in section 5-2-1, definition of "nuisances activities", subsection U of this chapter, within a six
(6) month period, on or within a property, the chief of police, or his/her designee, shall independently review such reports and any other relevant facts or
evidence to determine whether nuisance activity or other prohibited conduct, as provided in section 5-2-1, definition of "nuisance activities" of this chapter,
has occurred at or on the property in question. Upon a determination by the chief of police, or his/her designee, that the complained of activity(ies) has
occurred, the chief of police may initiate those procedures for addressing chronic nuisance property, as detailed in section 5-2-4 of this chapter. (Ord.
2016-54, 10-6-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 140/618
5-2-4: PROCEDURE FOR ADDRESSING POTENTIAL CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY:
A. Following the independent review, as set forth in section 5-2-3 of this chapter, if the chief of police or his designee concludes that the nuisance activities
have occurred, the chief of police shall notify the owner(s), manager(s), person(s) in charge, and, in the event, the property is leased property, the
tenant, in writing that the property in question is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance property. Such notice shall be provided by either personal
delivery, first class mail postage prepaid or by certified mail return receipt requested. If service is by regular or certified mail, service shall be deemed
complete three (3) days after mailing. In the event the property is a single-family dwelling rental, notice shall be served upon the landlord or manager at
the address provided in the license application provided by section 10-14A-3 of this code or, if a multiple-family dwelling, section 10-14B-3 of this code.
(Ord. 2016-54, 10-6-2016; amd. Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
The notice shall contain substantially the following information:
1. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the potential nuisance property.
2. A statement that the chief of police has information that the property may be a "chronic nuisance property" or a potential "chronic nuisance property"
as defined by this chapter, with a concise description of the criminal activity(ies) or nuisance activity(ies) that may exist, or that has occurred and why
the chief of police believes the property may be determined to be a chronic nuisance property or a potential chronic nuisance property.
3. A statement that the owner, manager(s) or person(s) in charge and, in the event the property is a leased property, the tenant(s) or other designee
may, within five (5) days of issuance of the notice, respond and request a meeting with the chief of police or his designee.
4. That the owner(s), manager(s) or other persons in charge of the property, and/or tenant(s) in possession thereof may raise any affirmative defense
delineated in section 5-2-8 of this chapter.
5. This section is not intended to deter those persons in need of police, fire or paramedic services from calling for those services.
B. At the meeting between the chief of police or his/her designee and the parties notified, the chief of police may request that the owner, manager(s),
person(s) in charge or his or her or its tenant(s), in the case of rental property, implement a reasonable abatement plan designed to alleviate and
prevent future occurrences of criminal activity or nuisance activity upon the property. The mitigation or abatement plan shall be in writing and shall be
reasonable under the circumstances in its objective, cost and scope, and shall be implemented within thirty (30) days of the meeting with the chief of
police or such longer period if not practically feasible to do so within thirty (30) days. The chief of police shall, within ten (10) days after the conclusion
of the meeting, make written findings of fact and conclusions, with respect to the complaints received and reviewed, and the proposed remedial action
to be taken by the owner(s), manager(s), or other person(s) in charge or in possession of the property, as recommended by the chief of police. Such
report shall note whether such remedial action was consented to by the parties attending such meeting.
If the criminal activity or nuisance activity complained of has or is being committed, facilitated or permitted by a tenant leasing the property, and such
activity is a violation of the material terms of a lease agreement, and if the owner, manager(s), or person(s) in charge commences an action for
eviction, in good faith, the village may reasonably assist in the eviction action by cooperating with the owner, manager(s) or person(s) in charge of the
property, including, but not limited to, providing law enforcement officers or other municipal employees as witnesses regarding the nuisance activity if
relevant.
1. Under the crime prevention partnership lease addendum, the owner or owner's agent must generally advise prospective tenants of the crime
prevention partnership program, and have a signed lease for the rental of the property which identifies all tenants eighteen (18) years of age or older;
include a provision in the lease requiring written notice of any guests who will be temporarily residing at the rental property more than seven (7)
consecutive days; and inform each tenant in writing of the maximum occupancy restrictions for the property; and have all adult tenants sign the crime
prevention partnership lease addendum. Upon request of a police or code enforcement official, it shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner or
owner's agent to fail to provide a copy of the signed crime prevention partnership lease addendum.
2. The crime prevention partnership lease addendum shall provide in words and phrases, similar to those delineated below, that the tenant, any
member of the tenant's household, any guest or any other person or persons associated with the tenant or his or her household:
a. Shall not engage in any criminal activity or violation of municipal codes or ordinances or any other violations of local, state or federal law on or
near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances;
b. Shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate any violation of local municipal ordinances or codes or any other violations as defined by local,
state or federal law and/or obstruction or resistance of law enforcement efforts against criminal activity on or near the rental unit, common areas or
appurtenances;
c. Shall not permit on or near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances to be used for or to facilitate any violations of local municipal
ordinances or codes or any other violation of local, state or federal law;
d. Should the tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest or any other person or persons associated with the tenant, or his/her
household, violate any provisions stated herein on or near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenance, such a violation shall constitute a
material noncompliance with the lease and shall further constitute grounds for termination of tenancy and eviction;
e. That the owner(s), manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the property, and/or tenant(s) in possession thereof may raise any affirmative
defense delineated in section 5-2-8 of this chapter;
f. This section is not intended to deter those persons in need of police, fire or paramedic services from calling for those services.
C. If, after complying with the procedures of subsection B of this section and within six (6) months from the date of the first confirmed case of criminal
activity or nuisance activity after the meeting, the chief of police receives a report documenting the occurrence of a fourth or subsequent instance of
criminal activity or nuisance activity upon the property, the property may be declared a chronic nuisance property.
D. It shall be a violation of this chapter for:
1. The owner, manager(s), person(s) in charge of the property in question to fail to implement, within sixty (60) days of the meeting with the chief of
police or such other reasonable amount of time under the circumstances, a reasonable mitigation or abatement plan, as requested by the chief of
police.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 141/618
E. When any party affected by this chapter responds to and meets with the chief of police, as set forth in subsection B of this section, no statements made
by that person in the meeting with the chief of police shall constitute an admission or be used in any judicial or quasi-judicial proceeding as an
admission that any nuisance activity has or is occurring at or on the property. This subsection E shall not require the exclusion of any other evidence,
otherwise admissible and offered for a purpose other than an admission against interest by that person making the statement. (Ord. 2016-54, 10-6-
2016)
5-2-5: ABATEMENT; ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
A. The village may commence an action before the village's administrative hearing officer for a determination that the property is a chronic nuisance
property pursuant to section 5-2-4 of this chapter. At any hearing before the village administrative hearing officer to determine whether the property in
question is a chronic nuisance property, which hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions and procedures of title 1, chapter 4, article A of
this code, the village shall have the initial burden of proof to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the property in question is a chronic
nuisance property. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to owner(s), manager(s), person(s) in charge, and, in the event, the property is leased
property, the tenants who may be adversely affected by a decision declaring the property a chronic nuisance property.
The village's representative shall present evidence in support of its claim that the property is a chronic nuisance property. The landlord(s), manager(s)
or tenant(s) in possession, if a leased property, or person(s) in charge or that person's representative or attorney on behalf of the responding party shall
be permitted to rebut such evidence.
No continuances shall be authorized by the administrative hearing officer in proceedings under this chapter unless for good cause shown or except
where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of any party to the proceeding. Lack of preparedness shall not be grounds for a
continuance.
The administrative hearing officer may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of
evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence including police reports shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by
reasonable, prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs or is otherwise admissible under the administrative adjudication code of the village.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing,
whether or not a violation(s) exists or existed and whether or not the property is a chronic nuisance property. The determination shall be in writing and
shall be designated as the findings, decision, and order. The administrative hearing officer's decision shall be final and binding, except that the
provisions of the Illinois administrative review law shall apply with respect to judicial review of the administrative hearing officer's findings, decision and
order. The findings, decision, and order shall include the administrative hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or not a violation(s) exists, a
determination as to whether the property in question is or is not a chronic nuisance property based upon the findings of fact, and any monetary fine or
other appropriate sanction imposed against the person(s) in charge/manager(s)/owner(s)/tenant(s) or occupant(s), as specified in subsection B of this
section, or dismissing the case in the event a violation is not proved. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served upon the person in
charge, owner, or tenant or occupant, within fourteen (14) business days of the date of the hearing.
B. If the administrative hearing officer makes a finding that a property was, or is, a chronic nuisance property, the administrative hearing officer may fine
the party(ies) responsible for the violation, for each violation of this chapter. Each day a nuisance activity occurs or continues shall be considered a
separate and distinct violation for purposes of determining a property to be a chronic nuisance property. The administrative hearing officer may, in his or
her discretion, impose such a fine for each day the nuisance activity goes unabated. No person shall be found in violation of this section unless the
village proves the violation by a preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. 2016-54, 10-6-2016)
5-2-6: ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT:
A. Nuisance Abatement: The village, as an alternative to administrative adjudication, may commence an action in the circuit court of DuPage County for a
determination that the property is a chronic nuisance property and/or to abate the chronic nuisance.
Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged chronic nuisance property exists, the court may, without notice or bond, enter
a temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction or permanent injunction to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such chronic nuisance
property and may enter an order restraining any defendant named from occupying, using or interfering with all property used in connection with the
chronic nuisance property.
B. Commencement Of Action, Burden Of Proof:
1. In an action seeking closure of a chronic nuisance property, the village shall have the initial burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence
that the property is a chronic nuisance property.
2. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty or other relief requested, the court may consider any of the following factors, if they are found
appropriate, and shall cite those found applicable:
a. The actions or lack of action taken by the owner or person(s) in charge to mitigate or correct the nuisance activity at the property;
b. Whether the criminal activity or nuisance activity at the property was repeated or continuous;
c. The magnitude or gravity of the criminal activity or nuisance activity at the property;
d. The cooperation of the owner or person(s) in charge of the property with the village to correct the offending condition or abate the nuisance;
e. Whether the owner or property manager, in the event of rental or leased property, has required the tenant(s) to sign a "crime prevention
partnership lease addendum";
f. Whether the landlord(s) or property manager, in the event of rental or leased property, have reviewed and verified that they understand the "Village
Crime Prevention Partnership Manual"; and
g. The cost to the village of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 142/618
C. Remedy:
1. In the event a court determines a property to be a chronic nuisance property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against all
use and occupancy for a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not more than one hundred eighty (180) days or until the nuisance activity(ies) or
violation(s) complained of is abated. In addition, the court may employ any other remedy deemed by it appropriate to permanently abate the
nuisance, including the entry of a permanent injunction enjoining any tenants, cotenants, and/or occupants responsible or partially responsible for the
property becoming a chronic nuisance property from future use, occupancy of or presence at or upon the property.
2. In addition to the remedy provided in subsection A of this section, the court may impose upon the owner(s), manager(s), person(s) in charge and/or
tenant(s) or occupant(s) of the property in question a civil penalty payable to the village of Glendale Heights, for each day the owner(s), person(s) in
charge and/or tenant(s) or occupant(s) had actual knowledge that the property was a chronic nuisance property and permitted the property to remain
a chronic nuisance property.
3. In determining what remedy or remedies to employ, the court may consider evidence of other conduct, which has occurred on the property, including,
but not limited to:
a. The disturbance of neighbors;
b. The occurrence of other criminal activity or nuisance activity at, on or from the property;
c. The property's general reputation for criminal or nuisance activity and/or the reputation of persons residing at or frequenting the property;
d. Physical damage to the property in question or surrounding properties;
e. Any hazard posed to any occupant of the property or adjoining property occupant or owner resulting from the physical condition of the property in
question or its structures.
D. Physical Securing Of Property: The court may authorize the village to physically secure the property against use or occupancy in the event the owner or
person in charge of the property fails to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event that the village is authorized to secure the property, all
costs reasonably incurred by the village to effect the closure shall be made and assessed as a lien against the property and shall be a debt due and
owing the village. As used herein, "costs" mean those costs actually incurred by the village for the physical securing of the property.
E. Statement Of Costs: The village community development department employee effecting the closure shall prepare a statement of costs incurred, and
the village shall thereafter submit said statement to the court for its review. If no objection of the statement is made within the period described by the
court, a lien in said amount shall be recorded against the property.
F. Liability For Payment: Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof
to the village.
G. Obligation To Pay Rent: The entry of such an order or injunction against a tenant shall not constitute a defense to nor an excuse of the obligation to pay
rent by such tenant during the effective period of such order or injunction. (Ord. 2016-54, 10-6-2016)
5-2-7: CHRONIC NUISANCE LOCATED AT MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
A. In the event any chronic nuisance property is a multi-family dwelling rental residential property, any order entered by the court to abate the nuisance or
otherwise vacate the property shall, in the discretion of the court, be limited in scope as to apply only to the individual rental unit or person(s) in charge
or tenant(s) or occupant(s) of that unit forming the basis for a finding that the property is a chronic nuisance property. (Ord. 2016-54, 10-6-2016)
5-2-8: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES:
A. Tenants and landlords shall not be penalized under this chapter based on:
1. Contact made to police or other emergency services, if: a) the contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence, or
sexual violence; b) the intervention or emergency assistance was needed to respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or c) the
contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with a disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that individual's
disability;
2. An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence or sexual violence against a tenant, household member, or guest occurring in the
dwelling unit or on the premises; or
3. Nuisance activities occurring in the dwelling unit or on the premises that is directly relating to domestic violence, dating violence, sexual violence,
engaged in by a member of a tenant's or lessee's household or any guest or other person under the tenant's, lessee's or household member's
control, and against the tenant, lessee, or household member.
4. It shall be an affirmative defense by the landlord of rental or leased property to an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance property that the
owner of the property, manager(s) or person(s) in charge, at the time in question, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence,
determine that the property had become a chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control
the conduct of tenants or others in possession leading to the findings that the property is a chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the
exercise of reasonable care and diligence, obtain an order for possession of the property, pursuant to the provisions of the forcible entry and detainer
act3.
B. Nothing with respect to this section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 143/618
1. Limits enforcement of 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 750/15.2 against any person calling the number "911" for the purpose of making a false alarm or
complaint and reporting false information, from being charged with disorderly conduct as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1 or section
6-6A-3 of this code; or
2. Prohibits claims made pursuant to 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-101 et seq., of the forcible entry and detainer statute, except where the tenant,
lessee, or household member who was the victim of domestic violence, sexual violence, stalking, or dating violence did not knowingly consent to the
barred person entering the premises or a valid court order permitted the barred person's entry onto the premises; or
3. Prohibits the village from enacting or enforcing ordinances to impose penalties on the basis of the underlying criminal activity or local ordinance
violation not covered by subsection A of this section and to the extent otherwise permitted by existing state and federal law; or
4. Shall prevent the landlord or village from seeking possession solely against a tenant, household member, or lessee of the premises who perpetrated
the domestic violence, sexual violence, or other criminal activity; or
5. Shall prevent the landlord or village from seeking possession against a tenant, lessee or household member who is a victim of domestic violence,
dating violence, and stalking, sexual violence or has a disability, if that tenant, lessee, or household member has committed the nuisance activity on
which the demand for possession is based.
C. A landlord shall have the power to bar the presence of a person from the premises owned by the landlord who is not a tenant or lessee or who is not a
member of the tenant's or lessee's household. A landlord bars a person from the premises by providing written notice to the tenant or lessee that the
person is no longer allowed on the premises. That notice shall state that if the tenant invites the barred person onto any portion of the premises, then
the landlord may treat this as a breach of the lease, whether or not this provision is contained in the lease. Subject to subsection B2 of this section, the
landlord may evict the tenant.
D. Further, a landlord may give notice to a person that the person is barred from the premises owned by the landlord. A person has received notice from
the landlord within the meaning of this subsection if he has been notified personally, either orally or in writing including a valid court order of protection,
as defined by subsection (7) of 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/112A-3(7) of the code of criminal procedure of 1963, granting exclusive possession as
the remedy (2) of subsection (b) of 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/112A-14(b) of that code, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has
been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof. Any person entering the landlord's premises
after such notice has been given shall be guilty of criminal trespass to real property as set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-3 of the criminal
code of 2012, or section 6-6B-1 of this code; or
After notice has been given, an invitation to the person to enter the premises shall be void if made by a tenant, lessee, or member of the tenant's or
lessees' household and shall not constitute a valid invitation to come upon the premises or a defense to a criminal trespass to real property. (Ord. 2016-
54, 10-6-2016)
5-2-9: BACKGROUND CHECKS:
Owners, managers, and/or leasing agents shall not be required to perform or require lessees to submit to criminal background checks. It is, however,
recommended that if prospective lessees of rental residential property are required to submit to criminal background checks, that credit checks, and
checks for past evictions prior to entering into a lease agreement should also be investigated. The decision whether or not to lease to a tenant should not
be based solely on the fact that the prospective tenant has an arrest record, without further inquiry as to whether or not the arrest record actually reflects
that person's conduct. Other factors to consider from a prospective tenant's arrest record, when deciding to lease to him or her, is how old, minor, or
irrelevant the records might be to the person's current ability to be a good tenant. Landlords should not impose strict bans on prospective tenants on the
basis of the fact that they have a criminal background without making an individualized assessment of the circumstances surrounding the offenses on the
person's record and giving the person an opportunity to explain. (Ord. 2016-54, 10-6-2016)
5-2-10: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, if found to be guilty of such
violation. If any violation shall be of a continuing nature, each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense and shall subject the violator to the
progressive minimum fines contained herein. (Ord. 2016-54, 10-6-2016)
Chapter 3
SOLID WASTE
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
CUSTOMER: Any single-family unit or other premises receiving service from a waste disposal contractor or firm.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The director of public works of the village or his designee, or such other officer as may be designated from time to time
by the village president.
DUMPING: Placing or disposing of any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste or litter which is not properly contained in appropriate trash bins or
dumpsters.
GARBAGE: Any rejected or waste household food, offal, swill or carrion and every accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the
preparation, use, cooking and dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables, and any other matter of any nature which is subject to decay,
putrefaction and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odor, or which, during or after decay, may serve as a breeding or feeding material for
rodents, flies or other germ carrying insects or animals.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 144/618
PREMISES: Any house, residence, building, flat, apartment dwelling place or place of abode, commercial or industrial establishment, hotel, church,
school, hospital, club building or meeting hall.
WASTE: Includes, but shall not be limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, mud, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging construction material, motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, appliances, household
furnishings, household fixtures, trees, tree branches, tree roots, tree trunks, brush, shrubs, plant stalks, plant and tree leaves, refuse, ashes, tin cans, dead
animals or parts thereof, any nauseous or offensive matter of any kind, or any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard.
WASTE CONTAINER: A container with a close fitting cover of galvanized iron or noncorrodible metal, or other material which is rodentproof and flyproof,
nonabsorbent, durable and leakproof, of the type commonly sold as a garbage can, of a suitable gauge and construction to ensure durability, with suitable
handles on the can and lid, and of a capacity of not less than ten (10) gallons and not more than thirty two (32) gallons. However, containers may exceed
thirty two (32) gallons but not more than ninety (90) gallons if the container is supplied by the village's franchised waste hauler.
WASTE DISPOSAL CONTRACTOR: Any person with whom the village has contracted for the removal of waste from within the village. (1978 Code § 9-2-
1-1; amd. Ord. 96-38, 5-2-1996; Ord. 99-16, 3-8-1999; 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
5-3-2: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL:
A. Whenever directed by any provision of this chapter, the village director of public works or his designee shall carry out such directions and perform such
duties as may be provided thereby, unless the village president shall designate some other officer to perform such duties.
B. All matters relating to or affecting the accumulation, collection, removal or disposal of waste, unless otherwise specifically assigned, shall be subject to
the supervision of the director of public works or his designee. (1978 Code § 9-2-1-2; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
5-3-3: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF WASTE PRODUCTION AND ACCUMULATION:
The occupancy of any premises for residential purposes shall be prima facie evidence that waste is being produced and accumulated in such premises.
(1978 Code § 9-2-1-3)
5-3-4: PROHIBITED ACCUMULATIONS AND DEPOSITS OF WASTE:
A. Prohibitions Enumerated:
1. No person shall permit any waste to accumulate within the village unless the same shall be suitably enclosed in covered waste containers, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. No person shall permit the accumulation of discarded household furniture, furnishings, fixtures, appliances or
parts thereof or dead animals, trees, tree branches, tree roots, tree trunks, brush, shrubs, grass clippings, plant stalks or leaves. All such waste shall
be removed from the premises, and every person shall keep his premises at all times free and clean from the same.
2. It shall be unlawful to dispose of or place any waste or other material in any street or other public place in the village. (1978 Code § 9-2-1-4)
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited upon public or private property within the village, or in any area under
the jurisdiction of the village, any garbage or other objectionable waste. (1978 Code § 9-2-1-4; amd. 2011 Code)
4. No person shall dump or otherwise dispose of any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste or litter in violation of state law or the provisions of this
code. (Ord. 96-38, 5-2-1996)
B. Violation; Penalty: Any property owner permitting any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste or litter not properly contained in appropriate trash bins or
dumpsters to remain on the property owner's premises for a period of twenty four (24) hours shall be guilty of a petty offense and fined as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 96-38, 5-2-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Removal By Village; Costs:
1. In the event the materials are not properly disposed of and removed from the premises within seventy two (72) hours, the village may, in its
discretion, remove said debris. The cost of the debris removal shall be chargeable to the property owner. (Ord. 96-38, 5-2-1996)
2. The village may remove or provide for the removal of garbage and waste or debris from private property when the owner of such property, after
reasonable notice, refuses or neglects to remove such garbage and waste as provided in this chapter, and may collect from such owner the
reasonable cost thereof. This cost shall be a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all subsequent liens and encumbrances, except tax liens,
if, within sixty (60) days after such cost and expense is incurred, the village, or the person performing the removal service by authority of the village,
in his or its own name, files notice of lien in the office of the county recorder of deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: a) a
description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof; b) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for
the removal service; and c) the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the village. However, the village lien shall not be valid as
to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to removal of the garbage, waste or debris and prior to the filing of
such notice, and the said lien of the village shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to such real
estate arise prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in such property, after
notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release may be filed of
record as in the case of filing notice of lien. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanics' liens.
Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within two (2) years after the date of filing notice of lien. (1978 Code § 9-2-2-8; amd. 2011 Code)
5-3-5: REFUSE CARRIED BY THE ELEMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the village any garbage or refuse in such a manner that the same may
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 145/618
be carried or deposited by action of the wind, rain or snow into or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any private
premises within the village. (1978 Code § 9-2-1-4; amd. 2011 Code)
5-3-6: BURNING WASTE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any garbage, refuse, waste or other substance within the village unless specifically authorized by the provisions
of this code. (1978 Code § 9-2-1-4)
5-3-7: DISPOSAL WITHIN BUILDINGS:
Garbage and other combustible wastes may be disposed of within the building wherein it is accumulated or within a closed building accessory thereto
situated on the same premises by complete incineration of such garbage or waste in such a manner as to create no noxious odors, smoke or other
nuisance, or by grinding or by shredding such waste finely and disposing of it through pipes leading to a public sanitary sewer; provided, however, that all
garbage or combustible matter so disposed of in such pipes shall have been ground or shredded to such a degree that all particles are carried freely under
the flow conditions normally prevailing in the sewers into which the same is deposited. No garbage or other combustible wastes shall be disposed of in
violation of the provisions of this code relating to fire prevention and sewage disposal. (1978 Code § 9-2-1-5)
5-3-8: TRANSPORTATION OF WASTE:
A. Covered Loads: No person shall transport waste, or cause waste to be transported, over the streets or other public ways of the village unless such
waste is entirely and securely covered. (1978 Code § 9-2-1-6)
B. Required Type Of Vehicle: Garbage shall not be transported over or along the streets of the village or other public property except in a leakproof,
compaction type body commonly referred to as a "packer type" refuse body, approved by the village director of public works or his designee. (1978
Code § 9-2-1-6; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
C. Cleanliness And Maintenance Of Vehicles: Vehicles and equipment used to transport waste shall be cleaned at sufficient intervals to prevent any
nuisance or insect breeding and shall be maintained in good condition and repair. (1978 Code § 9-2-1-6)
D. Storage Of Vehicles: Such vehicles may be stored or kept, when not in use, in a tightly constructed and closed building or shed within the village, if such
building or structure conforms with the requirements of the village zoning ordinance, or in open storage areas subject to the approval of the director of
public works or his designee. (1978 Code § 9-2-1-6; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
E. Spilled Loads: Waste disposal contractors shall immediately clean up, in a neat and workmanlike manner, any refuse that they may have spilled on
private premises, parkways, streets, alleys or other public places. (1978 Code § 9-2-1-6)
5-3-9: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
A. Containers Required: Every person in possession of any premises in the village shall provide, and at all times maintain in good order and repair, a
sufficient number of waste containers for a weekly accumulation of normal waste. (1978 Code § 9-2-2-2)
B. Specifications And Conditions Generally: All waste containers shall meet the requirements set out under the definition of same in section 5-3-1 of this
chapter, and no other type of container shall be acceptable. Filthy, leaking or defective receptacles shall be cleaned, repaired or replaced by the person
in possession of the premises served, and at his expense, as directed by the director of public works or his designee. All containers shall be kept clean
and disinfected with an effective antiseptic solution as often as is necessary to maintain them in a sanitary condition. Evidence of neglect of the
requirements of this subsection shall be determined by the director of public works or his designee. (1978 Code § 9-2-2-4; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-
15, 3-20-2014)
C. Institutional, Commercial And Industrial Containers And Racks:
1. Waste Containers: Institutional, commercial and industrial waste containers not mounted on wheels shall be stored on durable racks, placed on an
easily cleanable impervious surface. The racks shall raise the waste containers at least twelve inches (12") off the storage surface. Containers
mounted on wheels shall be specifically designed for use with collection vehicles. The wheels of the containers must elevate the base of the
container a distance of at least six inches (6") off the storage surface. Storage floors must have an impervious, easily cleanable surface. (Ord. 96-38,
5-2-1996)
2. Waste Enclosures:
a. All outside trash bins and dumpsters must be enclosed by a waste enclosure. All waste enclosures must be at least six feet (6') in height and
conceal trash from public view. Additionally, all enclosures, with the exception of those on multi-family residential properties, must have four (4)
sides and have a gate that latches closed. Multi-family residential enclosures may be enclosed on three (3) sides. (Ord. 2008-13, 2-7-2008)
b. Following the effective date hereof, there shall be a two (2) month grace period for business owners having outside storage of trash bins and
dumpsters to erect the appropriate fence enclosure. Business owners shall be required to apply for an appropriate building permit; however, during
the two (2) month grace period, business owners shall not be required to pay a fee for the building permit. All fence enclosures shall be inspected
by the village community development department. (Ord. 96-38, 5-2-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
c. Business owners having outside storage of trash bins and dumpsters who fail to construct the required fence enclosures within the two (2) month
grace period shall be fined as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 146/618
Failure To Construct
Fence Enclosure Within Fine Amount
By end of 2 month grace period Not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00, and its business license shall be revoked for a period of 3
days
3 months following the effective date
hereof
Not less than $500.00 nor more than $750.00, and its business license shall be revoked for a period of 1
week
4 months following the effective date
hereof
Not less than $750.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and its business license shall be revoked for a period of
2 weeks
Further failure to comply shall result in a forfeiture of its business license
3. Waste To Be Covered: All outside trash bins and dumpsters must be covered at all times. Any trash that is too large to fit inside the trash bin or
dumpster must be stacked inside the trash enclosure. (Ord. 96-38, 5-2-1996)
4. Pallet Storage: Any outside storage of pallets must be as follows: Pallets must be stacked vertically, no higher than nine feet (9'). Any property owner
permitting pallets to remain improperly stacked on the property owner's premises for a period of twenty four (24) hours shall be guilty of a petty
offense and fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 96-38, 5-2-1996; amd. 2011
Code)
D. Use Of Containers Required: Every person in possession of any premises in the village shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, cause to be
deposited in waste containers all waste produced in or on such premises as soon as practicable after the same is produced. (1978 Code § 9-2-2-3)
E. Placement, Removal And Storage:
1. Placement For Collection: All waste containers and receptacles shall be placed in the parkway area in front of the premises at or near the curb as
follows:
a. November 1 through March 31: No earlier than four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on the day preceding the day when such waste is to be collected.
b. April 1 through October 31: No earlier than six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on the day preceding the day when such waste is to be collected. (Ord. 2007-34,
3-22-2007)
2. Removal After Collection: All waste containers and receptacles shall be removed from the parkway areas not later than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. the
day following collection. (Ord. 2000-78, 10-5-2000)
3. Storage Between Collections: At all times between collections, waste containers and receptacles shall be kept within each individual lot's lines, either
at the rear or side yard premises. (Ord. 98-63, 11-5-1998)
4. Placement On Public Ways Prohibited: No waste container or receptacle shall be placed in any street, parkway, alley or sidewalk of the village.
(1978 Code § 9-2-2-7)
F. Scavenging Through, Removal From Containers Prohibited; Exceptions:
1. No person shall scavenge, search through, or remove from a container or other receptacle located on any public street, alley, parkway, right of way,
or other public property any solid waste or recyclable materials which have been placed therein for collection.
2. Subsection F1 of this section shall not apply to village authorized and licensed solid waste collection activities, authorized members of any law
enforcement agency or to any members of the same household and their contractors or employees who place solid waste or recyclable materials in
a container or other receptacle on a public street, alley, parkway, right of way or other public property in the village. (Ord. 96-02, 1-4-1996)
5-3-10: PREPARATION OF WASTE FOR CONTAINERS:
It shall be the duty of every person in possession of any premises to cause all garbage produced on the premises to be thoroughly drained of all surplus
liquid, securely wrapped or bagged in paper or packed in a covered box or carton of such dimensions as will permit its free passage into and out of the
waste container. Materials of every character shall be securely wrapped or bound in such a manner as may be necessary to prevent the scattering of the
same. (1978 Code § 9-2-2-5)
5-3-11: UNSUITABLE WASTE FOR CONTAINERS:
All waste, except garbage, of a size or nature which renders it unsuitable for deposit in waste containers and of the size and number herein specified shall
be placed on the ground adjacent to the containers in neat and orderly bundles or stacks not to exceed seventy (70) pounds in weight. Leaves, grass
clippings and similar substances may be placed in plastic bags. (1978 Code § 9-2-2-6)
5-3-12: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL BY LICENSED COLLECTOR; EXCEPTION:
All waste shall be collected and disposed of by a waste disposal contractor duly licensed by the village, except building and other construction contractors
may remove waste resulting from the performance of work done by such contractors within the village. (1978 Code § 9-2-2-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 147/618
ARTICLE A. WASTE DISPOSAL CONTRACTORS
5-3A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall remove waste from any premises in the village or transport waste through the streets, alleys or public ways of the village or in any other
manner dispose of waste originating within the limits of the village, or contract for or permit himself to be employed or engaged for any such removal,
transportation or disposal, without first securing a license from the village for performing such waste disposal service. (1978 Code § 9-2-3-1)
5-3A-2: PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY:
Each application submitted pursuant to this article shall include financial statements and references as to the applicant's financial responsibility. (1978
Code § 9-2-3-2)
5-3A-3: TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWAL; LICENSE FEE:
Except as may be hereinafter provided, the license to be issued herein shall be for a term of one year, to expire on December 31, and to be subject to
renewal action by the contractor for each yearly term thereafter. The fee for such license required by this article shall be as provided in section 4-2-2 of this
code. (Ord. 2004-91, 11-18-2004; amd. 2011 Code)
5-3A-4: DENIAL OF LICENSE:
The village president and board of trustees reserve the right to deny any applicant a license required by this article if any reasonable doubt exists as to the
applicant's reasonable compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable provisions of this code. (1978 Code § 9-2-3-4)
5-3A-5: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Evidence of a license issued pursuant to this article shall be provided by the village and displayed on each motor vehicle of the licensee used in the village
in accordance with regulations promulgated by the village president. (1978 Code § 9-2-3-5)
5-3A-6: LIABILITY INSURANCE AND WORKERS' COMPENSATION COVERAGE:
Every person licensed under the provisions of this article shall provide workers' compensation coverage for his employees and shall carry public liability
insurance in the following amounts: (1978 Code § 9-2-3-6)
A. For injury or death of any one person: One million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
B. For injury or death of more than one person, for each occurrence: Two million dollars ($2,000,000.00).
C. For property damage: Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). (1978 Code § 9-2-3-6; amd. 2011 Code)
5-3A-7: AGREEMENTS WITH VILLAGE:
A. Rate Review By Village; Submission Of Financial Records: Every applicant for a license required by this article must agree to permit the village to
review his rate structure and to provide the village financial records and statements as may be required, for the purpose of establishing and maintaining
fair rates to each class of customer.
B. Furnish Required Service; Ability To Render Service: Every applicant for a license required by this article must agree to furnish residential, institutional,
commercial and industrial waste disposal service and must demonstrate that he has adequate and sufficient manpower, equipment and personnel and
financial ability to render such service to any customer requesting it and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Frequency Of Service: Every applicant for a license required by this article must agree to serve, not less than once each week, any resident of the
village requesting such service and paying the established fee. All institutional, commercial and industrial garbage shall be collected daily. (1978 Code
§ 9-2-3-7)
5-3A-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In the event a waste disposal firm licensed pursuant to this article violates any provision of any ordinance of the village applicable to such business, the
village shall have the right, in addition to enforcing any penalties provided therefor, to revoke the license of such waste disposal firm. (1978 Code § 9-2-3-
9)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 148/618
Chapter 4
WEED CONTROL
5-4-1: DEFINITION:
The term "noxious weeds", as used in this chapter, shall be held to include all rank vegetable growths which exhale unpleasant or noxious odors and high
and rank vegetable growths that may conceal filthy deposits. The term shall also include any plant that adds its influence in bringing on hay fever and all
plants declared by state law to come under the heading "weeds" and shall also include thistles of all kinds, cockleburs, yellow dock, Indian mallow,
jimsonweed, ragweed, sweet clover, wild mustard (including black mustard), burdock, smartweed, sow thistle, tumbleweed, poison ivy and milkweed and
all weeds and grass exceeding eight inches (8") in height. (Ord. 2013-36, 6-20-2013)
5-4-2: WEED CONTROL REGULATIONS:
A. Height: It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant, or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant,
having control over any parcel of real estate or any part thereto to permit any noxious weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers,
vegetable gardens or other ornamental plants to grow to a height exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere in the village; any such plants or weeds
exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance, except for a permitted naturally landscaped area.
B. Parkway: The owner and/or occupant of any premises abutting any public street, road or way shall maintain the area between the edge of pavement or
curb and their property line, commonly known as parkway, in a neat, clean and orderly condition and free of any weeds and grass or plants in excess of
the provisions above.
C. Vegetable Garden: Vegetable gardens shall be permitted in rear, side and corner yards. Vegetable gardens shall be prohibited in the front yard.
D. Exceptions: The forest preserve district will be exempt to the weed control provisions identified in this section. (Ord. 2013-36, 6-20-2013)
5-4-3: REMOVAL NOTIFICATION:
A. Removal Notice: It shall be the duty of the community development department or police department to serve or cause to be served a notice upon the
owner, lessee or occupant, or any such owner, lessee or occupant having control over any parcel of real estate or any part thereto of any premises on
which weeds or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this chapter in any of the following ways:
1. By first class mail, overnight or two (2) day commercial delivery service to the owner and/or occupant's last known address or if the respondent is a
business entity, at any address identified for its registered agent or at its principal place of business.
2. By personal service.
3. By posting said notice upon the property that is the site of the alleged violation(s), when the respondent is the owner or person in control of the
property.
4. By any other means permitted by law for service of civil summons.
B. Abatement Time Limit: The notice shall require the abatement of the nuisance within three (3) days.
C. Single Notice: Only one such notice shall be sent in a given calendar year. This notice shall be for the specific violation contained in said notice and
notice for any other subsequent violation(s) in that same calendar year.
D. Report On Compliance Or Noncompliance By Public Officials: Immediately upon the termination of the time allowed in any such notice for the
abatement of such nuisance, the community development or police department employee of the village who served such notice, or any other employee
who shall be assigned by the director of community development, shall investigate to determine whether or not such nuisance has been abated. (Ord.
2013-36, 6-20-2013)
5-4-4: ABATEMENT; LIEN PROVISIONS:
A. Summary Abatement: Whenever, in the opinion of one of the village officers designated in subsection 5-4-3A of this chapter, the maintenance or
continuation of a nuisance creates an imminent threat of serious injury to the persons or serious damage to personal or real property, and the
continuation of the nuisance poses a substantial threat of injury to persons or property, such officer shall proceed to abate such nuisance; provided
further that whenever the owner or occupant or person in possession or in charge or control of the real or personal property which has become a
nuisance is unknown or cannot readily be found, such officer may proceed to abate such nuisance without notice. Where the abatement of a nuisance
requires continuing acts by the corporate authorities beyond the initial summary abatement and any other additional emergency abatements, it shall
seek abatement of such nuisance on a permanent basis through judicial process as soon as reasonably practicable.
B. Abatement Lien: If the person served with an abatement notice does not abate the nuisance within three (3) days, the village may proceed to abate
such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement and such expense, including an administrative fee as determined from time to
time which shall be charged and paid by such owner or occupant. The cost of cutting and removing such weeds shall be a lien upon the real estate
affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances except tax liens; provided that within sixty (60) days after such cost and expense is incurred, the
village, or persons performing the service by authority of the village, files notice of lien in the office of the county recorder of deeds. The notice of lien
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 149/618
shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) the description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof; 2) the amount of money
representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service of cutting and removing such weeds; and 3) the date or dates when such cost or
expense was incurred by the village. The lien of the village shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in or to such real estate have arisen
subsequent to the weed cutting and prior to the filing of such notice, nor shall the lien of the village be valid to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or
other lienholder whose rights in and to such real estate arose prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment of the costs and expense by the owner or
person interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village or person in whose name the lien has
been filed, and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien.
C. Privately Contracted Service: In the event that the village must abate a violation for any vacant property per subsection B of this section, or has issued
multiple notices of violations in the previous year on any vacant property, the director of community development, or his designee, has the right, but not
the obligation, to require the property owner to retain services of a private contractor to maintain the height of all grass and weeds in compliance with
this section. Proof of said retention shall consist of a copy of a valid, signed contract between the owner and contractor indicating the mowing services
through the end of October of that year will be provided on a clearly defined schedule to prevent the height of any weeds or grass on the property from
exceeding the maximum allowable height specified in subsection 5-4-2A of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-36, 6-20-2013)
5-4-5: PRIVATE NATURALLY LANDSCAPED LOTS:
A. Private Naturally Landscaped Lot Defined: A "private naturally landscaped lot" is a privately owned lot which is naturally landscaped so as to exhibit the
deliberate and conscious decision to plant, cultivate and maintain those native or naturally occurring species identified as wildflower and prairie grasses
in commonly accepted publications including, "Plants Of The Chicago Region" by Floyd Swink and Gerold Wilhelm (1974), "Wildflowers On The
Tallgrass Prairie, The Upper Midwest" by Sylvan T. Runkel and Dean M. Roosa (1989), "Field Guide To North American Wildflowers, Eastern Region"
by the Audubon Society (1979) and "Native Illinois Herbs And Forbs" by Illinois department of conservation.
B. Permit Required: No person shall own or maintain a private naturally landscaped lot without first securing a natural landscaping permit from the
community development department. Permit applications shall include a site plan drawn to scale on a plat of survey, which contains the permanent
index number of the property, the location of the property lines, location of the plant materials, list of plant materials by common name, north arrow,
location of structures, fences and paved areas and all setbacks of plant materials.
C. Compliance With Permit: Compliance with the terms of this section shall be a condition of any natural landscaping permit. Permits may be amended
with the approval of the community development department.
D. Term: The term of natural landscaping permits shall be perpetual, unless terminated. The permit shall run with the land and be binding upon and ensure
to the benefit of the owner and its successors in title. Permits shall not be required annually after the first issuance unless a change is to be made.
E. Annual Cutting: Natural landscaping on private lots shall be mowed or cut to eighteen inches (18") or less at least once prior to June 1 of each calendar
year.
F. Setbacks: Natural landscaping on private lots shall not be located in the front yard. A corner side yard shall have a two foot (2') minimum setback. Rear
yards and side yards shall have a two foot (2') setback except where abutted by other naturally landscaped yards.
G. Enforcement: If an owner or one in control of a plot of ground used as a naturally landscaped lot violates any part of this section, the abatement
procedure set forth in this chapter shall be enforced. (Ord. 2013-36, 6-20-2013)
5-4-6: PENALTIES:
A. Until such time as all liens placed upon a piece of property by the village have been satisfied, the village shall not issue any type of permit to the owner
or owners of such property.
B. In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter, any person who violates any section of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed each day that any such violation of any provision of this
chapter shall continue. (Ord. 2013-36, 6-20-2013)
Chapter 5
DANGEROUS OR DISEASED TREES AND SHRUBS
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DANGEROUS TREE OR SHRUB: Any tree or shrub that may inflict injury or cause harm to persons, property or the health of the general public.
DISEASED TREE OR SHRUB: Any tree or shrub infected with Dutch elm disease, emerald ash borer, verticillium wilt, Dothiorella, oak wilt or other
injurious parasite, fungus or disease. (Ord. 2013-50, 9-5-2013)
5-5-2: DANGEROUS OR DISEASED TREES OR SHRUBS PROHIBITED; PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 150/618
No person shall knowingly permit any dangerous or diseased tree or shrub to remain on any lot or tract of land owned or controlled by such person, and
any such dangerous or diseased tree or shrub is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as hereinafter provided. (Ord.
2013-50, 9-5-2013)
5-5-3: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
The cost of removal of a dangerous or diseased tree or shrub by the village shall not be a lien upon the real estate affected unless a notice shall be
personally served or sent by registered mail to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year on the property;
such notice to be delivered or sent not less than thirty (30) days prior to the removal of the tree or shrub located thereon. The notice shall refer to and
contain the substance of this chapter and shall identify the property by common description and the tree or shrub affected. (Ord. 2013-50, 9-5-2013)
5-5-4: REMOVAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the village in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel on
such public place shall be trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease.
B. Any limb of a tree or shrub which has become likely to fall onto or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on
which such tree or shrub grows or stands.
C. Any tree on private property which has been found to be diseased or in such condition as to constitute a hazard to the persons, property, or health of
the adjacent property owners or of the village generally shall be removed by the owners of such private property. (Ord. 2013-50, 9-5-2013)
5-5-5: FAILURE TO REMOVE; REMOVAL BY VILLAGE:
If any person fails to remove any dangerous or diseased tree or shrub within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice so to do from the village administrator
directing such removal, the village may remove such tree or shrub at the expense of such person. (Ord. 2013-50, 9-5-2013)
5-5-6: LIEN PROVISIONS:
A. Costs A Lien; Notice Requirements: The cost of a dangerous or diseased tree or shrub removal by the village shall become a lien upon the real estate
affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens; provided, that notice has been given as hereinafter described; and further
provided, that within sixty (60) days after such cost and expense is incurred by the village, or person performing the service by authority of the village,
in his or its own name, files notice of lien in the office of the county recorder of deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out the
following:
1. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof.
2. The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for removal of the tree or shrub.
3. The date when such cost and expense was incurred by the village.
B. Effect Of Lien: The lien of the village shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the tree or
shrub removal and prior to the filing of the notice of lien, and the lien of the village shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other
lien or whose rights in and to such real estate arose prior to the filing of such notice.
C. Release Of Lien: Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the
lien shall be released by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing
notice of lien. (Ord. 2013-50, 9-5-2013)
5-5-7: RIGHT OF VILLAGE TO REMOVE FROM PUBLIC WAYS:
The village shall have the right to remove from any parkway or other village property any tree or shrub considered undesirable or dangerous to the public
welfare and safety. (Ord. 2013-50, 9-5-2013)
5-5-8: ADOPTION OF EMERALD ASH BORER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
The village has adopted and made a part hereof the emerald ash borer management plan, revised 2013. (Ord. 2013-50, 9-5-2013)
5-5-9: PENALTY:
In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter, any person who violates any section of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed each day that any such violation of any provision of this
chapter shall continue. (Ord. 2013-50, 9-5-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 151/618
Chapter 6
NOISE CONTROL
5-6-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The corporate authorities find that:
A. Section 11-5-2 of the Illinois municipal code1, grants specific authority to all municipal governments to control noise.
B. Section 11-60-2 of the Illinois municipal code2, provides that municipalities may define, prevent and abate nuisances.
C. Municipalities may adopt and enforce local ordinances in the environmental field concurrent with the state.
D. Excessive noise degrades the environment of the village to a degree which:
1. Is harmful and detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of its inhabitants;
2. Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and recreation and with the conduct and operation of business and industry; and
3. Causes nuisances.
E. Effective control and elimination of excessive noise and excessive vibration is essential to the furtherance of the health and welfare of the village
inhabitants and to the conduct of the normal pursuits of life, recreation, commerce and industrial activity. (Ord. 98-70, 12-3-1998)
5-6-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to:
A. Adopt and implement a program of noise control consistent with and complementary to the Illinois environmental protection act3, and to the extent that
any provision of this chapter does not meet the minimum standards established by the Illinois environmental protection act and the regulations
promulgated thereunder, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply and those minimum standards shall control.
B. Prevent excessive noise originating within the village and to limit, control and eliminate excessive noise in general from sources located within the
village. (Ord. 98-70, 12-3-1998)
5-6-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
CONSTRUCTION: Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, but excluding demolition, for or on public or
private rights of way, structures, utilities, or similar property.
DEMOLITION: Any dismantling or intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right of way surfaces, or similar property.
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage or loss which demands
immediate action.
EMERGENCY WORK: Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by
an emergency.
NOISE: Any sound which annoys or disturbs or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any sound which:
A. Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals;
B. Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
C. Endangers or injures personal or real property.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, or corporation.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY: The property line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one
person from that owned by another person.
RESIDENTIAL AREA: Single-family, two-family, and multi-family zoning district classifications.
SOUND: An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity, or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal or interval forces, that
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 152/618
cause compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such
sound, including duration, intensity, and frequency. (Ord. 98-70, 12-3-1998)
5-6-4: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
In addition to the specific prohibitions outlined in this chapter, no person shall unreasonably make, continue, or cause to be made, continued, or permitted,
any noise disturbance. This section shall not apply to noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or
public right of way for which a permit has been obtained. (Ord. 98-70, 12-3-1998)
5-6-5: SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS:
The following acts, conduct and conditions are hereby declared and defined to be nuisances, and when committed, performed or permitted to exist by any
person, firm, association or corporation within the territorial limits of the village, are hereby declared to be unlawful and prohibited:
A. Construction: It shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, or demolition work between
the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential real
property boundary, except for emergency work of public service utilities, public works projects, or by special variance. (Ord. 2004-90, 11-4-2004)
B. Emergency Signaling Devices:
1. It shall be unlawful to intentionally sound or permit the sounding outdoors of any fire or burglar alarm, siren, whistle, or similar stationary emergency
signaling device, except for emergency purposes or for testing, as provided in this subsection. Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device
shall occur at the same time of day each time such a test is performed, but not before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. or the
closing time of a commercial establishment, whichever shall occur later. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. In no case shall
such test time exceed sixty (60) seconds. Testing of the complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling device and
the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. In no case shall such
test exceed ten (10) minutes.
2. It shall be unlawful to sound or permit the sounding of an exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is
automatically terminated within two (2) minutes of activation or within a reasonable time after notification of activation.
3. It shall be unlawful to sound any horn or other auditory signaling device on or in any motor vehicle on any public right of way or public space, except
as a warning of its approach, danger or an emergency.
C. Loading And Unloading: It shall be unlawful to load, unload, open, close, or to do other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
dumpsters, garbage cans, or similar objects between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. in such a manner as to cause
a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. (Ord. 98-70, 12-3-1998)
5-6-6: INSPECTIONS:
Any village law enforcement officer, in addition to any other authority vested in him, has the power, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter and
inspect any dwelling, multi-family dwelling, building, structure or premises within the village as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter,
provided permission is obtained from the occupant or, in the case of unoccupied property, from the owner or his agent. If such permission is refused or is
otherwise unobtainable, a search warrant must be obtained upon the showing of probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter may exist before
such entry or inspection is made. (Ord. 98-70, 12-3-1998)
5-6-7: SPECIAL VARIANCES:
A. Authority: The community development director or his designated representative shall have the authority, consistent with this chapter, to recommend the
granting or denial of special variances.
B. Application For Variance; Notice: Any person seeking a special variance pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the community
development director or his designated representative. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound
or activity for which the special variance is sought into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the
community, or on other persons. Notice of an application for a special variance shall be given by the community development director or his
representative to the owners of property within one thousand feet (1,000') of the source of the sound or activity and who may be adversely affected by
the granting of the variance. Any individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the special variance may file statement with the
director or his representative containing any information to support his claim.
C. Grounds For Variance; Additional Information: In determining whether to recommend to grant or deny the application, the community development
director or his designated representative shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the community, and other persons of not granting the special
variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other
adverse impact of granting the special variance. Applicants for special variances and persons contesting special variances may be required to submit
such additional information as the community development director or his representative may reasonably require.
D. Recommendation; Grant Or Denial: The community development director shall, within ten (10) working days of receipt of the application and all
supporting documentation, forward his recommendation to the village board of trustees for its consideration. The village board of trustees shall grant or
deny the application and shall place in the minutes of its proceedings the decision and the reasons for denying or granting the special variance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 153/618
E. Notice Of Decision; Compliance With Conditions: The community development director shall notify the applicant of the decision of the village board of
trustees in writing. A special variance shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the
permitted activity. The special variance shall not become effective until all conditions are adhered to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any
conditions of the special variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it to those provisions of this chapter regulating the source of sound
or activity for which the special variance was granted.
F. Time Extensions: Application for extension of time limits specified in special variances or for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated
like applications for initial special variances.
G. Guidelines: The community development director or his designated representative may issue guidelines approved by village board of trustees defining
the procedures to be followed in applying for a special variance and the criteria to be considered in deciding whether or not to grant a special variance.
H. Stay Of Proceedings: Enforcement of this chapter shall be stayed as to any person filing an application for a special variance pursuant to this section,
until such time as the application is acted upon by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 98-70, 12-3-1998)
5-6-8: ABATEMENT ORDERS:
In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, any village law enforcement officer may issue an order requiring the immediate abatement of any source of sound in
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 98-70, 12-3-1998)
5-6-9: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Except where a person is acting in good faith to comply with an abatement order issued pursuant to this chapter, any violation shall be cause for a notice
of violation to be issued by any village law enforcement officer. (Ord. 98-70, 12-3-1998)
5-6-10: OTHER REMEDIES:
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for injury
or damage arising from any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 98-70, 12-3-1998)
5-6-11: EXEMPTIONS:
Provided, however, that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or for the performance of emergency work to protect the
health, safety or welfare of the public.
B. Organized governmental or school related programs, activities, or events, or parades or other public programs and activities. (Ord. 98-70, 12-3-1998)
5-6-12: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 98-70, 12-3-1998; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 7
SMOKING REGULATIONS
5-7-1: TITLE:
This chapter, including any regulations adopted hereunder, shall be hereafter known, cited, and referred to as the GLENDALE HEIGHTS SMOKING
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-3-2008, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2008)
5-7-2: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
A. The general assembly of the state of Illinois and the village board of Glendale Heights find that tobacco smoke is a harmful and dangerous carcinogen
to human beings and a hazard to public health. Secondhand tobacco smoke causes at least sixty five thousand (65,000) deaths each year from heart
disease and lung cancer according to the National Cancer Institute. Secondhand tobacco smoke causes heart disease, stroke, cancer, sudden infant
death syndrome, low birth weight in infants, asthma and exacerbation of asthma, bronchitis and pneumonia in children and adults. Secondhand
tobacco smoke is the third leading cause of preventable death in the United States. Illinois workers exposed to secondhand tobacco smoke are at
increased risk of premature death. An estimated two thousand nine hundred (2,900) Illinois citizens die each year from exposure to secondhand
tobacco smoke.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 154/618
B. The general assembly of the state of Illinois and the village board of Glendale Heights also find that the United States surgeon general's 2006 report
has determined that there is no risk free level of exposure to secondhand smoke; the scientific evidence that secondhand smoke causes serious
diseases, including lung cancer, heart disease, and respiratory illnesses such as bronchitis and asthma, is massive and conclusive; separating
smokers from nonsmokers, cleaning the air, and ventilating buildings cannot eliminate secondhand smoke exposure; smoke free workplace policies are
effective in reducing secondhand smoke exposure; and smoke free workplace policies do not have an adverse economic impact on the hospitality
industry.
C. The general assembly of the state of Illinois and the village board of Glendale Heights also find the environmental protection agency has determined
that secondhand smoke cannot be reduced to safe levels in businesses by high rates of ventilation. Air cleaners, which are capable only of filtering the
particulate matter and odors in smoke, do not eliminate the known toxins in secondhand smoke. The American Society Of Heating, Refrigerating And
Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) bases its ventilation standards on totally smoke free environments because it cannot determine a safe level of
exposure to secondhand smoke, which contains cancer causing chemicals, and ASHRAE acknowledges that technology does not exist that can
remove chemicals from the air that cause cancer. A June 30, 2005, ASHRAE position document on secondhand smoke concludes that, at present, the
only means of eliminating health risks associated with indoor exposure is to eliminate all smoking activities indoors. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-3-2008, eff.
retroactive to 1-1-2008)
5-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten
percent (10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises. "Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail
lounges, adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois department of public health.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or
her services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity, that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or partially enclosed with: a) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways; or
b) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and
corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller
rink, ice rink, bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic
competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or other events.
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the Illinois gaming board rules of the Illinois administrative code.
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purpose of gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purpose
of accruing business revenue.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for
the aged or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these
professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during
the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in
subsection 5-7-4E of this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where
smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference rooms and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A
private residence or home based business, unless used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult care, or other similar social service care on the
premises, is not a "place of employment".
PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: a) has been in active and continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to the effective date
hereof, whether incorporated or not; b) is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times; c)
is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain; and d) only sells
alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this definition, "private club" means an organization that is managed by a board of
directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or both, to govern its
activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 RSC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including, without limitation, a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment,
mobile home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar
public accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be considered a private residence.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or
in part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a
minimum distance, as set forth in subsection 5-7-4E of this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes
that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A "public place" does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to
provide licensed childcare, foster care, or other similar social service care on the premises. A "public place" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals,
restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances,
educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention
facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or
operated by the state or state subcontractor, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial institutions,
educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 155/618
areas, and no less than seventy five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar
public accommodations that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT: A. An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school
cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees; and
B. A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere.
"Restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants,
or herbs, and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other
products is merely incidental. "Retail tobacco store" does not include a tobacco department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any
establishment with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any
other lighted smoking equipment.
STATE AGENCY: Has the meaning formerly ascribed thereto in subsection (a) of section 3 of the Illinois purchasing act (now repealed).
UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT: Has the meaning ascribed thereto in section 1 of article VII of the Illinois constitution of 1970. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-3-2008,
eff. retroactive to 1-1-2008; amd. Ord. 2008-37, 6-12-2008)
5-7-4: NONSMOKING AREAS DESIGNATED:
A. No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of employment or within fifteen feet (15') of any entrance to a public place or place of
employment.
B. No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the state or a political subdivision of the state.
C. Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless specifically exempted by section 5-7-7 of this chapter.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is prohibited in any portion of the living quarters, including, but not limited to, sleeping
rooms, dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies, and hallways, of a building used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is owned and
operated or otherwise utilized by a public or private institution of higher education.
E. Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this chapter so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits,
open windows, and other means. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-3-2008, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2008)
5-7-5: AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE NONSMOKING AREAS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public
place or place of employment may designate a nonenclosed area of a public place or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where
smoking is also prohibited; provided, that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner
described in subsection 5-7-6A of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-3-2008, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2008)
5-7-6: SIGNS POSTED; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS:
A. Posting Of Signs:
1. "No Smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this
chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place.
2. Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign
clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.
B. Removal Of Ashtrays: All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or
other person having control of the area. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-3-2008, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2008)
5-7-7: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, smoking is allowed in the following areas:
A. Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a childcare, adult daycare, or other healthcare facility or any other home based business
open to the public.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 156/618
B. Retail tobacco stores, as defined in section 5-7-3 of this chapter, in operation prior to the effective date hereof. The retail tobacco store shall annually
file with the department by January 31 an affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar year that was derived from the
sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs, and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and related smoking accessories.
Any retail tobacco store that begins operation after the effective date hereof may only qualify for an exemption if located in a freestanding structure
occupied solely by the business, and smoke from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoke is prohibited.
C. Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and
have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking is permitted, and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing
home.
D. Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous, and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. No more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of
rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-3-2008, eff.
retroactive to 1-1-2008)
5-7-8: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES:
A. Enforcement Officials: The village police department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and may assess fines pursuant to subsection C of this
section.
B. Complaints: Any person may register a complaint with the village police department for a violation of this chapter. The department shall establish a
telephone number that a person may call to register a complaint under this subsection.
C. Violations; Fines:
1. A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who violates this chapter shall be fined pursuant to this subsection. Each day that a
violation occurs is a separate violation.
2. A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under this chapter shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense,
and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each subsequent offense. A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of
employment that violates this chapter shall be fined: a) two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation; b) five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
the second violation within one year after the first violation; and c) two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each additional violation within
one year after the first violation.
3. A fine imposed under this subsection shall be allocated as follows: One hundred percent (100%) of the fine shall be deposited into the general fund
of the village.
D. Injunctions: The village or any individual personally affected by repeated violations may institute, in a circuit court, any action to enjoin violations of this
chapter. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-3-2008, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2008)
5-7-9: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the exercise of any rights afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-3-2008, eff.
retroactive to 1-1-2008)
5-7-10: RULES; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
The village shall adopt rules adopted by the department which are necessary for the administration of this chapter and which are not less restrictive than
this chapter. If any rules adopted by the department are less restrictive than this chapter, and not just a supplement to this chapter, then the terms of this
chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 2008-02, 1-3-2008, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2008)
Chapter 8
ABANDONED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES
5-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is left at any place for such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably appear
to have been abandoned.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which has not moved in thirty (30) days, does not display a valid village of Glendale Heights vehicle sticker,
does not display a valid state registration plate, has flat tires and/or broken windows or lights, or is in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the
process of being stripped or dismantled. A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including bodywork; provided, that such work is
performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes.
PROPERTY: Any real property within the village which is not a street or highway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 157/618
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular traffic. (Ord. 2006-67, 11-16-2006)
5-8-2: ABANDONMENT, LEAVING VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
A. Abandoning Vehicles: No person shall abandon any vehicle within the village, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the village for
such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned.
B. Leaving Inoperable Vehicles On Streets: No person shall leave any partially dismantled, inoperable, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway
in the village. (1978 Code § 10-2-2)
5-8-3: NUISANCE DECLARED; NOTICE TO REMOVE:
Inoperable motor vehicles, as defined in section 5-8-1 of this chapter, whether on public or private property, are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and all
persons shall dispose of any such inoperable motor vehicles under their control upon receipt of written notice received from the village authorities or from
the chief of police, or any member of the police department designated by said chief of police, commanding the disposition of such inoperable motor
vehicles. (1978 Code § 10-2-3)
5-8-4: IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
The chief of police, or any member of the police department designated by the chief of police, is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle
left at any place within the village which reasonably appears to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or which reasonably appears to be lost,
stolen or unclaimed, or which is an "inoperable motor vehicle" as defined in section 5-8-1 of this chapter. (1978 Code § 10-2-4)
5-8-5: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
The procedure to be followed by the police department in regard to abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicles shall be in accordance with state law.
(1978 Code § 10-2-5)
Chapter 9
OUTSIDE STORAGE OF FIREWOOD
5-9-1: LOCATION:
A. In Yards: Outside storage of firewood in all residential districts is permitted in rear yards or side yards only, not closer than three feet (3') to any lot line
and completely off utility and drainage easements.
B. In Garages: Residential areas that have detached garages in the front yard may store firewood at the rear of the garage. (1978 Code § 9-2-1-4)
5-9-2: STACK REQUIREMENTS:
A. Generally: Firewood should be stacked in a neat and orderly fashion so as not to block drainage or harbor rodents and animals.
B. In Yards: Firewood stacks cannot exceed a maximum of four feet (4') in height, two feet (2') in width, and sixteen feet (16') in length.
C. In Garages: Firewood stacks cannot exceed a maximum of four feet (4') in height and two feet (2') in width and cannot extend beyond the outside
exterior walls of the garage. (1978 Code § 9-2-1-4)
Chapter 10
ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
5-10-1: COUNTY REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of establishing regulations and standards for the detection and elimination of illicit discharges into the storm
drainage system throughout the village, the "DuPage County illicit discharge detection and elimination ordinance" (the "county ordinance") adopted on May
26, 2009, as the illicit discharge detection and elimination ordinance of the village, as is fully set forth in appendix A of the ordinance codified herein, and
each and all of the regulations therein, including any and all amendments that may from time to time be adopted by the county. (Ord. 2010-03, 1-21-2010)
5-10-2: NOTICE OF ADOPTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 158/618
This chapter shall serve as notice that the village has chosen to be a "full participant", as provided in section 16-31(1) of the county ordinance, with the
county of DuPage for purpose of the enforcement of the county ordinance within the village's territorial jurisdiction. (Ord. 2010-03, 1-21-2010)
5-10-3: AMENDMENTS TO REGULATIONS:
The following deletions, modifications and amendments to the county ordinance shall be effective and applicable in the village:
Section 16-12 (Definitions) is amended by:
A. Deleting the definition of "committee" in its entirety and replacing it with the words "the stormwater oversight committee of the village".
(Ord. 2010-03, 1-21-2010)
B. Deleting the definition of "department" in its entirety and replacing it with the words "the village's department of public works".
C. Deleting the definition of "director" in its entirety and replacing it with the words "the village's director of public works".
(Ord. 2010-03, 1-21-2010; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
D. Adding the definition of "village" to the list of definitions: "Village. The village of Glendale Heights, Illinois".
Section 16-31 (Participating Communities) is amended by:
Deleting the word "department" in paragraphs 1b, 1c, and 1e and replacing it with the words "DuPage County stormwater management division".
Section 16-33 (Duties Of Director) is amended by:
Deleting the word "communities" in paragraph 3 and replacing it with the words "DuPage County stormwater management committee".
Section 16-34 (Representative Capacity) is amended by:
Deleting the word "county" and replacing it with the word "village".
Section 16-42 (Prohibitions Of Illicit Connections) is amended by:
Deleting the word "department" in the last sentence of paragraph 5 and replacing it with the words "DuPage County stormwater management
division".
Section 16-50 (Submission Of Notice Of Intent (NOI) To The Department) is amended by:
Deleting the word "department" in paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 and replacing it with the words "DuPage County stormwater management division".
Section 16-56 (Compliance Monitoring) is amended by:
Deleting the word "department" in paragraph 1b and replacing it with the words "DuPage County stormwater management division".
Section 16-62 (Notice To Correct Violations: Director May Take Action) is amended by:
Deleting the words "county of DuPage" in paragraph 2 and replacing them with the text "village of Glendale Heights".
Section 16-86 (Right Of Appeal) is amended by:
A. Deleting the words without substitution "stormwater committee of the DuPage County board" in paragraph 1 and replacing them with the word
"committee".
B. Deleting the text "county board" from paragraphs 3 and 4 and replacing it with the text "village board".
(Ord. 2010-03, 1-21-2010)
Title 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 159/618
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
6-1-1: CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a police department in and for the village, said police department to consist of the chief of police, who shall be ex officio village
marshal, a deputy chief of police, and such sergeants, patrol officers and other police officers, auxiliary police, and other employees as the village
president and board of trustees may determine to be necessary as provided in the annual budget for the village. There is also hereby established the
exempt rank of commander, the number of such commanders to be determined from time to time by the president and board of trustees as provided in
said annual budget. (Ord. 2006-45, 8-17-2006)
6-1-2: ORGANIZATION:
The police department shall be organized and shall function as provided by the rules and regulations and subject to the control of the village authorities
and as may be provided by ordinance and applicable provisions of state law. (1978 Code § 10-1-2)
6-1-3: APPOINTMENTS, PROMOTIONS AND DISCHARGES:
A. Appointments And Promotions: Appointments and promotions within the police department, other than to the office of chief of police or to the exempt
rank of deputy chief of police or commander, shall be made by the board of police commissioners in the manner provided by state law. All original
appointments, except those exempt ranks stated hereinabove, shall be for a probationary period of eighteen (18) months and can be terminated at any
time during such period without a hearing upon a report and recommendation by the chief of police that the applicant has been deemed to be
unqualified or unfit to serve as a police officer. (1978 Code § 10-1-3)
B. Discharges: No police officer shall be discharged from the police department except after a hearing on written charges before the board of police
commissioners as provided by law; provided, however, this shall not be construed as affecting the power of the village president and board of trustees
to appoint and remove the chief of police. (1978 Code § 10-1-5)
6-1-4: OATH OF OFFICE:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, each police officer of the village shall take and execute the proper oath of office. (Ord. 2006-45, 8-17-2006)
6-1-5: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Office Created: There is hereby created the office of chief of police.
B. Appointment; Term; Removal: The chief of police shall be appointed by the village president, by and with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees, and shall serve at their pleasure. He/she shall hold office for such a term as established by the board of trustees, but said term shall not
exceed the term of the village president in office at the time of the appointment as chief of police and thereafter until a successor is appointed and
qualified, during which said time he/she shall have the same rights, powers and duties as hereinafter provided for the chief of police. However, if no
chief of police is appointed and approved within sixty (60) days following the taking of office of the village president after an election, the incumbent
chief of police shall not continue in office, and that position shall be declared vacant until a successor is appointed and qualified. If the person
appointed chief of police was, at the time of such promotion, a member of the police department, then said individual shall retain his/her status and
rank while serving as chief and shall revert to such status and rank when said term as chief has ended.
C. Residency: The chief of police shall, within twelve (12) months of his/her appointment to that position, become a permanent, full time resident of the
village. The chief of police shall, for his/her entire tenure in that position with the village, remain a permanent, full time resident of the village.
D. General Powers And Duties: The chief of police shall be the chief executive officer of the police department. The chief of police shall be responsible for
the management and fiscal management of the police department, including the direction and control of operations and administration, subject to the
supervision of the village administrator. As such, he shall have the custody, care and control of the public property of the police department, all
firearms, and all fixed and mobile equipment assigned to the police department. The chief of police shall devote his whole time to the municipal affairs
of the village to preserve the peace, order, safety and cleanliness thereof, and to this end, he shall execute and enforce all village ordinances and all
orders of the president and board of trustees. In addition, the chief of police shall execute, or cause to be executed, all orders of the president and
board of trustees or village administrator so far as they relate to the preservation of public health, and shall be charged with the duty of protecting the
rights of persons and the protection of property in the village and of providing a proper police force at every conflagration or disaster. The chief of police
shall make rules and regulations as well as general orders and operating procedures governing the conduct of members and operations of the police
department. In addition, the chief of police shall designate one or more ordained ministers to serve as voluntary police chaplains, without pay, and he
shall define their duties.
E. Reports Required: The chief of police shall, prior to the first meeting of the village board of trustees in March of each year, make an annual report in
writing on the state of the police department with a detailed report of the transactions of the department for the preceding calendar year, with such
statistics and suggestions in regard to the requirements of the department as he may deem advisable. He shall also make reports of any matter
concerning the police department whenever requested by the village president or board of trustees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 160/618
F. Record Of Prisoners Kept: It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep a record of the names of all persons arrested or committed to the county jail
in a book to be provided for such purpose. The record shall show the date of arrest or committal, the number of days imprisoned, the amount of the
fine, when and to whom paid, and the date of discharge or other disposition of such persons. (Ord. 2013-61, 10-3-2013)
6-1-6: DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Position Created; Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation: There is hereby created the position of deputy chief of police. The deputy chief of police
shall be appointed by and shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police. The deputy chief of police shall have been a sworn police officer of the
department prior to his appointment as deputy chief of police. He shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the president and board of
trustees. (1978 Code § 10-1-14-1)
B. Powers And Duties: The deputy chief of police shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and shall provide those services as required by the
chief of police. In the event the chief of police is not able to perform his duties, the deputy chief of police shall have the same powers and duties
generally as that of chief of police. (1978 Code § 10-1-14-2)
6-1-7: COMMANDER:
A. Position Created; Appointment; Compensation: The position of commander is hereby created. Each commander shall be appointed by and shall serve
at the discretion of the chief of police. The position of commander shall be exempt from the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1 et
seq., and all appointments to the position of commander shall be made at the discretion of the chief of police, without the advice or consent of the
board of police commissioners. Commanders shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the president and board of trustees.
B. Qualifications; Examination:
1. Each commander shall have been a sworn police officer of the department holding the rank of sergeant immediately prior to his or her appointment
by the chief of police. Prior to such appointment to the position of commander, in order to establish the minimum qualifications for the position of
commander, each commander shall have been required to obtain a passing grade upon a written examination which is to be administered by an
outside testing agency to be designated by the chief of police, and a passing grade for an oral exercise, to be conducted by a minimum three (3)
member panel. The panel shall consist of the chief of police and at least two (2) persons employed or previously employed by police agencies other
than the village of Glendale Heights. After the administration of the written examination and the oral exercise, all candidates for the position of
commander who have received the minimum passing grades shall be evaluated by the chief of police. The chief of police shall make the appointment
after having obtained the approval of the village administrator.
2. Appointments to the position of commander shall be made by the chief of police without the necessity of new written exams or oral exercises, if such
appointment is made within two (2) years of the date upon which the last written exam for such position was conducted.
C. Removal: In the event the chief of police determines to remove any officer from the position of commander, the chief of police shall be required to obtain
the approval of the village administrator. Upon termination of the appointment to the position of commander by the chief of police, the officer shall revert
to and be established in the rank of sergeant which he held immediately prior to his appointment as commander, and thereafter shall be entitled to all
benefits and emoluments of such prior rank, without regard as to whether a vacancy then exists in such rank. (Ord. 2000-21, 4-6-2000)
6-1-8: POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE:
A. Serve Processes: Any regular member of the police department shall have power and authority, and it shall be his duty to serve and execute warrants
and other processes for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with the violation of any village ordinance or any crime, misdemeanor
or offense against the peace of the state or the village or held for examination or trial, or taken on execution for the commission of any crime,
misdemeanor or violation of any law or ordinance of the village, and while serving or executing or assisting in the service or execution of any such
warrant or process, he shall be vested with and have all the powers and authority conferred on constables by the common laws and laws of the state.
(1978 Code § 10-1-6)
B. Assist Fire Department: It shall be the duty of the police department to aid all fire departments providing service to the village by giving alarm in case of
fire and by clearing the streets or grounds in the immediate vicinity of the fire so that the members of the fire department shall not be hindered or
obstructed in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 2013-15, 4-18-2013)
C. Arrest And Detain: The members of the village police department are hereby authorized to arrest, with or without process, or on view, any person who
shall break the peace or is found violating any ordinance of the village or any criminal law of the state, and to take such person before a court of
competent jurisdiction, or if necessary, to detain such person in custody overnight or on Sunday in any safe place until he can be brought before a court
of competent jurisdiction.
D. Appear As Witnesses; Fees: All police officers making arrests shall appear as witnesses before the court where the trial may be had, shall procure all
necessary evidence in their power, and furnish a list of witnesses to the court and the village attorney, and no village officer shall be entitled to any
witness fees to be taxed against the village in any action for the violation of an ordinance where the village is plaintiff.
E. Temporary Questioning: A police officer, after having first identified his office, may stop any person in any public place for a reasonable period when that
person is wearing known gang colors, gang emblems or other gang insignia or identification or reasonably appears to be engaged in the
communication of gang related messages or signals through the use of hand signals, commonly known as "gang signs" or other means of
communication, or as otherwise provided by law, and the officer has probable cause to believe from the totality of the circumstances that the person is
committing, is about to commit, or has committed any offense under the ordinances of the village of Glendale Heights or under the laws of the state of
Illinois. Once stopped, the officer may make reasonable inquiry as to the circumstances of the stop and may demand the name and address of the
person and an explanation of his activities. Such detention and temporary questioning shall be conducted in the vicinity where the person is stopped
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 161/618
whenever practicable. Whenever a police officer has stopped a person for temporary questioning pursuant to this subsection and the officer has reason
to believe that his or another officer's safety may be jeopardized or reasonably believes that he or another officer is in danger of attack, he may search
the person for weapons. Any lawfully possessed weapon discovered at the time of said search shall be returned to that person upon the completion of
questioning. (1978 Code § 10-1-6)
6-1-9: WORKERS' COMPENSATION:
All duly appointed police officers of the village shall be considered to be employees of the village, within the meaning of the state workers' compensation
act, and as such, shall be entitled to the benefits and protection thereof. (1978 Code § 10-1-7)
6-1-10: POLICE PENSION FUND:
Pursuant to the provisions of 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 through 5/3-149, there is hereby established a police pension fund for the benefit of the
members of the police department of the village. (1978 Code § 10-1-11; amd. 2011 Code)
6-1-11: TRAINING:
A. Village Participate In State Training Program: The village hereby elects to participate in the police training program provided in the Illinois police training
act. (1978 Code § 10-1-10)
B. Regular Members To Complete Training Course: No person shall be appointed to the regular police department of the village as a permanent police
officer until he has been certified by the Illinois law enforcement training standards board as having successfully completed an approved training
course, as provided in the Illinois police training act, and within a probationary period not to exceed one year.
C. Board Of Police Commissioners To Require Training In Its Rules: The board of police commissioners shall provide in its rules that any person appointed
to the police department of the village shall not become a regular member of said police department until he has completed the training course required
by this section not later than eighteen (18) months after the date of his initial employment. (1978 Code § 10-1-10; amd. 2011 Code)
D. Costs: All costs expended by the village and not reimbursed, on the accomplishment of the police training program by a person appointed as a
probationary police officer of the village, shall be repaid, in full, by said person to the village in the event that said person should leave the employment
of the village prior to the end of one year following his completion of the police training program and obtains employment with another police
department or police agency or organization involving police or investigative work. Each person, as a requirement of his employment as a probationary
police officer of the village, shall execute an agreement with the village, on a form provided by the village for this purpose, as a contract and agreement
by said person to reimburse the village for such police training program costs as provided in this subsection. (1978 Code § 10-1-10)
6-1-12: DUTY TO ASSIST POLICE:
It shall be the duty of every citizen in the village, when called upon by any member of the police department, to promptly aid and assist such officer in the
execution of his police duties. (1978 Code § 10-1-8; amd. 2011 Code)
ARTICLE A. PART TIME POLICE CORPS
6-1A-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established in the village a part time police corps consisting of such number of part time police officers, who shall serve the village as
employees, as the corporate authorities shall from time to time deem necessary. (Ord. 2008-51, 8-7-2008)
6-1A-2: APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL:
The village president is hereby authorized to appoint, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, part time police officers as employees. Prior to
the appointment becoming effective, all proposed part time police officers shall be fingerprinted, and their fingerprints shall be checked by the Illinois state
police and the federal bureau of investigation for any possible criminal record. In addition, all proposed part time police officers shall submit to a polygraph
and psychological testing. The appointment of all part time police officers may be terminated by the village president at any time. The employment of all
part time police officers shall be considered "at will". (Ord. 2008-51, 8-7-2008)
6-1A-3: MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS:
Appointed part time police officers shall meet the following hiring standards:
A. Must be a U.S. citizen;
B. Must be twenty one (21) years of age or older;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 162/618
C. Must possess a high school diploma or GED equivalency;
D. Must have a valid Illinois driver's license;
E. Must have eyesight of 20/20, or correctable to 20/20;
F. Must not be colorblind;
G. Must be in good physical health and able to pass Illinois law enforcement training standards board POWER test;
H. Must be able to pass a physical examination by a licensed medical doctor prior to the physical agility test, or have a valid waiver issued by a licensed
medical doctor stating that the applicant is capable of participating in a physical agility test;
I. Must be certified by the state, within one year of the date of appointment, demonstrating: 1) completion of four hundred (400) hours of law enforcement
training; 2) completion of the basic part time law enforcement officer training program as approved by the Illinois law enforcement training standards
board; or 3) certification from another U.S. state that is equivalent to the state of Illinois training standards;
J. Must not have a felony conviction, or any findings of guilty pertaining to other crimes involving moral turpitude, as determined in the sole discretion of the
village1; and
K. Must meet all standards set forth in the firearm owners identification card act2. (Ord. 2008-51, 8-7-2008)
6-1A-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Part time police officers shall be members of the village police department, except for pension purposes. The number of hours a part time police officer
may work within a calendar year is restricted to no more than one thousand (1,000) hours. Part time police officers shall not be assigned to direct or
supervise full time police officers, nor shall they be used as permanent replacements for full time police officers. Part time police officers shall be peace
officers and conferred upon them shall be those powers and duties granted by law. Part time police officers shall enforce the ordinances of the village and
laws of the state of Illinois. They shall preserve order, prevent infractions of the law, and arrest violators of the laws of the state of Illinois and ordinances of
the village. (Ord. 2012-39, 6-7-2012)
6-1A-5: TRAINING:
Part time police officers shall be trained under the intergovernmental law enforcement officer's in-service training act in accordance with the procedures for
part time police officers established by the Illinois law enforcement training standards board. A part time police officer hired after January 1, 1996, who has
not yet received certification under section 8.2 of the Illinois police training act, shall be directly supervised. (Ord. 2008-51, 8-7-2008)
6-1A-6: FAMILIARIZATION WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Part time police officers shall familiarize themselves with, and be subject to and obey, all ordinances and other rules, regulations, and policies and
procedures governing the conduct and operation of the village police department. (Ord. 2008-51, 8-7-2008)
ARTICLE B. AUXILIARY POLICE CORPS
6-1B-1: ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established in the village an auxiliary police corps consisting of such number of auxiliary police officers, who shall serve the village as
employees, without pay, as the corporate authorities shall from time to time deem necessary. (1978 Code § 10-1-12-1)
6-1B-2: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
Auxiliary police officers shall be appointed by the village president, subject to the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and shall hold such
appointments for a term of one year, or until the same shall be terminated at the discretion of the village president, with the consent of the board of
trustees. (1978 Code § 10-1-12-2)
6-1B-3: NOT POLICE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS; UNIFORM AND IDENTIFICATION:
Auxiliary police officers shall not be members of the regular police department of the village and shall wear a uniform and identification symbol prescribed
by the chief of police, which uniform and symbol shall be different and distinct from that worn by the members of the regular police department. (1978
Code § 10-1-12-3)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 163/618
6-1B-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Auxiliary police officers shall at all times during the performance of their duties be subject to the direction and control of the chief of police and shall have
the following powers and duties which shall only be exercisable when properly assigned to them and when on duty and in uniform:
A. To aid in directing traffic in the village;
B. To aid in the control of natural or manmade disasters;
C. To aid in case of civil disorder; and
D. To perform normal and regular police duties when assigned by the chief of police on occasions when it is impracticable for members of the regular
police department to perform normal and regular police duties, except those duties granted to a conservator of the peace. (Ord. 2008-22, 3-20-2008)
6-1B-5: USE OF FIREARMS, IDENTIFICATION CARD AND BADGE RESTRICTED:
Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms, except with the permission of the chief of police, and except when in uniform and in the performance of
their duties, nor shall they use their police identification card or badge to effectuate an arrest at any time. (Ord. 2008-22, 3-20-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
6-1B-6: TRAINING AND FAMILIARIZATION WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Auxiliary police officers, prior to entering upon any of their duties, shall receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures by
the village chief of police or his designee, and shall familiarize themselves with and be subject to and obey all ordinances and other rules, regulations,
policies and procedures governing the conduct and operation of the regular police department of the village. (1978 Code § 10-1-12-6)
6-1B-7: TERMINATION FOR VIOLATIONS:
Violation of any of the rules, regulations, policies and procedures of the regular village police department or of any of the provisions of this article shall
subject an auxiliary police officer to termination of his appointment. (1978 Code § 10-1-12-7)
ARTICLE C. COMMUNITY SERVICE OFFICER
6-1C-1: POSITION CREATED; PURPOSE:
There is hereby created in the village the position of community service officer to be hired by the village president and board of trustees to assist the
village police department in the accomplishment of certain jobs and functions which do not require the power and authority of a police officer. Such officer
shall function so as to allow the members of the village police department more time to perform police and public safety duties for the health, welfare and
safety of the citizens of the community. (1978 Code § 10-1-13-1)
6-1C-2: POLICE CHIEF SUPERVISION; UNIFORM AND IDENTIFICATION; WEAPONS:
Persons employed in the position of community service officer shall be placed under the supervision of the chief of police and shall be assigned such tasks
as the chief deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. Such officer shall wear a uniform and identification symbol prescribed by the chief of
police, which uniform and symbol shall be different and distinct from that worn by the members of the regular police department, part time police corps and
auxiliary police corps. Such officer, as a civilian employee, shall not carry a firearm or other weapon. (1978 Code § 10-1-13-2; amd. 2011 Code)
6-1C-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A community service officer shall, at all times during the performance of his or her duties, be subject to the direction and control of the chief of police, and
such officer shall perform his or her duties only when the same have been properly assigned by the chief of police and only during duty periods and while
in uniform. Powers and duties of a community service officer shall be of a nonpolice nature and shall not include any power ordinarily given to the regular
police officers by the ordinances of the village or this code or by state statutes to preserve the peace, to enforce laws and ordinances, to investigate
crimes, to direct traffic, to serve warrants and summons, to make searches or seizures of property, to make arrests, or to issue traffic citations for moving
traffic violations. Community service officers may be assigned to and may perform the following duties, which, by being specifically set forth, are not
intended herein to be exclusively limited:
A. The performance of duties as a radio dispatcher in the police department;
B. The performance of custodial inventory, filing system, clerical and stenographic functions within the police department;
C. The giving of safety lectures and operation of training films relating to bicycle and automobile safety within the school system or other functions relating
to the police department;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 164/618
D. The response and handling of assistance calls concerning animals, lockouts of vehicles and houses, lost children and missing persons, stranded
motorists and malfunctioning motor vehicles;
E. To investigate and issue complaints for violation of this code or village ordinance provisions of a noncriminal nature including issuance of "tag on" tickets
concerning parking meter and vehicle parking violations, the issuance of complaints regarding dogs and other animal offenses, snow removal, zoning
and building code offenses;
F. To investigate and handle the disposition of incidents of broken electrical wire, gas leaks, water main breaks, fallen trees or tree limbs upon public
sidewalks and streets, and broken or damaged public property including traffic signs or signals, light posts, parking meters and street signs;
G. To inspect from time to time all parking meters and other municipal property for operating efficiency and to make collections of parking meter monies;
H. To undertake traffic surveys and other investigations deemed necessary to assist the police department or the village board with traffic or public safety
problems;
I. To perform school crossing guard duties or the operation of the police pistol range;
J. To appear in court to testify in regard to complaints or tickets issued by such officer or in which such officer is a witness; and
K. To perform all other duties of a nonpolice nature as may be assigned by the chief of police. (1978 Code § 10-1-13-3)
Chapter 2
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE A. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
6-2A-1: ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE; COMPOSITION:
A. There is hereby established the local agency for emergency services and disaster relief for the village to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or
damage resulting from disaster caused by the explosion in the village or in neighboring areas of atomic or other means from without or by means of
sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure or other natural or technological causes, in
accordance with the Illinois emergency management agency act of 1992. Said organization shall be known as the GLENDALE HEIGHTS
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY, and every mention in this article of the local emergency management agency or of the provisions of the
Illinois emergency management agency act shall be synonymous with and shall apply and include, within the context and meaning of said provisions,
the term "EMA" standing for the "emergency management agency" and the provisions of the Illinois emergency management agency act.
B. The EMA will consist of all emergency planning, exercise, and emergency operating center activities as well as the "ESDA" (emergency services and
disaster agency), which will serve as the field response unit, to support emergency activities and units that emerge from the citizen corps as set forth in
article B of this chapter. The EMA will function under the supervision and direction of the chief of police. In addition, the local emergency management
agency shall consist of the coordinator, and any additional members as deemed necessary by the chief of police and approved by the village
administrator. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2A-2: COORDINATOR:
A. Office Established; Appointment; Residency: There is hereby established the office of the emergency management coordinator for the village. The
emergency management coordinator shall be appointed by the village president and shall be a regular employee of the village. The coordinator does
not need to be a resident of the village, however, the coordinator shall live within fifteen (15) miles of the village corporate limits.
B. Succession Upon Inability To Serve: In the event the coordinator is absent, resigns, dies, or is otherwise unable to serve, the village administrator shall
designate an individual to act as coordinator until a new coordinator is appointed by the village president.
C. General Duties: The emergency management coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of
the local agency subject to the direction and control of the chief of police. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2A-3: MEMBERS:
A. Field Coordinator: Under the oversight of the emergency management coordinator of the village, an ESDA field coordinator will be appointed by the
village administrator. The field coordinator shall be responsible for the operations of the ESDA unit, and will serve administrative functions relating to
the operation of the ESDA unit as directed by the emergency management coordinator of the village.
B. Volunteer Members: Volunteer members of the ESDA unit will be appointed by the village administrator. The maximum staffing level will be fifteen (15)
members. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 165/618
6-2A-4: OATH OF OFFICE:
Each person, whether compensated or uncompensated, who is appointed to serve in any capacity in the EMA shall, before entering upon his or her duties,
take an oath, in writing, before the emergency management coordinator or any other person authorized to administer oaths in the state, which oath shall
be filed with the emergency management coordinator, and which oath shall be substantially as follows:
I , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic;
that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I
am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time that I am affiliated with the
Glendale Heights Emergency Management Agency, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2A-5: FUNCTIONS:
A. The EMA shall perform such functions within the village as shall be prescribed in and by the local, county, and state emergency operations plan and
programs, orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Illinois emergency management agency and, in addition, shall conduct such
functions outside the corporate limits as may be required under any mutual aid agreement or compact as are entered into as provided by the Illinois
emergency management agency act.
B. The emergency management coordinator shall prepare and submit to the county office of homeland security and emergency management for review
and certification an "emergency operations plan" describing the organization, mission, and functions of the village and supporting services for
responding to and recovering from disasters. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2A-6: MOBILE SUPPORT TEAMS:
A. Members Designated: All or any members of the EMA may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the governor or the state
director of the Illinois emergency management agency.
B. Team Leader: The leader of a mobile support team shall be designated by the director of the Illinois emergency management agency.
C. Compensation; Powers And Duties: Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the
governor, or the state director of the emergency management agency, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, privileges
and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any member who is not a paid officer or employee of the village, while serving, shall be entitled
to at least one dollar ($1.00) per year compensation from the state, as provided by law. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2A-7: MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS:
The coordinator of the EMA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be effective
until it has been approved by the village board of trustees and by the applicable political subdivisions. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2A-8: COOPERATION WITH STATE AGENCIES:
If the governor declares that a disaster exists, it shall be the duty of the EMA to cooperate fully with the state emergency management agency and with the
governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2A-9: COMPENSATION:
Members shall receive for such training time or response activities such compensation as may be established by the village board of trustees through the
annual budget. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2A-10: STATE REIMBURSEMENT OF VILLAGE EXPENSES:
The state treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement by the state to the village for the compensation paid and the
actual and necessary travel, subsistence and maintenance expenses of paid employees of the village while serving outside its corporate limits pursuant to
call as members of a mobile support team, and for all payments made for death, disease or injury of those paid employees arising out of and incurred in
the course of that duty, and for all losses of damage to supplies and equipment of the village resulting from the operations. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2A-11: EMERGENCY PURCHASES:
A. The village board of trustees may, on recommendation of the emergency management coordinator, authorize any purchase or contract necessary to
place the village in a position to combat a declared disaster and to protect the public health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 166/618
assistance to victims of those disasters.
B. In the event of a declared disaster, the emergency management coordinator of the village is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such
services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or
formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations, as authorized by the Illinois emergency management agency act;
provided, that if the village board of trustees meets at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body. (Ord.
2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2A-12: OFFICE:
The village administrator is authorized to designate space in the village hall or elsewhere for the EMA as its office. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
ARTICLE B. CITIZEN CORPS COUNCIL
6-2B-1: ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE:
There is hereby established a citizen corps council in the village. The general purpose of the council is to promote community preparedness and enhance
homeland security through communication, coordination and collaboration among the various citizen corps programs throughout the village. The citizen
corps council is to unite the strength of every citizen by means of education, training, and volunteer services to make the village safer, better prepared, and
determined to respond to crime and all kinds of disasters, including threats of terrorism. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2B-2: APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP:
The village president shall appoint, with the consent of the village board, members to the citizen corps council. Membership may include representatives
from the village board, police and fire departments, the emergency management coordinator, emergency medical services or healthcare providers, major
industries or other groups such as leaders from educational institutions, faith based organizations, the business community, environmental and
transportation groups, utility providers, or other groups that represent a large cross section of the community. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2B-3: TERM; REAPPOINTMENTS; REMOVALS:
Membership on the citizen corps council is limited to three (3) years. The village president may reappoint members at his or her discretion. The village
president may remove a member from the council as deemed necessary. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2B-4: ORGANIZATION:
The council, at its first meeting, shall elect officers consisting of one chairperson and one vice chairperson. The council shall establish bylaws governing
their meetings and activities and shall present them to the village board for approval. The bylaws shall provide that the council meet at least once quarterly.
(Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2B-5: AUTHORITY:
The citizen corps council is authorized to take such action and to create programs as necessary to mobilize the citizens of the village to volunteer to help
prepare for local and national emergencies. The council has no authority to enter into any agreement or contract or to expend any funds without the prior
approval of the village board. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
ARTICLE C. LOCAL DISASTERS
6-2C-1: DECLARATION:
The village president, or his or her interim emergency successor as provided under this code and identified in the village emergency operations plan, shall
have the authority to declare a local disaster, which shall activate the village emergency operations plan and thereby authorize the furnishing of necessary
aid and assistance. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2C-2: CONTINUANCES OR RENEWALS:
Any initial order or proclamation declaring a local disaster shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the
consent of the board of trustees. (Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6-2C-3: NOTICES:
Any declaration, continuance or termination of a local disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the village clerk.
(Ord. 2009-11, 2-19-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 167/618
Chapter 3
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE A. FIRE CODE
6-3A-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village and incorporated herein by reference the 2006 edition of the international fire code, as promulgated by the
International Code Council, Inc., as the fire code of the village for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion
hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in
the occupancy of buildings and premises in the village, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the community development director available
for public use, examination and inspection. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the international fire code are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes set forth in section 6-3A-
2 of this article. (Ord. 2008-60, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
6-3A-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The 2006 international fire code adopted by section 6-3A-1 of this article is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the village of Glendale Heights, herein after referred to as "this code".
(Ord. 2008-60, 8-21-2008)
Section 108.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 108.1 General. Whenever the director of community development disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when
it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the
applicant may appeal from the decision of the director of community development to the fire chief and board of trustees of either the Glenside fire
protection district or Bloomingdale fire protection district, DuPage County, Illinois, in writing, within fifteen (15) days from the date of the decision
appealed.
Section 109.3 is amended to read as follows:
Section 109.3 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
shall erect, construct, alter, repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the director of community development, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions, shall be penalized with a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $1,000.00. Each day shall be
considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 2008-60, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Section 311.1 is amended by adding the following paragraphs to read as follows:
Temporarily unoccupied buildings, structures, premises or portions thereof, including tenant spaces, shall be safeguarded and maintained in
accordance with this section. Fire protection systems required by this code or the 2006 international building code as amended and adopted by the
village of Glendale Heights shall be installed, repaired, operated, tested and maintained in accordance with this code. The building owner shall provide
updated key holder information as required by the fire protection district having jurisdiction.
Vacant structures which have been unoccupied for more than twenty four (24) consecutive months shall be required to be inspected prior to occupancy.
The building or occupied portion(s) shall be required to be equipped with a full automatic fire alarm system as specified in section 907 and be directly
monitored by the authority having jurisdiction.
Section 313.3 is added to read as follows:
Section 313.3 Parking. The parking or storage of motorized vehicles shall only be permitted in properly designated areas designed specifically for
vehicle parking or storage.
Section 503.6 is amended by adding the following paragraph to read as follows:
Section 503.6 Security Gates. Where security gates are installed, they shall be equipped with an approved key switch that activates the operation of
the gate. The key switch and its location shall be approved by the fire code official. The security gates and the emergency operation shall be
maintained operational at all times. At properties equipped with security gates, provisions shall be made for securing the gate in a locked position using
a double padlock system. A padlock approved for this use by the fire code official shall be provided in addition to the occupant's padlock.
Section 903.4.2.1 is added to read as follows:
Section 903.4.2.1 Alarms Audio/Visual Indicating Devices. In addition to the required ten (10) inch water flow bell, a weather tight visual warning
device shall be provided above the fire department connection. The color shall be approved by the fire district having jurisdiction.
Section 903.4.2.2 is added to read as follows:
Section 903.4.2.2 Audio/Visual Devices. Alarm indicating appliances, audio/visual devices, shall be provided, seen and heard in all areas of every
building per NFPA 72. All sprinklered buildings shall be provided with occupant notification devices. This will provide full building notification per NFPA
72.
Section 903.4.2.3 is added to read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 168/618
Section 903.4.2.3 Fire Sprinkler Inspection Valves. Inspector test valves shall be provided in the most practical area remote from the riser. They
shall be accessible at all times and located no more than six (6) feet above the finished floor. On multiple riser systems test valves shall be marked as
to which riser it tests.
Section 903.4.3 is amended to read as follows:
Section 903.4.3 Floor Control Valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves with water flow switches shall be provided at the point of
connection to the riser on each floor in multi-story buildings.
Section 903.4.4 Automatic Sprinklers: Add new section as follows:
Section 903.4.4 Automatic Sprinklers. Where automatic sprinklers provide protection to an area with an approved flow switch interconnected to the
fire alarm system, and the area is easily identifiable as to the location of the activation, additional automatic detectors are not required. When a building
has numerous rooms protected by the zoned sprinkler system the fire department may require additional smoke detectors for a more rapid means to
identify the location of smoke or fire.
Section 903.6.2 Sprinkler Safety Factor: Add new section as follows:
Section 903.6.2 Sprinkler Safety Factor. Provide a minimum 10% or 5 psi minimum safety factor in the fire protection hydraulic calculation. The
system demand shall be 5 psi minimum below the seasonal low water flow test supply.
Section 903.7 Hydraulic Nameplate: Add new section as follows:
Section 903.7 Hydraulic Nameplate. On hydraulic calculations by each hydraulic calculated area on each drawing provide a copy of the hydraulic
nameplate.
Section 903.8 NFPA: Add new section as follows:
Section 903.8 NFPA. All references to NFPA standards are to be considered part of this code.
Section 903.9 Fire Pump Test Header: Add new section as follows:
Section 903.9 Fire Pump Test Header. Fire pump test heads shall be equipped with an OS&Y valve on the pump test header. An exterior test header
shall be provided on all sprinkler systems that are equipped with a fire pump.
Section 903.10 Fire Pump Room: Add new section as follows:
Section 903.10 Fire Pump Room. Provide an exterior access door to the sprinkler riser valve and fire pump room. All new fire pump rooms shall be
enclosed in masonry constructed 2-hour fire rated room.
Section 903.11 Riser Check Valves: Add new section as follows:
Section 903.11 Riser Check Valves. On large warehouses or buildings, a check valve shall be provided on each sprinkler riser to prevent false
alarms.
Section 904.3.1 Electrical Wiring: Amend section as follows:
Section 904.3.1 Electrical Wiring. Electrical wiring shall be in accordance with the 2008 national electrical code.
Section 906.1 Change section as follows:
Section 906.1 Where Required. Delete exception.
Section 907.1.2 Equipment: Add to section as follows:
Section 907.1.2 Equipment. All fire alarm systems shall be of the addressable type and shall be installed per NFPA 72. All fire alarm panels shall be
equipped with a minimum of sixty (60) hours of battery back up service in the case of AC power failure.
Exception: The fire code official may allow non-addressable systems when older alarm panels are replaced or at the discretion of the fire code official.
Section 907.1.3 Fire Alarm Panel & Equipment: Add new section as follows:
Section 907.1.3 Fire Alarm Panel & Equipment. Whenever an existing fire alarm panel and/or its components become inoperative and is required to
be replaced the fire code official may require the fire alarm system for the entire building to be brought up to current code requirements.
Section 907.2.1 Change section as follows:
Section 907.2.1 Group A. Delete section in its entirety and insert "A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in
group A occupancies."
Section 907.2.2 Change section as follows:
Section 907.2.2 Group B. Delete section in its entirety and insert "A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in
group B occupancies."
Section 907.2.3 Change section as follows:
Section 907.2.3 Group E. Delete section in its entirety and insert "A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in
group E occupancies."
Section 907.2.4 Change section as follows:
Section 907.2.4 Group F. Delete section in its entirety and insert "A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in
group F occupancies."
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 169/618
Section 907.2.5 Change section as follows:
Section 907.2.5 Group H. Delete section in its entirety and insert "A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in
group H occupancies."
Section 907.2.6 Change section as follows:
Section 907.2.6 Group I. Delete section in its entirety and insert "A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in
group I occupancies."
Section 907.2.7 Change section as follows:
Section 907.2.7 Group M. Delete section in its entirety and insert "A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72
in group M occupancies."
Section 907.2.9 Change section as follows:
Section 907.2.9 Group R-2. Delete section in its entirety and insert "A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72
in group R-2 occupancies."
Exception:
1. R-2 occupancies that are classified as townhouses.
Section 907.2.24 Add new section as follows:
Section 907.2.24 Group S. A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in group S occupancies.
Section 907.3.1 Change section as follows:
Section 907.3.1 Occupancy Requirements. Delete section in its entirety and insert "A fire alarm system shall be installed in all occupancies."
Section 907.10.1.5 Use Group M: Add new section as follows:
Section 907.10.1.5 Use Group M. Use group M spaces shall be designed to "ring by tenant" activated by the fire alarm system. Water flow alarms
shall be designed to sound a general alarm of the sprinkler zone. Weathertight strobe lights shall be mounted outside each tenant space as directed by
the fire code official.
Section 907.15 Monitoring: Add to section as follows:
Section 907.15 Monitoring. All new fire alarm systems shall transmit trouble, supervisory, and fire signals through a wireless transmitter in accordance
with NFPA 72. Only equipment certified and approved by the authority having jurisdiction designated proprietary agent may be installed. The
designated proprietary agent shall be the only authorized installer and repair service for the approved radio transmitters.
Section 907.15.1 Fire Alarm Battery Back Up: Add new section as follows:
Section 907.15.1 Fire Alarm Battery Back Up. All new fire alarm systems shall be equipped with 60 hours of battery back up and shall transmit
trouble, supervisory, and fire signals to the fire department communication center and/or its designated proprietor.
Section 907.15.1.2 Existing Fire Alarm Systems: Add new section as follows:
Section 907.15.1.2 Existing Fire Alarm Systems. All existing fire alarm systems within the Glenside and Bloomingdale fire districts shall be allowed
to continue with direct connection or may be changed to wireless at the owner's request. Where an existing fire alarm panel is changed or modified, or
when it has been out of service for a period of thirty (30) or more days, the means of communication shall be required to be changed to a wireless radio
transmitter.
Chapter 45 Referenced Standards: Change references as follows:
Chapter 45 Referenced Standards. Pages 386 _ 387 delete reference to the ICC electrical code and replace with 2008 national electric code.
(Ord. 2008-60, 8-21-2008)
6-3A-3: ENFORCEMENT OF CODE:
The enforcement of the fire code adopted in this article shall be the responsibility of that bureau of fire prevention established by the appropriate fire
protection district exercising jurisdiction as to those portions of the village falling within the boundaries of such district. Enforcement action shall be under
the administrative supervision of the chief of the appropriate district fire department who shall serve as chief of the bureau of fire prevention. (1978 Code
§ 5-1-5; amd. 2011 Code)
ARTICLE B. FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION REGULATIONS
6-3B-1: FIRE PREVENTION PROVISIONS ENUMERATED:
A. Identification Of Hazardous Materials: Any hazardous materials shall be identified for health, flammability and reactivity in accordance with NFPA 704M,
"Identification System For Fire Hazards Of Materials", 1969 edition.
B. Fire Procedure Notice: Owners, managers and agents of multiple dwelling units with three (3) or more living units shall post and maintain in a
conspicuous location within each dwelling unit a notice in writing which explains what procedures to use in the event of fire. The notice shall contain a
diagram of exit routes and all fire exits.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 170/618
C. Construction To Prevent The Spread Of Fire, Gas And Smoke:
1. Walls, partitions, floors, ceiling roofs, openings therein and other features necessary for prevention of spread of fire, smoke and gases shall be
maintained in proper condition and repair at all times.
2. All openings including doors shall be provided with automatic self-closing devices designed to keep opening protective devices closed.
3. Approved smoke and gas detecting devices may be considered for closing doors where openings must normally remain open.
D. Testing Stairs, Fire Escapes And Tunnels: All stairs, fire escapes, tunnels and similar safety devices shall be periodically tested for their safe use.
E. Stock Maintenance: All stock shall be kept in a neat, orderly, compact manner in accord with good housekeeping.
F. Packing Materials: Wherever and whenever stock is dispensed directly from a shipping container and combustible material is used as protective
packing, such packing material shall be removed from the container and taken care of by removing to the outside in a closed container. Such container
shall be kept closed at all times except when removing stock therefrom.
G. Removal Of Packing And Waste Materials: No persons shall store in any building excess amounts of combustible empty packing cases, barrels, boxes,
rubber tires, shavings, excelsior, rubbish, paper bags, litter, hay, straw and similar combustibles. Aisles and storage of the above mentioned
combustibles necessary for the performance of business shall be kept in an orderly and neat manner. Combustible materials shall be removed daily or
more often as is necessary to suitable vaults, bins or separate buildings. Such practices shall be approved by the bureau of fire prevention.
H. Open Flames And Lights: No open flames or lights and no heating or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of igniting flammable materials shall be
allowed unless such apparatus is well adhered to and permanently mounted on a glass globe or similar approved device.
I. Tenant Separation: Each tenant space shall be separated from each other by walls, partitions and floor-ceiling assemblies having at least a one hour
approved fire rating.
J. Firewalls: Where required, firewalls shall be installed between buildings or to divide complexes or buildings into areas for firefighting control. Openings in
firewalls shall be protected in accordance with NFPA 80, "Standards For Fire Doors And Windows", 1973 edition.
K. Fire Stops: Vertical and horizontal spread of fire shall be controlled by properly located and installed fire stops.
L. Elevators:
1. All elevators shall be designed to automatically return to the main floor in case of fire.
2. One elevator shall be designed for emergency control.
3. One elevator shall be designed to allow access to and hold an ambulance cot with patient in a horizontal position.
4. All elevators shall be designed in accordance with nationally recognized standards.
5. Fire safety and emergency operating facilities for elevators shall be approved by the bureau of fire prevention.
M. Smoke And Heat Venting:
1. All exit components and all buildings over ten thousand (10,000) square feet gross area or over two (2) stories in height shall be provided with
emergency smoke and heat venting.
2. Venting may be accomplished by gravity and/or mechanical methods.
3. All venting shall be designed in accordance with nationally recognized standards.
4. All venting methods shall be approved by the bureau of fire prevention.
N. Fire Department Access:
1. Public or private access shall be provided to each building so that the first responding fire department unit will be so located that all points of the
interior of the building may be reached by one hundred fifty feet (150') of fire department initial attack hose.
Where the size of the building and height of the building do not allow this criteria to be met and an interior standpipe system is connected to a public
water system and equipped with a fire department connection, the above criteria may be considered met when approved by the fire prevention
bureau.
2. Public or private access for motor fire apparatus shall be provided around the building so that it may be properly laddered and operation of
mechanically elevated mechanisms may be properly utilized. Minimum width of fire lanes shall be fifteen feet (15'), with greater widths to
accommodate vehicles when turning.
3. Access routes shall be so arranged that fire department apparatus may respond from all points of the building to adjacent fire hydrants along routes
not to exceed three hundred feet (300') from the most remote point of the building to the closest fire hydrant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 171/618
4. Fire lanes on private property shall be approved by the bureau of fire prevention, and parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing such fire
lanes or access routes by use of chains, barricades or other means shall be prohibited at all times.
5. Private fire department access roads and ways shall be properly maintained and accessible at all times.
6. Access routes shall be circulating for adequate fire apparatus movement.
7. Access roads shall not be less than fifteen feet (15') from adjacent buildings.
O. Water Supplies For Fire Department Use:
1. Water Supplies; Quantity: The following are fire department pumper supplies which should be available commensurate with the hazards therein:
Single-family detached residential 1,000 gpm
Town/row or cluster housing 1,500 to 2,000 gpm
Apartment type construction 3,000 to 4,000 gpm
Industrial type development 3,000 to 5,000 gpm
Research and developmental laboratories 3,000 to 4,000 gpm
Business and commercial areas 3,000 to 4,500 gpm
Mercantile centers 3,000 to 6,000 gpm
(1978 Code § 5-1-4)
2. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be in compliance with the provisions of section 10-2-2, amendment 903.3.5.3 of this code. (2011 Code)
6-3B-2: PLAN REVIEW:
A. Plan Review Required: Plans showing all fire protection related features, fire resistant assemblies and any conditions affecting fire protection or fire
prevention shall be submitted to the appropriate bureau of fire prevention prior to the commencement of construction, alterations, additions and the
increasing of fire hazards or relocating of fire hazards within buildings.
B. Applications: Applications shall be made on a form provided by the said bureau of fire prevention and shall include complete details of such information,
including three (3) sets of plans, and said applications shall be made prior to issuances of other permits by the village.
C. Required Information: All plans shall bear the name, address and seal of licensed professionals when necessary in accordance with statutes of the
state of Illinois regarding architects, professional engineers and structural engineers.
D. Inspections: If inspections are required, the bureau of fire prevention shall be notified at least one day in advance of all such inspections so that they
may be accomplished at the appropriate time while all facilities, construction, equipment, etc., are visible and in such condition so as to be adequately
inspected. (1978 Code § 5-1-7)
6-3B-3: OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
A. Permit Required:
1. All buildings are required to have an occupancy permit issued by the director of community development verifying that it meets the requirements of
the international fire code. (Ord. 2002-23, 4-4-2002; amd. 2011 Code)
2. The occupancy permit shall be required for all existing buildings in accordance with subsection A1 of this section.
3. Occupancy permits shall be required for buildings which change use, and special hazards controlled by this code, added to or remodeled or altered.
B. Compliance With Fire Code: No occupancy permit shall be issued unless the building is in conformance with the requirements of the international fire
code.
C. Expiration And Renewal: Occupancy permits shall expire annually from the date of issuance and may be renewed if buildings are maintained in
conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 2002-23, 4-4-2002)
6-3B-4: EMERGENCY CONDITIONS:
When, in the opinion of the bureau of fire prevention, there is actual and immediate danger because of hazardous conditions which endanger life or may
cause adverse effects upon adjoining properties, the bureau may order the building to be immediately vacated and cause immediate remedial action if
necessary. The cost of such remedial action shall be borne by the owner of the premises. (1978 Code § 5-1-8)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 172/618
6-3B-5: EXPLOSIVE, FLAMMABLE AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
A. Storage Limits:
1. Explosives And Blasting Agents: The limits referred to in section 12.5b of the American Insurance Association's fire prevention code in which storage
of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited are the village corporate limits.
2. Flammable Liquids In Outside Aboveground Tanks:
a. The limits referred to in section 16.22a of the American Insurance Association's fire prevention code in which storage of flammable liquids in
outside aboveground tanks is prohibited are the village corporate limits.
b. The limits referred to in section 16.61 of the fire prevention code in which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited are
the village corporate limits.
c. No flammable liquids or gases shall be stored within two hundred feet (200') of any building or ground used as a hospital, church or school.
Flammable liquids shall not be used for washing or cleaning purposes in any gasoline filling station. All flammable liquids and rags and waste
materials impregnated with such liquids shall be stored in covered metal containers. No flammable wastes shall be permitted to drain into any
sewer or stormwater drainage system.
3. Bulk Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases: The limits referred to in section 21.6a of the American Insurance Association's fire prevention code in
which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is restricted are hereby established as the village corporate limits. (1978 Code § 5-1-9; amd. 2011
Code)
B. Transportation Routes:
1. The routes referred to in section 12.7M of the American Insurance Association's fire prevention code for vehicles transporting explosives and
blasting agents are hereby established as follows: North Avenue (Route 64) and otherwise by special permit detailing route, quantities, hazards,
protection provided and need, approved and issued by the bureau of fire prevention.
2. The routes referred to in section 20.14 of the American Insurance Association's fire prevention code for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals
and other dangerous articles are hereby established as follows: North Avenue (Route 64) and otherwise by special permit detailing route, quantities,
hazards, protection provided and need, approved and issued by the bureau of fire prevention. (1978 Code § 5-1-9)
6-3B-6: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES; PERMITS REQUIRED:
The board of trustees of the appropriate fire protection district shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits within their respective jurisdictions, in addition to those
now enumerated in the American Insurance Association's fire prevention code. The appropriate bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a
conspicuous place in its office and the village hall and shall distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (1978 Code § 5-1-12; amd. 2011 Code)
6-3B-7: FIRE INSPECTORS:
The chief of the fire department of each said fire protection district shall assign and train such members of the department as may be deemed necessary
to serve as fire inspectors, and shall recommend to the village board of trustees the employment of additional technical inspectors under such terms and
conditions as the board shall prescribe. (1978 Code § 5-1-6)
Chapter 4
ALARM SYSTEMS
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
AUTOMATIC SIGNAL DEVICE: Any automatic protection device which automatically sends a recorded signal, warning or voice alarm directly to the village
police over regular public telephone lines upon detection of a fire or intrusion.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of a signal device through electrical or mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner
or lessee of a signal device or of his employees or agents. "False alarm" does not include alarm signals activated by violent conditions of nature,
telephone line interruptions, acts of God, or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the signal device user.
MINIMUM INSTALLATION AND CLASSIFICATION REQUIREMENTS: The provisions of the most current edition of the publication numbered UL681 and
entitled "Installation, Classification And Certification Of Burglar Alarm Systems", as published by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
MONITORING SYSTEM: The system installed at the village police department to receive visual or audible signals from an approved automatic signal
device.
SIGNAL DEVICE: An approved electrically operated instrument which automatically sends visual and/or audible alarm signals over a signal line to be
registered by indicators at a monitor panel at the receiving terminal, and which meets the installation and classification requirements of this chapter. (1978
Code §§ 4-9-1, 4-9-8)
6-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FAILURE TO OBTAIN:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 173/618
A. No person shall install, operate or maintain in his home, place of business or other premises a signaling device calculated to summon the police or fire
department, or that is connected directly or indirectly to the monitoring system at the police department or fire department, or to any alarm answering
company's receiving location without first obtaining a permit for each separate alarm system he wishes to install. (1978 Code § 4-9-2)
B. The failure of any person to obtain a signal device system user permit as required by this section constitutes an offense punishable by a fine as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (1978 Code § 4-9-13; amd. 2011
Code)
6-4-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE:
A. Application for permits to so install, maintain and operate a signaling device shall be filed with the village clerk on forms supplied by the village and shall
be accompanied by the required fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). (1978 Code § 4-9-3)
B. Each application for permit shall set forth the names, addresses and telephone numbers of both the installer of the signal device and the owner of the
premises on or in which the device will be installed as well as a description of the system and the location where it is to be installed. Each such
application shall further set forth emergency telephone numbers of the signal device user and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of key
holders to the premises and signal device system who can respond to the alarm location as soon as possible, but not to exceed forty five (45) minutes.
Each permit application shall also contain the written approval of the owner of the premises described in such application to the following paragraph,
which will be set forth on the application:
The undersigned, as the legal and beneficial owner of the property described in this application hereby agrees that the Village shall not be liable for
any defects in operation of signal device systems, for any failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation and operation of
equipment, the transmission of alarm signals and prerecorded alarm messages or the relaying of such signals and messages. In the event that the
Village finds it necessary to disconnect a defective signaling device or any device which is used in a manner which violates the provision of the
Municipal Code, the Village shall incur no liability by such action.
(1978 Code § 4-9-4)
6-4-4: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Each application shall be referred to the chief of police, or his designated agent, for review, written rejection or written approval. Such rejection or approval
shall be based upon the application and the signaling device complying or failing to comply with the provisions hereof upon inspection. Upon inspection
and rejection or rejections, each reinspection shall be subject to a reinspection fee of five dollars ($5.00). (1978 Code § 4-9-5)
6-4-5: ELECTRICAL PERMIT AND COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING CODES REQUIRED; FINAL INSPECTION; ISSUANCE OF
PERMIT:
Any person desiring to install a signal device after January 1, 1983, shall obtain an electrical permit from the village department of community
development. All signal devices shall be installed, maintained and operated in accordance with the village building code, the national electrical code, and
the most current edition of the publication numbered UL681 entitled "Installation, Classification And Certification Of Burglar Alarm Systems", as published
by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. No permit for use of a signal device shall be issued without a certificate of final inspection issued by the department of
community development. No permit allowing the connection of a signaling device to the monitoring system shall be issued until it has been first determined
that such device and the installation thereof comply with all provisions hereof. Each permit must bear the dated, written signature of the chief of police,
shall describe the premises to which such permit is issued and the name, address and telephone number of the owner thereof. (1978 Code § 4-9-6; amd.
2011 Code)
6-4-6: PERMIT NOT WARRANTY OF DEVICE:
The issuance of a permit shall in no way constitute a warranty of the signal device involved, and issuance of said permit shall be specifically subject to the
village disclaimer of liability as detailed in subsection 6-4-3B of this chapter and further detailed in section 10/2-206 of the local governmental and
governmental employee's tort immunity act, 745 Illinois Compiled Statutes. (1978 Code § 4-9-7; amd. 2011 Code)
6-4-7: FALSE ALARMS:
A. Responsibility For False Alarms; Records Kept; Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit: Each person, firm or corporation holding a permit for the
operation or maintenance of a signaling device shall be responsible for any false alarms transmitted by the device which they operate or maintain. The
chief of police shall maintain a record of all false alarms so transmitted and, pursuant to the required notice and opportunity to be heard, may revoke or
suspend the permit for operation of the signaling device involved in the transmission of four (4) false alarms in any one year or make reasonable
charges therefor. (1978 Code § 4-9-8)
B. Charges:
1. Established: The chief of police shall charge a permit holder a service fee for each false alarm in any one calendar year transmitted by a signal
device as follows:
False alarms 1 through 3 No charge
False alarms 4 through 6 $ 50.00 each false alarm
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 174/618
False alarms 7 through 9 100.00 each false alarm
All false alarms after 10 150.00 each false alarm
(Ord. 2011-71, 9-15-2011)
2. Payment: Such charges shall be payable to the police department by the user permit holder upon receipt of a statement for such charge within thirty
(30) days of issuance of such statement.
3. Exemptions: No charge shall be imposed for false alarms for thirty (30) days after initial installation or ten (10) days after major alterations or
additions, nor will any alarms be held accountable to the permit holder in these circumstances. (Ord. 2011-27, 6-2-2011)
4. Failure To Pay; Disconnection; Reconnection Charge: The signal device shall be disconnected in the event of failure to pay the service charge within
thirty (30) days of receipt of the statement. When all charges have been paid and all problems with the signaling system and/or its users have been
corrected, and a reconnection to the system is desired by the user, a service charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be paid by the user prior to
reconnection. (1978 Code § 4-9-12)
C. Hearing: Every signal device user shall be entitled to an informal hearing with the chief of police, or such person as delegated by him, for each false
alarm in excess of four (4). At the informal hearing, the signal device user may offer evidence that the alarm activation for which he is being charged
comes within one of the permissible exceptions. Said hearing should be requested within five (5) days after receipt of the statement of the charge for a
false alarm. Failure to timely request such hearing shall constitute an admission that the service charge is justified and due to the police department.
(1978 Code § 4-9-10)
6-4-8: TESTING OR DEMONSTRATING DEVICES:
There shall be no testing or demonstrating signal device systems without first notifying the police department prior to such test or demonstration and
obtaining the permission of the chief of police. Any activation due to a test or demonstration without said notice and permission shall be deemed a false
alarm. (1978 Code § 4-9-11)
6-4-9: AUTOMATIC SIGNAL DEVICES PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate or maintain any automatic signal device or automatic protection device which automatically transmits a signal, message or
warning directly to the village police/fire department or its agents. A violation of this section constitutes an offense punishable by a fine as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (1978 Code § 4-9-14; amd. 2011 Code)
6-4-10: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. Grounds: The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to suspend or revoke a permit on the following grounds:
1. Suspension:
a. Failure to comply with the application for permit.
b. Failure to properly operate or maintain a signaling device or any part thereof.
c. The transmission of four (4) false alarms to the monitoring system in any one year.
2. Revocation:
a. Failure to cure any ground for suspension prior to the end of a suspension order.
b. Transmission of four (4) false alarms in any one year. (1978 Code § 4-9-15)
B. Procedure: Any permit may be suspended or revoked in the following manner:
1. Notice: If any device is defectively operated or maintained, a written notice of intent to suspend or revoke such permit shall be sent to the holder
thereof. Such notice shall state the reason or reasons of intent to suspend or revoke and the date and the time of the hearing to be held on such
notice.
2. Hearing: The hearing shall be held by the chief of police, or his designated agent. At the conclusion of such hearing, the matter may be continued to
a date certain so as to give the permit holder an opportunity to cure such defect, or the permit may be suspended or revoked, at the option of the
chief of police.
3. Inspection: If the hearing is so continued, or if the permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall request an inspection prior to the continued
hearing date or the end of the suspension period. Each such request shall be accompanied by a fee of five dollars ($5.00). If such inspection shows
that such defect has been removed or cured, the notice of intent to suspend or revoke or the suspension order shall be terminated on that date. If
such inspection shows that such defect has not been so removed or cured, then such permit shall be revoked. (1978 Code § 4-9-16)
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-5-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 175/618
The community service officers and the police department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (1978 Code § 10-3-1; amd. 2011 Code)
6-5-2: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
A. No person shall cruelly treat in any way any animal in the village. Any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads, or abandons any animal
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
B. Any person who taunts, provokes, torments, agitates or otherwise harasses a guard dog or police dog in any manner whatsoever shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this section. (Ord. 96-03, 1-4-1996)
6-5-3: RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal of any kind to permit the same to run at large or be at large on the streets, public ways, or upon
the private premises of any person other than the private premises of the owner or keeper of said animal. For purposes of this section, any animal which is
not fenced upon the property of its owner or keeper or is not chained or leashed upon said property or controlled by leash shall be deemed to be running
at large. (1978 Code § 10-3-3)
6-5-4: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
ANIMAL: Any and all types of animals, both domesticated and wild, male and female.
KEEP OR HARBOR: To maintain, possess, control and use.
OWNER: Any person owning, controlling, keeping or harboring a dog or other animal or fowl. (1978 Code § 10-3-8-1)
B. Conduct Prohibited:
1. Noise: It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to permit any dog, cat, bird, or other animal to make excessive, frequent, or untimely
loud and continued noise at any time which disturbs the comfort or repose of any person or persons in the immediate vicinity and which disturbs the
surrounding property owners' reasonable use and enjoyment of their property.
2. Failure To Remove Excrement: It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or person in control of any animal, including, but not limited to, dogs and
cats, to cause or permit such animal to be on a public way or public streets or on private property not owned or possessed by such owner, keeper or
person in control unless that person has in his immediate possession a device for the removal of animal excrement to a receptacle located upon
property owned or possessed by such owner, keeper or person in control. It shall further be unlawful for any owner, keeper or person in control of
any animal to fail to immediately remove such excrement left by such animal on any public property, public streets or on private property not owned
or possessed by such owner, keeper or person in control of such animal. Upon removal, the owner, keeper or person in control of such animal shall
deposit such excrement in a proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such owner, keeper or person in control of such animal.
3. Accumulation Of Excrement: It shall be unlawful and is hereby declared a nuisance for the owner or other person in charge or control of any property
located within the village to allow animal excrement, including, but not limited to, dog excrement and cat excrement, to accumulate on such property.
4. Damage To Persons Or Property:
a. It shall be unlawful to allow any animal to molest or attack any person or other animal, or to damage or impair the value of public or private
property or to detrimentally affect the public health, safety and welfare.
b. Without the consent of an owner of private property, it shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to permit such animal to injure,
destroy or carry away any item of value which may be on said private property including, but not limited to, any vegetable, plant, fruit, shrub, tree,
or flower which may be planted or seeded thereon. (Ord. 2003-93, 12-4-2003)
C. Penalties: Any person who owns, keeps or harbors such dog, animal or bird who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense, nor less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third offense if found to be guilty of such violation or violations. If any violation shall be of a continuing
nature, each day of violation shall be deemed to be a separate offense and shall subject the violator to the progressive minimum fines contained
herein. (1978 Code § 10-3-8-3; amd. 2011 Code)
6-5-5: ANIMAL HOUSES:
A. Except as otherwise permitted, it shall be unlawful to maintain within the village any stable or poultry yard or place for housing any poultry, pigeons,
geese, ducks, boa constrictor snakes, pigs, swine, cattle, horses, goats or other similar animals or livestock.
B. No owner shall allow any place where any animal is or may be kept to become unclean or unsanitary. "Unsanitary", when used herein, shall mean a
condition which is likely to attract vermin or rodents or endanger the public health or welfare of the surrounding area. (Ord. 2003-93, 12-4-2003)
6-5-6: DISEASED ANIMALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 176/618
A. Exposure To Public Prohibited: No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be exposed in any public place whereby the
health of man or beast may be affected.
B. Removal From Owner's Premises Prohibited: No diseased animal shall be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner, except under the
supervision of the community service officer or the state veterinarian.
C. Rabies Suspects: Whenever the animal control officer receives information that any person has been bitten by a dog or other animal, he shall confine
the animal for ten (10) days at a place to be determined thereby or at the residence of the owner of the animal, all in accordance with state law. (1978
Code § 10-3-5; amd. 2011 Code)
6-5-7: DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A. Definitions:
1. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in this subsection:
ANIMAL: Any warm or cold blooded nonhuman mammal, bird, fish, reptile, poisonous or nonpoisonous, arachnids or apiarian, the keeping or
possession of which is not otherwise prohibited.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: Any animal which, if a dog, when unmuzzled and unleashed, or in case of another animal, when unrestrained, approaches
any person in an apparent attitude of attack, whether or not the animal completes its attack; or on more than one occasion causes property damage
anywhere within the village other than to the property of the owner of said animal.
OWNER: Any keeper, person, partnership, corporation, association or any other entity owning, keeping, harboring, possessing, caring for, or having
custody or control, whether on a temporary or a permanent basis.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: a. Any individual animal that, when unprovoked, inflicts physical injury on a human being or other animal either on public or
private property.
b. Any individual animal with an observable propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or other animals.
c. Any individual animal which attacks a human being or other animal without provocation.
d. Any individual animal which has been found to be a "dangerous animal", as defined herein, on at least two (2) separate occasions.
e. Any individual animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of animal fights.
f. Any individual animal which, upon a complaint or complaints by citizens or upon an observation of an official of the village of Glendale Heights,
based upon its temperament when put into contact with human beings, or other animals, is reasonably believed to be an animal with vicious
tendencies.
g. Any individual animal which has been found to be a vicious animal in another jurisdiction.
Any of the acts specified in subsections a through g of this definition shall itself be sufficient to bring the act within the definition of vicious animal, and
each such occurrence shall be a separate event upon which an offense can be based.
2. A "dangerous animal" or "vicious animal" shall not include any such animal if the behavior is exhibited as a result of teasing, torment, abuse to the
animal, or when an assault, trespass, tort, or crime occurs on the immediate premises where the animal is located at the time the action takes place,
or when the animal is protecting or defending a human being within an immediate vicinity from an attack or assault. The prohibitions of this section
shall not apply to dogs used by any police department, law enforcement agency or law enforcement official in the performance of their duties.
B. Dangerous Or Vicious Animal Prohibited: Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any
dangerous or vicious animal within the corporate limits of the village. (1978 Code § 10-3-9)
C. Determination Of Dangerous Or Vicious Animal; Penalties: Upon receipt of a complaint of a violation of this section, a court of competent jurisdiction
shall first determine whether the subject animal is a dangerous or a "vicious animal" as herein defined. Upon a finding that the animal in question is
dangerous or vicious, any person found to have violated the provisions of this section for a first time shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars
($75.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if the offense pertains to a dangerous animal, and not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if the offense pertains to a vicious animal. Any person found to have violated the provisions
of this section for a second or subsequent offense shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) if the second offense pertains to a dangerous animal, and not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) if the second offense pertains to a vicious animal. (1978 Code § 10-3-9; amd. 2011 Code)
D. Authority To Destroy Dangerous Animals: The members of the police department are authorized to kill any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind
when it is necessary for the protection of any person or property. (1978 Code § 10-3-4; amd. 2011 Code)
6-5-8: ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN RECREATION AREAS AND PARKS:
No dog or other animal, whether or not attended by the owner or keeper or other person and held or led by chain or leash, shall be permitted in any
recreation area of any public park set aside for the playing of tennis, baseball, football or other game or for use as a tot lot or other organized recreation
purposes. (1978 Code § 10-3-7)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 177/618
ARTICLE A. DOGS AND CATS
6-5A-1: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required; Application: Any person who owns, keeps, or houses a dog or cat within the village shall be required to obtain an annual license. The
license shall be valid from May 1 to April 30 each year. Application for a license shall be made to the administrative services department.
Any person that acquires, keeps, or houses a new or additional dog or cat during a licensing year shall be required to obtain a license within thirty (30)
days of acquiring the animal, except for a dog or cat less than four (4) months old, in which case, a license shall be obtained when the dog or cat
attains the permit age of four (4) months old.
Any license applied for and issued from the passage of this section through April 30, 2016, shall only be valid until April 30, 2016. A new license shall
be required commencing May 1, 2016, and shall follow the May 1 through April 30 annual license cycle.
B. Rabies Vaccination Required: Every person who owns, keeps, or houses any dog or cat within the village shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated
by a registered veterinarian with an approved vaccine capable of preventing rabies for an immunization period of either one or three (3) years. Such
inoculation shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a license required by this section.
C. License Fee: The fee for a license required by this section shall be five dollars ($5.00) for each dog or cat.
D. Issuance Of License And Tag: The administrative services department shall issue a license and tag upon submittal of an application, valid proof of
inoculation for rabies, and payment of the required fee.
E. Collar And Tag To Be Worn: It shall be unlawful for any person that owns, keeps, or houses any dog or cat within the village to permit the dog or cat to
be off the premises where it is owned, kept, or housed without wearing a collar with the tag issued pursuant to this section attached thereto.
F. Vicious Or Dangerous Dog Or Cat: No license shall be issued for any dog or cat which has been proven to be vicious or dangerous. (Ord. 2015-72, 11-
19-2015)
6-5A-2: NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS RESTRICTED:
No person, family, or household, except in veterinary hospitals, pet shops, kennels, or dog pounds, may keep more than three (3) domestic pets at any
time on any premises within the village; except, that a litter of puppies or kittens may be kept for up to four (4) months after birth. "Domestic pets" means
dogs or cats only, and shall not include any other kind or type of animal. The payment of a license fee or license fees on dogs or cats shall not be
construed to allow the keeping of more than the number of dogs or cats herein provided. (Ord. 2003-93, 12-4-2003; amd. 2011 Code)
6-5A-3: IMPOUNDMENT AND REDEMPTION OF DOGS:
A. Impoundment And Disposition: Any dog found running at large upon any public street or highway, or any dog for which the annual license fee has not
been paid, as required by this article, shall be impounded by the village police or community service officers. If such dog is not redeemed within seven
(7) days after being impounded, it shall be disposed of in a manner prescribed by the police. (1978 Code § 10-4-2; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Notice Of Impoundment: Upon the impounding of any dog, the police department or community service officer shall forthwith notify the owner or keeper
of the dog personally or by mail of such impounding, unless such owner or keeper is to him unknown or cannot be found. (1978 Code § 10-4-3; amd.
2011 Code)
C. Redemption Of Impounded Dog; Fees: Any dog impounded may be redeemed by the owner upon payment of a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each
day or any part thereof during which the dog has been impounded. All such fees shall be paid to the police department which shall remit the same to
the village treasurer for deposit to the general fund within three (3) working days thereafter. In addition, where the annual dog license fee has not been
paid, no dog shall be redeemed until the owner has first paid the annual license fee to the village clerk and has obtained the proper dog license. (Ord.
2011-72, 9-15-2011)
D. Place Of Impoundment: In the discretion of the village clerk and at the expense of the owner or keeper of any dog taken up by the village, the dog may
be confined with a veterinarian in the village in place of being confined in the dog pound. (1978 Code § 10-4-4)
6-5A-4: PENALTY:
A. Any person who is in violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense and shall be fined for each such
violation as follows:
1. The first violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of no less than thirty five dollars ($35.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
2. The second violation of this article by the same person within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than seventy five
dollars ($75.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 178/618
3. A third or subsequent violation of this article by the same person within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than one
hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
B. Every day of which, or during which, a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2011-72, 9-15-2011)
ARTICLE B. FEEDING WILD ANIMALS AND WATERFOWL
6-5B-1: PURPOSE:
The intent of this article is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community and its wildlife by prohibiting the feeding of wild animals and
waterfowl, including ducks, geese, and gulls, on public and private property in the Village of Glendale Heights. This article is not intended to prohibit or
prevent the incidental, sporadic or infrequent feeding of wild animals and waterfowl (e.g., feeding ducks a single piece of bread and that which is not
immediately consumed dissolves or otherwise is consumed by fish; attaching an ear of corn to a squirrel feeder, or feeding song birds utilizing a wellmaintained
bird feeder), but rather prohibit or prevent the feeding of wild animals and waterfowl in such a manner which creates an unclean, unsafe, or
unsanitary condition, either on such person's property, on the property of another, or on public property (e.g., unnatural or atypical accumulation of
waterfowl feces, damaging or destroying vegetation and grasses due to large concentrations of waterfowl, or the "luring", "drawing", or "attracting"
waterfowl away from the natural habitat of lakes, ponds and other bodies of water into private yards or public property).
It has been established that feeding wild animals and waterfowl increases the potential for damage to public parks and private property, may elevate the
potential for the spread of disease, and contributes to water-quality problems such as summer algal blooms. In addition, it is the intent of this article to
protect the welfare of the wild animals and waterfowl themselves, as wild animal studies have shown that feeding wild animals and waterfowl can interrupt
their normal migration patterns, can make them more aggressive in demanding food, cause nutritional problems, expose them to danger by eliminating
their natural fear of predators, and promote the spread of disease and disease-carrying parasites such as fleas and ticks. (Ord. 2018-104, 12-13-2018)
6-5B-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
A. It is hereby declared unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance to repeatedly feed any wild animal or waterfowl on private or public property in a manner
described in section 6-5B-1 of this article that creates an unclean, unsafe, or unsanitary condition.
B. This article does not prohibit the feeding of song birds using a well-maintained bird feeder which is a feeder that generally protects seed against the
weather. (Ord. 2018-104, 12-13-2018)
6-5B-3: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of this article shall be subject
to the penalties as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2018-104, 12-13-2018)
Chapter 6
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-6-1: ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONDUCT OF ANOTHER:
A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another when:
A. Having a mental state described by the ordinance defining the offense, he causes another to perform the conduct, and the other person in fact or by
reason of legal incapacity lacks such a mental state;
B. The ordinance defining the offense makes him so accountable; or
C. Either before or during the commission of an offense, and with the intent to promote or facilitate such commission, he solicits, aids, abets, agrees or
attempts to aid such other person in the planning or commission of the offense; however, a person is not so accountable unless the ordinance defining
the offense provides otherwise, if:
1. He is a victim of the offense committed;
2. The offense is so defined that his conduct was inevitable incident to its commission; or
3. Before the commission of the offense, he terminates his effort to promote or facilitate such commission and does one of the following: wholly
deprives his prior efforts of effectiveness in such commission, or gives timely warning to the proper law enforcement authorities, or otherwise makes
proper effort to prevent the commission of the offense. (1978 Code § 10-6-1-1)
6-6-2: IMPERSONATING, INTERFERING WITH VILLAGE OFFICERS:
No person shall falsely represent himself to be an officer of the village or shall, without being duly authorized, exercise or attempt to exercise any of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 179/618
duties, functions or powers of a village officer or shall hinder, obstruct, resist or otherwise interfere with any village officer in the discharge of his official
duties. (1978 Code § 10-6-1-2)
6-6-3: INTERFERING WITH, RESISTING POLICE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay, obstruct, resist or otherwise interfere with any member of the police department or any other person
duly authorized to perform police duties in the discharge of his duties. (Ord. 2007-80, 9-4-2007)
ARTICLE A. OFFENSES AGAINST ORDER
6-6A-1: ASSAULT:
A person commits an assault and is guilty of a violation of this code when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in
reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. (1978 Code § 10-6-2-2)
6-6A-2: BATTERY:
A person commits battery, which is a violation of this code, if he intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification and by any means:
A. Causes bodily harm to an individual; or
B. Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual. (1978 Code § 10-6-2-3)
6-6A-3: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct, which is a violation of this code, when he knowingly:
A. Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
B. With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation thereby ensues;
C. Transmits in any manner to the fire department a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there was no reasonable ground for
believing that such fire existed;
D. Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in any place and that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there was no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or
explosive was concealed in such place;
E. Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at the
time of such transmission that there was no reasonable ground for believing that such an offense had been committed;
F. Enters upon the property of another and, for a lewd or unlawful purpose, deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it;
G. Does any act in a violent, tumultuous or alarming manner toward another, placing that other person in danger of safety to his health, limb or life;
H. Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby public or private property of another is placed in danger of being destroyed or
damaged;
I. Endangers or interferes with the lawful pursuits of another by threats or acts of violence to that person;
J. Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the health, safety or property of another;
K. Utters "fighting words" directed at any other person resulting in that other person becoming alarmed or disturbed;
L. Congregates with one or more persons on any public place in such a manner as to impede the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
M. Knowingly or intentionally engages in any fight, riot or brawl within the village; provided, however, that any applicable affirmative defense as set forth in
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-1 shall be available; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 180/618
N. Knowingly or intentionally flashes or transmits to another, anywhere within the village, any known or clearly defined street gang signs with the intent to
create a breach of the peace or create a public disturbance. (Ord. 96-93, 10-17-1996)
6-6A-4: DRUNK AND DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
No person shall be drunk or shall be in a state of intoxication in any street, avenue or public place or in any private house or place to the disturbance of
any person. (1978 Code § 10-6-2-7)
6-6A-5: DISTURBING ASSEMBLIES:
No person shall wilfully interrupt or disturb any school or other assembly of people met for a lawful purpose, and no person shall interrupt or disturb any
religious assembly. (1978 Code § 10-6-2-5)
6-6A-6: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
A. No person shall assemble, congregate or collect in bodies, crowds, groups of three (3) or more for any unlawful purposes within the limits of the village;
nor shall any person in a body of three (3) or more congregate, loiter, linger, stand together or near to each other on any sidewalk, street, alley, public
parking lot, public park or public passageway or in front of, about or upon any stairway, doorway or window of any church, theater, auditorium, school,
hall or other public building so as to obstruct, block, impede or interfere with the free passage of persons on or upon said public sidewalks, streets and
ways, or so as to obstruct, impede or interfere with the free passage of persons entering or occupying any such public buildings or premises or any
premises fronting upon any public sidewalk, street or way, when requested to immediately disperse and move by any police officer.
B. Except for authorized personnel, no person shall assemble, congregate or collect, singly or in groups, within any area designated as Armitage Ditch,
Armitage Fork, Hestenman Ditch, Mill Pond, Havens/Dillon Drainage Ditch, or any waterway or watercourse within the boundaries of the village which
is provided for the purpose of carrying stormwater runoff. (1978 Code § 10-6-2-4)
6-6A-7: MOB ACTION:
Mob action, which shall be a violation of this code, consists of any of the following:
A. The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two (2) or more persons acting together and without authority of law;
B. The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
C. The assembly of two (2) or more persons, without authority of law, for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of anyone supposed to
have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence. (1978
Code § 10-6-2-10)
6-6A-8: ENGAGING IN DANGEROUS SPORTS:
No person shall, on any public street, sidewalk, or in any public place other than a designated recreation area in the village, fly kites, play ball or engage in
any sport or exercise likely to impede the passage of vehicles or otherwise injure persons or property or obstruct the business of other persons making use
of such public street, sidewalk or public place. (1978 Code § 10-6-2-6)
6-6A-9: USE, POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR ON PUBLIC WAYS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic liquor, as defined by state law, on any public way or in or about any motor vehicle upon a public
way in the village.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in or upon or about any motor vehicle upon any public way in
the village except in the original package and with the seal unbroken. (1978 Code § 11-1-11)
6-6A-10: SOCIAL HOSTING:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless expressly stated otherwise:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits, including dilutions and
mixtures thereof, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer and which contains onehalf
of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other
substances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 181/618
CONVEYANCE: Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft, or container operated for the transportation of persons or property.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of two (2) or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, permit, or condone the consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by a
minor at an event or gathering at a residence or premises.
ILLICIT DRUGS: Any drug, substance, or compound prohibited by law, including drugs prescribed by a physician that are in the possession of or
used by someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
INTENTIONALLY: Conduct engaged in by a person with the conscious objective to accomplish that result or engage in that conduct.
KNOWINGLY: Conduct engaged in by a person when he is consciously aware of the nature or attendant circumstances of his conduct which
constitutes an offense under this section.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: Any foster parent, person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by court order, or person appointed guardian or given
custody of a minor.
MINOR: Any person not yet twenty one (21) years of age.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
1. As a natural or adoptive parent, or stepparent;
2. As a legal guardian; or
3. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court.
PERSON: Any individual, person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking lots.
REASONABLE STEPS: Controlling access to alcohol and alcoholic beverages at an event or gathering; controlling the quantity of alcohol and
alcoholic beverages present at the event or gathering; verifying the age of the persons attending the event or gathering by inspecting driver's
licenses or other government issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcohol and alcoholic beverages while at the event or
gathering; and supervising the activities of minors at the event or gathering and calling for police assistance in the event people under twenty one
(21) are in possession of alcohol at the event or gathering or advising law enforcement in advance of departing a residence or premises under his or
her control that he or she will be away and that no underage person is authorized to be present and consume alcohol at residence or premises.
RELIGIOUS CEREMONY: The possession, consumption, and dispensation of alcohol or an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of conducting a bona
fide rite or religious ceremony.
RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: Any residence, home, dwelling, garage, shed, or other accessory structure, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether
occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or
used with or without permission or compensation.
RESPONSE COST: Cost associated with responses by law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, and other emergency response providers to an
event or gathering, including, but not limited to:
1. Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent
responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with an event or gathering, and the administrative costs attributable to such responses;
2. The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code enforcement, fire, or other emergency response personnel injured responding
to, remaining at, or leaving the event or gathering;
3. The cost of repairing any damaged village equipment or property, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at,
or leaving an event or gathering.
B. Prohibited: Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person to permit, allow, host or fail to take reasonable steps to prevent an event or
gathering at a residence or premises under his or her control or reasonable opportunity to control, or in any conveyance over which a person has
control or reasonable opportunity to control, where illicit drugs, alcohol, or alcoholic beverages can be, are, or were consumed by a minor, if such
person either knows or reasonably should have known that a minor could, was, or did consume illicit drugs, alcohol, or alcoholic beverages.
C. Person Deemed To Have Known: A person who permits, allows, or hosts an event or gathering shall be deemed to have known or should have known
that a minor could, was, or did consume illicit drugs, alcohol, alcoholic beverages if a person has not taken all reasonable steps to prevent the
consumption of illicit drugs, alcohol, alcoholic beverages by a minor.
D. Duty To Take Responsible Steps: It is the duty of any person who permits, allows, or hosts an event or gathering at a residence or premises under his
or her control or reasonable opportunity to control, or in any conveyance under his or her control or reasonable opportunity to control, where minors will
be present, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of illicit drugs, alcohol, or alcoholic beverages by any minor at the event or
gathering.
E. Intentional Actions: A person is responsible for violating and is in violation of this section if that person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels,
conspires with, or solicits another person to commit a violation of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 182/618
F. Prima Facie Evidence: It shall be prima facie evidence that any person present in, within, on and/or upon any residence, premises, or conveyance
where a violation of this section occurred and which was under his or her control or reasonable opportunity to control, had knowledge of such
violation(s).
G. Absent Host: A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering to be liable under this section.
H. Costs: In addition to any fine imposed, a person found to be in violation of this section shall be responsible for any and all response costs incurred to
investigate and/or respond to the event or gathering.
I. Exceptions: The following are exceptions to a violation of this section:
1. This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcohol or alcoholic beverages that occurs at a religious ceremony or exclusively between
a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian, as permitted by Illinois state law.
2. Any person who hosts an event or gathering shall not be in violation of this section, if he or she seeks assistance from the village police department
or other law enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses to abide by a person's exercise of reasonable steps, or terminates the event or
gathering because of an inability to prevent a minor from consuming illicit drugs, alcohol, or alcoholic beverages despite having taken reasonable
steps to do so, as long as such request is made or termination occurs prior to any complaints being made about the event or gathering.
J. Penalties: Any person who is in violation of this section shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense and shall be fined for each such violation as
follows:
1. The first violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00).
2. A second violation of this section by the same person within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
3. A third or subsequent violation of this section by the same person within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
Each day of which, or during which, a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2011-67, 9-1-2011)
ARTICLE B. OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
6-6B-1: TRESPASS:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a trespass within the village upon either public or private property.
B. Acts Constituting Trespass: Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of subsection A of this section, any of the following acts by any
person, firm or corporation shall be deemed included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of said subsection A:
1. An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by any owner or
occupant thereof;
2. The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or exhibited
at the main entrance to the premises or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing by
any owner or occupant thereof;
3. A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or occupant
thereof;
4. An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control thereof
or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle after being requested to leave by the person having such right. (1978 Code § 10-6-4-1)
6-6B-2: CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
Whoever commits any of the following acts shall be guilty of a violation of this code:
A. Knowingly damages any property of another;
B. Recklessly, by means of a fire or an explosive, damages property of another;
C. Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another;
D. Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without his consent;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 183/618
E. Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby intends to interfere with
the use by another of the land or building; or
F. Damages any property with intent to defraud an insurer. (1978 Code § 10-6-4-2; amd. 2011 Code)
G. 1. Removing, altering, defacing, covering, manufacturing, or destroying the manufacturer's serial number or any other manufacturer's number or
distinguishing identification mark upon any machine or other article of merchandise for the purpose of concealing or destroying the identity of such
machine or article of merchandise and being in possession of said machine or article.
2. Any machine or other article of merchandise which is affected by or used in the process of removing, altering, defacing, covering or destroying a
machine or article of merchandise shall be confiscated by the appropriate governmental authority. (Ord. 96-68, 7-25-1996)
3. Anyone found to have violated this subsection G shall be guilty of a petty offense and fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 96-68, 7-
25-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
6-6B-3: DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No person shall cut, injure, mark, alter, break, remove, destroy or otherwise damage any public street, public park or parkway, public sidewalk, public
building, any sewer or water pipe, hydrant, buffalo box, water meter, lamppost, traffic sign or signal or other public sign, any public fencing, tennis courts,
public recreation supplies or facilities or equipment, and any tree, shrub, plant, ornamental foliage or flowers growing in or upon any public park or
parkway, nor shall any person cause any damage to any grass or turf or recreation area within a public park or parkway by use of a motor vehicle or other
apparatus, or dig up or remove any grass, soil, clay, sand or gravel from any such public park, parkway or recreation area within the village. This section
shall not include grass cutting and landscaping activities and the planting, cutting or removal of trees or shrubs or recreational equipment within public
park, parkway or recreation areas by village employees or recreation personnel acting pursuant to instructions or permission given by the village
administrator or the parks, recreation and facilities director. (1978 Code § 10-6-4-7)
6-6B-4: POSTING HANDBILLS AND ADVERTISEMENTS:
No person shall paste, post, print, nail or otherwise erect any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind in any public park or parkway
including any tree, lamppost, hydrant, and utility service pole therein, or on any sidewalk, alley, street or public building within the village; provided, that this
section shall not apply to the posting of legal notices pursuant to law. (1978 Code § 10-6-4-5)
6-6B-5: DEFACING ADVERTISING:
No person shall wilfully and maliciously tear down, mutilate and deface or render illegible any poster, notice or handbill lawfully posted upon any street,
alley or other place in the village. (1978 Code § 10-6-4-3)
6-6B-6: VANDALISM; REWARD PROVISIONS:
There is hereby established a reward in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for any one person which shall be given by the village to
any person or corporation or institution who submits information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person committing an act of vandalism to any
public property or within any public place or public park or recreation area, and including therein acts of defacement or destruction or injury or damage to
or unauthorized removal of any public structure (including streetlights) or sign (including traffic signs); or to any recreation equipment or apparatus in a
public park and recreation area or public building; or to any tree or shrubbery located within a public park or on a public parkway, or to any public property,
vehicle or apparatus located within a public building or upon public grounds (including any fire station or library building located within the village). In
determining the amount of reward, the village board shall consider the cost of the damage occasioned to public property by such vandalism, the
seriousness or number of acts of vandalism involved, the length of court proceedings leading to conviction, and such other circumstances as the village
board deems proper. (1978 Code § 10-6-4-6)
6-6B-7: ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or cause to be abandoned any cart or basket obtained from any retail store within the village.
B. Determination Of Abandonment: A cart or basket obtained from a retail store shall be deemed abandoned when it has been removed from any parking
area immediately adjacent to the retail store. (1978 Code § 10-6-4-4)
C. Nuisance Declared; Impoundment, Redemption And Disposal: Any abandoned cart or basket is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be
confiscated by proper village officials and impounded at the village hall until claimed by a representative of the retail store owning the cart or basket.
The impounded cart or basket shall be released to its proper owner upon payment of a storage fee in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00). The
abandoned cart or basket shall be held by the village for a period of ten (10) days, after which time, any unclaimed cart or basket shall be disposed of
in any manner deemed fit by the village. (1978 Code § 10-6-4-4; amd. 2011 Code)
6-6B-8: USE OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS FOR POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
No public building in the village shall be used by any person, political organization or political party for purposes of conducting political activities, including
rallies, speeches, debates and other activities of a partisan political nature. (1978 Code § 10-6-4-5)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 184/618
6-6B-9: THEFT:
A person commits the offense of theft, which shall be a violation of this code, when:
A. He knowingly obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
B. He knowingly obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
C. He knowingly obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or (1978 Code § 10-6-4-9)
D. He knowingly obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to be stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably
induce him to believe that the property was stolen; or
E. He knowingly obtains or exerts control over property in the custody of any law enforcement agency which is explicitly represented to him by any law
enforcement officer or any individual acting in behalf of a law enforcement agency as being stolen, and: (1978 Code § 10-6-4-9; amd. 2011 Code)
1. Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the property; or
2. Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such a manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
3. Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such use
or benefit.
F. The property has a total value not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00). (1978 Code § 10-6-4-9)
6-6B-10: RETAIL THEFT:
A. A person commits the offense of retail theft when he or she knowingly:
1. Takes possession of, carries away, transfers, or causes to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
2. Alters, transfers, or removes any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or
in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
3. Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which such
merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
4. Under rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of the merchandise; or
5. Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such cart; or (1978 Code § 10-6-4-8)
6. Represents to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of property, knowing that such representation is false, and conveys or attempts to
convey that property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in exchange for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant; or
7. Uses or possesses any theft detection shielding device or theft detection device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
8. Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner and thereby intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the
property when a lessee of the personal property of another fails to return it to the owner, or if the lessee fails to pay the full retail value of such
property to the lessor in satisfaction of any contractual provision requiring such, within ten (10) days after written demand from the owner for its
return. A notice in writing, given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, by registered mail, to the lessee at the address given by the lessee and
shown on the leasing agreement shall constitute proper demand. (2011 Code)
B. If any person: 1) conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale
in a retail mercantile establishment; and 2) removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving payments for that merchandise in
that retail mercantile establishment, such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred such merchandise with the
intention of retaining it or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without
paying the full retail value of such merchandise. (1978 Code § 10-6-4-8)
C. The words and phrases defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16A-2.1 through 5/16A-2.11, "retail theft", shall be applicable to the provisions of this
section. (1978 Code § 10-6-4-8; amd. 2011 Code)
6-6B-11: THEFT FROM RECYCLING BINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not the owner or occupant of any premises upon which is located a bin or bins used for the collection of recycled
paper, glass, aluminum, tin or other recyclable materials, said bins having been furnished by or on behalf of the village, to remove, assist in removing or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 185/618
cause to be removed any material that has been placed in such a recycling bin or bins, unless authorized by the village. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (1978 Code § 10-6-4-10; amd. 2011 Code)
ARTICLE C. OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS AND DECENCY
6-6C-1: GAMBLING:
A. Definitions:
GAMBLING DEVICE: 1. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other machine or device for the reception of money or other thing of value on
chance or skill or upon the action of which money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded, bet, won or lost, or any mechanism, furniture, fixture,
equipment or other device designed primarily for use in a gambling place.
2. A gambling device does not include:
a. A coin in the slot operated mechanical device played for amusement which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical device,
which device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of the operation thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which
returns to the player thereof no money, property or right to receive money or property.
b. Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for the money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard.
c. A crane game. For purposes of this definition, a "crane game" is an amusement device involving skill, if it rewards the player exclusively with
merchandise contained within the amusement device proper and limited to toys, novelties and prizes other than currency, each having a
wholesale value which is not more than twenty five dollars ($25.00).
d. A redemption machine. For the purposes of this definition, a "redemption machine" is a single-player or multi-player amusement device
involving a game, the object of which is throwing, rolling, bowling, shooting, placing, or propelling a ball or other object that is either physical or
computer generated on a display or with lights into, upon, or against a hole or other target that is either physical or computer generated on a
display or with lights, or stopping, by physical, mechanical, or electronic means, a moving object that is either physical or computer generated on
a display or with lights into, upon, or against a hole or other target that is either physical or computer generated on a display or with lights,
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The outcome of the game is predominantly determined by the skill of the player.
(2) The award of the prize is based solely upon the player's achieving the object of the game or otherwise upon the player's score.
(3) Only merchandise prizes are awarded.
(4) The wholesale value of the prizes awarded in lieu of tickets or tokens for single play of the device does not exceed twenty five dollars
($25.00).
(5) The redemption value of tickets, tokens, and other representations of value, which may be accumulated by players to redeem prizes of
greater value, for a single play of the device does not exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00).
LOTTERY: Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised
consideration for a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name.
POLICY GAME: Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees, by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other
device, that any particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall, in the event of any contingency in the nature of a lottery, entitle the purchaser
or holder to receive money, property or evidence of debt. (1978 Code § 10-6-1-4; amd. Ord. 2013-37, 6-20-2013)
B. Gambling Prohibited: A person commits gambling, which shall be a violation of this code, when he:
1. Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value.
2. Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or any political nomination, appointment or election.
3. Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any gambling device.
(1978 Code § 10-6-1-4)
4. Contracts to have or give himself or another the option to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain or other commodity
whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, where it is, at the time of making such contract, intended by both parties thereto that the
contract to buy or sell, or the option, whenever exercised, or the contract resulting therefrom, shall be settled, not by the receipt or delivery of such
property, but by the payment only of differences in prices thereof; however, the issuance, purchase, sale, exercise, endorsement or guarantee, by or
through a person registered with the secretary of state pursuant to 815 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8 or by or through a person exempt from such
registration under such section, of a put, call or other option to buy or sell securities which have been registered with the secretary of state or which
are exempt from such registration under 815 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3 is not gambling within the meaning of this subsection B4. (1978 Code
§ 10-6-1-4; amd. 2011 Code)
5. Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by means of which bets or wagers have been or are recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he has received in the course of a bet or wager.
6. Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or chance, political nomination, appointment or election.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 186/618
7. Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document or other
similar device.
8. Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game or drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticket or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or
similar device, or any advertisement of any lottery or policy game.
9. Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds or chances in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar means,
or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or receipt of such information; except, that nothing in this subsection B9 prohibits
the transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting of sporting events or contests. (1978 Code § 10-6-1-4)
C. Activities Not Deemed Gambling: Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted of gambling:
1. Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance including, without limitation, contracts of indemnity or guaranty, or life,
health or accident insurance.
2. Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or
endurance, or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered into such contest.
3. Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the laws of this state.
4. Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in interstate or
foreign commerce to any place outside of this state when such transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law; or the manufacture,
distribution or possession of video gaming terminals, as defined in the video gaming act, by manufacturers, distributors, and terminal operators
licensed to do so under the video gaming act.
5. The game commonly known as "bingo", when conducted in accordance with the bingo license and tax act.
6. Lotteries when conducted by the state of Illinois in accordance with the Illinois lottery law. This exemption includes any activity conducted by the
department of revenue to sell lottery tickets pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois lottery law and its rules.
7. The purchase of lottery tickets through the internet for a lottery conducted by the state of Illinois under the program established in section 7.12 of the
Illinois lottery law.
8. Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling activity or
enterprise. For the purpose of this section, an antique slot machine is one manufactured twenty five (25) years ago or more.
9. Raffles when conducted in accordance with the raffles act and the village raffle ordinance, title 4, chapter 7 of this code.
10. Charitable games when conducted in accordance with the charitable games act.
11. Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under the Illinois pull tabs and jar games act.
12. Video gaming terminal games at a licensed establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, or licensed veterans'
establishment when conducted in accordance with the video gaming act.
13. Games of skill or chance where money or other things of value can be won, but no payment or purchase is required to participate. (Ord. 2013-37,
6-20-2013)
D. Evidence: In prosecutions under subsection B of this section, circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and weight as in any criminal
prosecution. (1978 Code § 10-6-1-4)
6-6C-2: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
A. Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upward who performs any of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency, which
shall be a violation of this code: (1978 Code § 10-6-3-1)
1. An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-12; or
2. A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
Breast feeding of infants is not an act of public indecency. (1978 Code § 10-6-3-1; amd. 2011 Code)
B. "Public place", for purposes of this section, means any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. (1978 Code § 10-
6-3-1)
6-6C-3: INDECENT EXHIBITION OF ANIMALS:
No person shall instigate, cause or procure, or in any manner assist, in any indecent exhibition of any animal. (1978 Code § 10-6-3-2)
6-6C-4: OBSCENITY:
A. Elements Of The Offense: A person commits obscenity, which shall be a violation of this code, when, with knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or
recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, such person:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 187/618
1. Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or provide, any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or embodiment
of the obscene;
2. Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene;
3. Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
4. Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition of his body for gain;
5. Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal laws or
regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
6. Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene. (1978 Code § 10-
6-3-4)
B. Definition: Any material or performance is obscene if:
1. The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and
2. The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate
sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition
of the genitals; and
3. Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. (1978 Code § 10-6-3-4; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Interpretation Of Evidence:
1. Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults; except, that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially susceptible
audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to such an
audience. (1978 Code § 10-6-3-4)
2. Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate that material is being commercially exploited
for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that the matter is
lacking in serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. (1978 Code § 10-6-3-4; amd. 2011 Code)
3. In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence shall be admissible to show:
a. The character of the audience for which the material was designed or to which it was directed.
b. What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would probably have on
the behavior of such people.
c. The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits of the material or absence thereof.
d. The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in the state.
e. Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or other promotion of the material.
f. Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
D. Prima Facie Evidence: The creation, purchase, procurement or possession of a mold, engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially
adapted for reproducing multiple copies or the possession of more than three (3) copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an intent
to disseminate.
E. Affirmative Defenses: It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the dissemination:
1. Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than children under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other special justification for possession of such material. (1978 Code § 10-6-3-4)
6-6C-5: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS:
A. Definition: "Cannabis" includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa,
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof and the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its
naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such
stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks
(except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
B. Violation: It shall be a violation of this section for any person knowingly to possess any quantity of any substance containing cannabis; except, that the
effect of this section shall be limited to persons knowingly possessing less than thirty grams (30 g) of any substance containing cannabis. (1978 Code
§ 10-6-2-11)
C. Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
offense. (1978 Code § 10-6-2-11; amd. 2011 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 188/618
6-6C-6: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
A. Definitions:
CANNABIS: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 3 of the "cannabis control act"1, as if that definition were incorporated herein.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102 of the "Illinois controlled substances act"2, as if that definition were
incorporated herein.
DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in
section 10 of the methamphetamine control and community protection act, which are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled
substance in violation of the "cannabis control act3" or the Illinois controlled substances act4 or the methamphetamine control and community
protection act. The term includes, but is not limited to:
1. Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance.
2. Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled substance.
3. Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis or
controlled substances.
4. Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons.
5. Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body
including, where applicable, the following items:
a. Water pipes.
b. Carburetion tubes and devices.
c. Smoking and carburetion masks.
d. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
e. Carburetor pipes.
f. Electric pipes.
g. Air driven pipes.
h. Chillums.
i. Bongs.
j. Ice pipes or chillers.
6. Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is for use in violation of this section. (Ord. 99-08, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Sale, Delivery Or Possession Prohibited:
1. Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use in ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body, or for the purpose of preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for
that use. In determining intent under this subsection B1, the court or trier of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or
controlled substance to the drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or controlled substance on or in the drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 99-08, 1-7-
1999)
2. Sale Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, sell, or deliver for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia.
(Ord. 99-08, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Nuisance Declared; Procedures:
1. Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for any
commercial consideration is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
2. The village attorney, upon direction of the village administrator, may commence an action in the county circuit court to abate the public nuisance as
described in this subsection.
3. Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged public nuisance exists, the court may, without bond, enter a temporary
restraining order to enjoin any defendant from maintaining the nuisance and may, without bond, enter into a preliminary injunction restraining any
defendant from removing or interfering with any property used in connection with the public nuisance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 189/618
4. If, during the proceedings and hearings upon the merits, the existence of the nuisance is established, and it is established that the nuisance was
maintained with the permission of the owner, or an agent of the owner managing the premises, the court shall enter an order restraining all persons
from maintaining or permitting the nuisance and from using the premises for a period of one year thereafter. However, an owner, lessee, or other
occupant thereof may use the premises if the owner gives bond with sufficient security or surety in an amount between five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), approved by the court, payable to the village of Glendale Heights. The bond shall include a
condition that no offense specified in this section shall be committed at, in, or upon the property described, and a condition that the principal obligor
and surety assumes responsibility for any fine, costs or damages incurred by any person resulting from such an offense.
D. Exempt Items:
1. This section shall not apply to:
a. Items marketed for use in preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to
lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale; or
b. Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in connection with, the planting, propagating, cultivation, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance. Items exempt under this subsection D1b include, but are not
limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette rolling papers; or
c. Items listed in subsection A of this section which are marketed for decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered completely
inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose prohibited by this section or state or federal law.
2. In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this subsection, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
a. The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item involved has been put.
b. Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the device
upon its functioning.
c. Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can be or may be put.
d. Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery.
e. Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs.
f. The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise
exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made.
g. Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor
or dealer of tobacco products.
h. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.
E. Seizure And Forfeiture: All drug paraphernalia is subject to forfeiture. Any drug paraphernalia that is the subject of a violation of this section shall be
subject to seizure and subject to forfeiture upon a finding of guilty of any person for a violation of this section. Upon appropriate order of the court, said
drug paraphernalia shall be destroyed.
F. Penalties:
1. Any person who keeps for sale, offers for sale, sells, or delivers any item of drug paraphernalia commits a violation of this section for which a fine of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each item shall be imposed. (Ord. 99-08, 1-7-1999)
2. A person who knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or
a controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use, commits a violation of this section for
which the court shall impose a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in addition to any other penalty prescribed. In determining intent under this
subsection F2, the trier of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or controlled substance to the drug paraphernalia or the
presence of cannabis or a controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 99-08, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
ARTICLE D. OFFENSES INVOLVING WEAPONS
6-6D-1: UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS:
A. A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons, which shall be a violation of this code, when he knowingly:
1. Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries any bludgeon, blackjack, slingshot, sand club, sandbag, metal knuckles or any knife,
commonly referred to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device
in the handle of the knife;
2. Carries or possesses with intent to use the same unlawfully against another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle or
other piece of glass, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character;
3. Carries on or about his person or in any vehicle, a tear gas gun projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance;
4. Carries concealed in any vehicle or concealed on or about his person, except when on his land or in his own abode or fixed place of business, any
pistol, revolver or other firearm;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 190/618
5. Sets a spring gun;
6. Possesses any device or attachment of any kind designed, used or intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm;
7. Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries any weapon from which more than eight (8) shots or bullets may be discharged by a single
function of the firing device, any shotgun with a barrel less than eighteen inches (18") in length, or any bomb, bombshell, grenade, bottle or other
container containing an explosive substance, such as, but not limited to, black power bombs and Molotov cocktails;
8. Carries or possesses any firearm or other deadly weapon in any place which is licensed to sell intoxicating beverages, or at any public gathering
held pursuant to a license issued by any governmental body, or any public gathering at which an admission is charged, excluding a place where a
showing, demonstration or lecture involving the exhibition of unloaded firearms is conducted; or
9. Carries or possesses in a vehicle or on or about his person any pistol, revolver or firearm, when he is hooded, robed or masked in such a manner as
to conceal his identity.
B. The presence in an automobile, other than a public omnibus, of any weapon, instrument or substance referred to in subsection A7 of this section is
prima facie evidence that it is in the possession of, and is being carried by, all persons occupying such automobile at the time such weapon, instrument
or substance is found, except under the following circumstances:
1. If such weapon, instrument or instrumentality is found upon the person of one of the occupants therein; or
2. If such weapon, instrument or substance is found in an automobile operated for hire by a duly licensed driver in the due, lawful and proper pursuit of
his trade, then such presumption shall not apply to the driver. (1978 Code § 10-6-5-1)
6-6D-2: UNLAWFUL SALE OF FIREARMS:
A person commits the offense of unlawful sale of firearms, which shall be a violation of this code, when he knowingly:
A. Sells or gives any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person to any person under eighteen (18) years of age;
B. Sells or gives any firearm to a person under twenty one (21) years of age who has been convicted of a misdemeanor other than a traffic offense or
adjudged delinquent;
C. Sells or gives any firearm to any narcotic addict;
D. Sells or gives any firearm to any person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of Illinois or any other jurisdiction;
E. Sells or gives any firearm to any person who has been a patient in a mental hospital within the past five (5) years;
F. Sells or gives any firearm to any person who is mentally retarded; or
G. Delivers any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person, incidental to a sale, without withholding delivery of such firearm for at least
seventy two (72) hours after application for its purchase has been made, or delivers any rifle, shotgun or other long gun, incidental to a sale, without
withholding delivery of such rifle, shotgun or other long gun for at least twenty four (24) hours after application for its purchase has been made.
However, this subsection shall not apply to:
1. The sale of a firearm to a law enforcement officer or a person who desires to purchase a firearm for use in promoting the public interest incident to
his employment as a bank guard, armed truck guard or other similar employment;
2. A mail order sale of a firearm to a nonresident of Illinois under which the firearm is mailed to a point outside the boundaries of Illinois; (1978 Code
§ 10-6-5-2)
3. The sale of a firearm to a nonresident of Illinois while at a firearm showing or display recognized by the Illinois department of state police; or (1978
Code § 10-6-5-2; amd. 2011 Code)
4. The sale of a firearm when another firearm is traded in for the firearm purchased, in whole or in part. (1978 Code § 10-6-5-2)
6-6D-3: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS OR AMMUNITION:
A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of firearms or firearm ammunition, which shall be a violation of this code, when:
A. He is under eighteen (18) years of age and has in his possession any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person;
B. He is under twenty one (21) years of age, has been convicted of a misdemeanor other than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent and has any firearm
or firearm ammunition in his possession;
C. He has been convicted of a felony under the laws of Illinois or any other jurisdiction within five (5) years from release from the penitentiary or within five
(5) years of conviction if penitentiary sentence has not been imposed, and has any firearm or firearm ammunition in his possession;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 191/618
D. He is a narcotic addict and has any firearm or firearm ammunition in his possession;
E. He has been a patient in a mental hospital within the past five (5) years and has any firearm or firearm ammunition in his possession; or
F. He is mentally retarded and has any firearm or firearm ammunition in his possession. (1978 Code § 10-6-5-3)
6-6D-4: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS; PROVIDING TO MINORS:
A. Prohibited Discharge Of Firearms, Bows And Crossbows:
1. Firearms: It shall be unlawful for any person,except a member of the police department, when on duty, or any officer of any court whose duty it may
be to serve warrants or make arrests, to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, fowling piece or other firearm within the village. (Ord. 2005-80, 12-1-2005)
2. Bows And Crossbows:
a. No person shall be permitted to fire or discharge within the village any bow, crossbow, or similar weapon which is calculated or intended to propel
or project an arrow or similar projectile.
b. Notwithstanding subsection A2a of this section, archery lessons may be held by organizations with qualified instructors in any public park. Said
organizations must first register with the village clerk on a form provided by the village clerk, and there shall be no charge to register. The
registration form shall include the name of the organization, contact information, the date of the archery lessons, the location of the archery
lessons, the amount of people in the archery class, and any other information deemed reasonably necessary for the effective control or
management of the archery lesson and to protect the welfare of the community. The registration form shall be dated and signed under penalty of
perjury. In addition, the organization shall provide proof of liability insurance to the village which names the village as an additional insured.
B. BB Guns, Paintball Guns And Slingshots:
1. Prohibited Discharges:
a. No person shall be permitted to fire or discharge within the village any air rifle, air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, pellet gun,
paintball gun, slingshot, or any other implement which is calculated or intended to propel or project a breakable paintball, bullet, pellet, or other
projectile constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead, or any other hard material with a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm.
b. Notwithstanding subsection B1a of this section, target lessons may be held by organizations with qualified instructors in any public park. Said
organizations must first register with the village clerk on a form provided by the village clerk, and there shall be no charge to register. The
registration form shall include the name of the organization, contact information, the date of the target lessons, the location of the target lessons,
the amount of people in the target class, and any other information deemed reasonably necessary for the effective control or management of the
target lesson and to protect the welfare of the community. The registration form shall be dated and signed under penalty of perjury. In addition, the
organization shall provide proof of liability insurance to the village which names the village as an additional insured. (Ord. 2008-34, 5-22-2008)
2. Providing To Minors; Nonaccessibility:
a. Businesses:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any business or its employees to sell, lend, give or otherwise transfer any air rifle, air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring
pistol, BB gun, pellet gun, paintball gun, slingshot, or any other implement which is calculated or intended to propel or project a breakable
paintball, bullet, pellet, or other projectile constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead, or any other hard material with a force that reasonably is
expected to cause bodily harm to any person under the age of thirteen (13) where the business or its employee knows or has cause to believe
the person to be under thirteen (13) years of age or where such business or employee has failed to make a reasonable inquiry relative to the
age of such person and such person is under thirteen (13) years of age.
(2) It shall also be unlawful for any business or its employees to allow any air rifle, air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, pellet gun,
paintball gun, slingshot, or any other implement which is calculated or intended to propel or project a breakable paintball, bullet, pellet, or other
projectile constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead, or any other hard material with a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm to be
displayed in anything other than locked cases, and the locked cases shall only be accessible to the employee of the business.
b. Others: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, lend or otherwise transfer any air rifle, air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun,
pellet gun, paintball gun, slingshot, or any other implement which is calculated or intended to propel or project a breakable paintball, bullet, pellet,
or other projectile constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead, or any other hard material with a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm
to any person under the age of thirteen (13) except where the relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward or adult instructor and pupil
exists between such person and the person under thirteen (13) years of age, or where such person stands in loco parentis to the person under the
age of thirteen (13).
3. Possession, Concealment:
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, possess or conceal in any vehicle or carry, possess or conceal on or about his person, except when on
his own land or in his own abode or fixed place of business, any air rifle, air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, pellet gun, paintball
gun, slingshot, or any other implement which is calculated or intended to propel or project a breakable paintball, bullet, pellet, or other projectile
constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead, or any other hard material with a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm, except such items
may be transported if the following conditions are met:
(1) Such items are broken down in a nonfunctioning state;
(2) Such items are not immediately accessible;
(3) Such items are unloaded and enclosed in a case, shipping box, or other container; and
(4) The ammunition, pellet, or other projectile is separated from such item.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 192/618
b. The presence in an automobile other than a public omnibus of any such item is prima facie evidence that it is in the possession of, and is being
carried by, all persons occupying such automobile at the time such item is found, except under the following circumstances:
(1) If such item is found upon the person of one of the occupants therein.
(2) If such item is found in an automobile operated for hire by a duly licensed driver in the due, lawful and proper pursuit of his trade, then such
presumption shall not apply to the driver.
C. Penalties; Confiscation Of Weapons:
1. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in an amount not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense; except, that:
a. Any person intentionally violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined in an amount not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
b. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section while occupying an automobile shall be fined in an amount not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
2. In addition to any other penalty that may be imposed for violating this section, weapons used in violation hereof shall be forfeited to and confiscated
by the village. (Ord. 2005-80, 12-1-2005)
Chapter 7
MINORS
6-7-1: CURFEW:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words shall be defined as follows:
BODILY INJURY: Injury that harms or creates a substantial risk of harm to one's person or that causes death, disfigurement, loss or impairment of the
function of any bodily member or organ.
CURFEW HOURS: 1. Between one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturday.
2. Between one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sunday.
3. Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following
day.
CUSTODIAN: A person who has attained the age of twenty one (21) years and who is authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody
of a minor.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstance or combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for such immediate action as is
necessary to protect a person from imminent threat of bodily injury, loss of life or to protect property from substantial damage. The term includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, medical emergency, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent bodily injury, loss
of life or loss of property.
ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any restaurant,
retail establishment, eatery, or place of amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN: 1. A person who, by court order, is designated guardian of the person of a minor; or
2. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court of competent jurisdiction.
MINOR: Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PARENT: 1. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of a minor; or
2. A person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of the minor.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, public
ways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, shops, parks, places of entertainment or
amusement, arenas, stadiums, and restaurants.
REMAIN: 1. To linger or stay; or
2. Fail to leave the premises of an establishment when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the
establishment. (Ord. 2004-29, 5-13-2004; amd. Ord. 2006-44, 8-3-2006; 2011 Code)
B. Offenses: It shall be unlawful for:
1. A minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the village during curfew hours; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 193/618
2. A parent, guardian or custodian to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the village during curfew hours; or
3. The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours.
C. Defenses:
1. It shall be a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section that the minor was:
a. Accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian or custodian;
b. On or returning from an errand at the direction of the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian without any unnecessary detour or stop;
c. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
d. Engaged in an employment activity in which such minor may lawfully engage under the laws of the state of Illinois, or traveling to or returning
home from the employment activity, without any unnecessary detour or stop;
e. Involved in an emergency;
f. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence, that of a guardian or custodian, or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor
does not object to the minor's presence;
g. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the village, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
h. Exercising first amendment rights protected by the United States constitution or article I, sections 3, 4 and 5 of the constitution of the state of
Illinois, or both, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or (Ord. 2004-29, 5-13-2004)
i. Married or previously married or has been declared an emancipated minor in accordance with Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 2004-29, 5-13-2004;
amd. 2011 Code)
2. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection B of this section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours, and the minor refused, when first requested,
to leave the premises.
D. Enforcement:
1. Prior to taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall inquire as to the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the
public place. No citation shall be issued and no arrest shall be made under subsection B of this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response of the minor and all other circumstances known to the officer at the time, no defense as set
forth in subsection C of this section exists.
2. Any police officer who finds a minor child in violation of subsection B of this section is required to take such minor into custody until such time as the
minor's parent, legal guardian, or other adult having legal care or custody of the minor is located and notified of the violation and takes custody of the
minor from the police. If no such person can be located within a reasonable period of time, the minor shall be referred to the appropriate juvenile
authorities. (Ord. 2004-29, 5-13-2004)
E. Penalty: Any person who violates a provision of this section shall be fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 2004-29,
5-13-2004; amd. 2011 Code)
6-7-2: TRUANCY:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a student who is: 1) a natural or adoptive parent; 2) a legal guardian; 3) a person who stands in loco
parentis; or 4) a person to whom legal custody has been given by court order.
PARENTAL PERMISSION: Permission given to a student to absent himself or herself from school or from one or more school classes or from a school
day.
STUDENT: Any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years and enrolled in grades 1 through 12 of a public, private, or parochial school
within the corporate limits of the village of Glendale Heights or any person enrolled in grades 1 through 12 of a public, private, or parochial school
outside the corporate limits of the village of Glendale Heights but whose principal residence is within the corporate limits of the village of Glendale
Heights. Students who are instructed in a homeschool program are not subject to the provisions of this section.
TRUANT: A student who absents himself or herself from attendance during all or part of a school day during a time when school is in session without
parental permission, without permission of a school authority, or without "valid cause" as defined in this subsection.
VALID CAUSE: Illness, observance of a religious holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency, and other situations beyond the control of
the student as determined by the principal or the principal's designee of the school which that student attends. (Ord. 2003-09, 2-6-2003; amd. 2011
Code)
B. Prohibitions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 194/618
1. It shall be unlawful for any student to absent himself or herself from attendance during all or part of a school day during a time when school is in
session without parental permission, without permission of a school authority, or without valid cause.
2. It shall be further unlawful for a student to knowingly submit to school authorities a written excuse which explains the absence from school
attendance of the student and which written excuse contains false information.
3. Each day or portion of a day that a student absents himself or herself from attendance in school during a time when classes are in session without
parental permission, without permission of a school authority, or without valid cause shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
C. Parental Responsibility:
1. It shall be unlawful for a parent to knowingly or negligently permit or cause a student who is under the age of eighteen (18) years old to be truant.
2. A parent shall be considered to have knowingly or negligently permitted a student to be truant if the parent has actual knowledge or reasonable
cause to know that the student has absented himself or herself from attendance during all or part of a school day during a time when school is in
session, the student is scheduled to be attending class, and the parent fails to act to ensure that the student attends the school and classes in which
he or she is enrolled.
3. It shall be unlawful for a parent to knowingly submit to school authorities a written excuse which explains the absence from school attendance of the
student in his or her care or control, which excuse contains false information.
4. Each day that a student is absent from attendance in school and/or a school class during a time when school is in session when the parent(s)
knowingly permitted or caused that person to be "truant", as defined in subsection A of this section, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
D. Enforcement Procedures:
1. A truancy complaint may be filed and signed by a member of the staff of the school from which the student was truant or by a police officer, naming
the student as the defendant therein, and setting forth the name and address of the truant student, the names and addresses of the parents or
persons having custody or control of the student, the age of the student at the time of the alleged truancy, the grade level at which the student is
enrolled, and the date(s) or time(s) of the alleged truant behavior.
2. If, after the truancy complaint is given above, a student is truant for a second time, a truancy complaint may also be filed against one or more of the
parents of the truant student, signed by a member of the staff of the school from which the student was truant or by a police officer.
3. If the student is cited as a truant on more than one occasion under the same or similar circumstances within a period of three (3) months, a
rebuttable presumption shall arise that the parent(s) knowingly or negligently permitted or caused such truancy.
4. A truancy complaint against a parent shall contain the name and address of the truant student, the name(s) and address(es) of the parent(s) having
custody or control of the student, the age of the student at the time of the alleged truancy, the grade level at which the student is enrolled, the date(s)
or time(s) of the alleged truant behavior, and an allegation that the parent(s) knowingly or negligently caused or permitted the truancy alleged.
5. No truancy complaint shall be filed against any student or parent, as provided in this section, unless the school from which the student is truant has
first offered the student support or counseling services which address the issue of truancy as determined to be appropriate by the school district.
E. Remedies And Penalties:
1. Injunctive Relief:
a. In addition to any other penalties provided herein, a court, upon a finding that a student is truant, may order that, unless valid cause exists, the
student shall attend school in the school in which he or she is enrolled during all times when school is in session, including all class periods.
b. In addition to any other penalties provided herein, upon a finding by the court that the parent(s) knowingly or negligently permitted or caused a
"student", as defined in subsection A of this section, to be truant, said parent(s) shall be ordered to take all steps possible to ensure that the
student is not truant in the future.
2. Penalties:
a. Parents: If, after a first notice of a truancy violation given to the parent(s) that his or her child has been truant, and a parent violates any provision
of this section in connection with a subsequent violation by the student, this shall be treated as a first offense by the parent. For the first offense by
a parent, the fines shall be not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), plus costs. For each
subsequent offense by a parent, the fine shall be not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
plus costs.
b. Students: If, after a first notice of violation is given to the student pursuant to this section, a subsequent violation by that student occurs, the
student shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus costs. For each
subsequent offense by a student, the fine shall be not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00),
plus costs.
c. Community Service: Any person that shall violate any of the provisions of this section may be required, in lieu of or in addition to a fine, to perform
a period of community service not to exceed seventy two (72) hours per violation. Community service may consist of manual labor assigned by the
court, to be done in the village or elsewhere, relative to any cause or project that the court may deem suitable to help cause a positive behavior
change. Community service shall not be scheduled during school hours when students are required to be in attendance in school. (Ord. 2003-09,
2-6-2003)
6-7-3: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms specified have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
CRIMINAL STREET GANG OR GANG: Any ongoing organization, association in fact or group of three (3) or more persons, whether formally or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 195/618
informally organized, having as one of its activities the commission of criminal or illegal acts, and whose members individually or collectively engage in
or have engaged in a pattern of criminal or illegal acts.
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of the state, but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the juvenile court act.
MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years but not yet nineteen (19) years of age. (Ord. 2002-24, 4-4-2002)
B. Improper Supervision Of Minor: Any parent, legal guardian or other person commits improper supervision of a child when he knowingly permits a child
in his custody or control under the age of nineteen (19) years to: associate with known thieves, burglars, felons, narcotic addicts or other persons of ill
repute; visit a place of prostitution; commit a lewd act; or commit an act tending to break the peace or violate a municipal curfew ordinance. (Ord. 2002-
24, 4-4-2002; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Notice Of Violation: Upon an initial offense identified in subsection B of this section, a parent or legal guardian shall be notified by the village police
department when an unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian is identified by the police department as associating with known
thieves, burglars, felons, narcotic addicts or other persons of ill repute; visiting a place of prostitution; committing a lewd act; or committing an act
tending to break the peace or violate a municipal curfew ordinance. The notice shall specify the offense and shall provide the parent or legal guardian
with information on how to obtain assistance. (Ord. 2002-24, 4-4-2002)
D. Penalty: Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense.
(Ord. 2002-24, 4-4-2002; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 8
FIREWORKS
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the word "fireworks" shall mean any squib, rocket, firecracker, roman candle, fire balloon, torpedo, flashlight composition, fireworks
or other devices or compositions used to obtain visible or audible pyrotechnic display. (1978 Code § 10-6-6-1; amd. 2011 Code)
6-8-2: PROHIBITIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, store, use, manufacture, assemble, mix, handle, possess, offer for sale,
expose for sale, or sell any fireworks. Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to the possession or use of signaling devices for current daily
consumption by railroads and others requiring them in their occupation or the possession, sale or use of normal stocks of flashlight compositions by
photographers or dealers in photographic supplies or the giving of a fireworks display in a public park or other public open place when a permit has been
secured for such display. (1978 Code § 10-6-6-2)
6-8-3: FIREWORKS DISPLAYS:
A. Permit Required: The village president and board of trustees, upon due application, may grant a permit to a properly qualified person giving a display of
fireworks in the public parks or other public open places. Such permits shall impose any restrictions as may be necessary to safeguard life and property
in each case.
B. Application For Permit; Fee; Nontransferability: Application for a permit to exhibit fireworks shall be made in writing at least thirty (30) days in advance of
the date of display, and action shall be taken on such application by the village president and board of trustees. The fee for such permit shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00). The sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for the purpose stated in this chapter only. No
permit granted hereunder shall be assigned or transferred by the permittee.
C. Insurance Or Bond Required:
1. Every applicant shall file a policy of insurance in which the village, its officials, agents and employees, are named insureds against any and all claims
arising through or because of such display. In lieu of filing the policy of insurance, a certificate evidencing the issuance of such insurance, executed
by a duly authorized agent, servant or employee of the carrier, may be so filed; provided, that such issuance shall be written by an insurance carrier
authorized to conduct such business in the state. In lieu of filing said policy or certificate of insurance, an applicant may file an indemnity bond
running to the village, its officials, agents and employees, in the sum of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) to indemnify the village and said persons
against any and all claims arising through or because of such display. Such policy or indemnity bond shall be subject to the approval of village
attorney and shall be filed in the office of the village clerk.
2. The insurance policy required by this subsection, or the indemnity bond in lieu thereof, shall be written for at least the following minimum coverage:
a. A limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for all damages arising out of bodily injury, sickness or disease, including death, at any time resulting
therefrom, sustained by each person as a result of any one accident and a total limit of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for all such damages
sustained by two (2) or more persons as a result of any one accident.
b. A limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for all damages arising out of injury or destruction of all property of one or more persons as a result of
any one accident.
c. The policy shall contain a provision that it shall not be canceled by the carrier until at least ten (10) days' notice thereof shall have been given to
the village by mailing such notice to the village clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 196/618
D. Revocation Of Permit: Any permit issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked by the village administrator for a violation of the provisions
of this section, and the revocation of the permit shall not preclude the imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this chapter. (1978 Code § 10-6-6-
3)
6-8-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A
separate and distinct offense shall be considered as having been committed for each and every day any person shall violate any provisions of this chapter.
(1978 Code § 10-6-6-4; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 9
GRAFFITI
6-9-1: PROHIBITIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to inscribe, draw or otherwise place upon the surface of any structure or wall that is publicly or privately owned any word,
phrase, diagram, symbol, sketch, or letters wherein the contents thereof are visible to any member of the general public and contains references to sexual
activity, diagrams relating to sexual activity or sexual organs, references to criminal activities, or groups which promote or are involved in criminal activity,
swearing or fighting words, defamatory materials about any person, or references to relationships. The above list is not to be considered a limitation, but is
merely illustrative of items known as graffiti. It shall be an affirmative defense to the alleged violation of this section if such activity was undertaken with the
prior written consent of the owner of the property, demonstrating that the owner was aware of the content and method of the inscription to be placed on the
structure or wall. (1978 Code § 10-8-1)
6-9-2: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL:
A. Industrial And Commercial Structures: It shall be the duty of the owner of an industrial or commercial structure or wall upon which any inscription or
representation prohibited in section 6-9-1 of this chapter appears to remove, eradicate or eliminate such inscription or representation within three (3)
days. In the event the owner has failed to eliminate such graffiti, the owner or his agent shall be notified via certified mail or personal notice that he has
an additional forty eight (48) hours to remove such graffiti. In the event the owner fails to remove the graffiti within five (5) days, the village, at its option,
may remove the graffiti at the owner's expense, and the village shall not be liable for any damage caused by said removal.
B. Residential Structures: It shall be the duty of the owner of a residential structure or wall upon which any inscription or representation prohibited in
section 6-9-1 of this chapter appears, to remove, eradicate or eliminate such inscription or representation within three (3) days. In the event the owner
has failed to eliminate such graffiti, the owner or his agents shall be notified via certified mail or personal notice that he has an additional seventy two
(72) hours to remove such graffiti. In the event the owner fails to remove the graffiti within seven (7) days, the village, at its option, may remove the
graffiti at the owner's expense, and the village shall not be liable for any damage caused by said removal. (Ord. 96-46, 5-16-1996)
6-9-3: COMPENSATION, RESTITUTION AND RESTORATION:
The owner of the property shall be entitled to restitution and compensation for the direct costs incurred in the repair and restoration of his property to its
previous condition from any person convicted of the offense listed in section 6-9-1 of this chapter. If the court enters an order of restitution, said property
owner shall submit receipts evidencing payments for costs regarding removal or repair of the graffiti. If the person convicted of the offense is an
unemancipated minor, the parent or legal guardian of that person will also be held liable for all expenses the minor is required to pay to said owner. At the
option of the owner or the village, the convicted minor and his/her parent or legal guardian shall also be required to restore the owner's property to its
previous condition. (1978 Code § 10-8-3)
6-9-4: LIEN PROVISIONS:
In all cases where the owner or agent controlling the real estate upon which there exists graffiti in violation of this chapter shall fail, refuse or neglect to
remove the same or cause the same to be removed after forty eight (48) hours from receipt of written notice or personal service to said owner or agent, or
as otherwise provided in section 6-9-2 of this chapter, the village may cause the graffiti to be removed from the property, and the reasonable costs thereof
shall be charged to and collected from the owner of such real estate. The cost of removing the graffiti is a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all
other liens and encumbrances except tax liens; provided, that within sixty (60) days after such cost and expense is incurred, the village, or persons
performing the removal of graffiti by authority of the village in the village's name, files notice of lien in the office of the county recorder of deeds. The notice
of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: a) the description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof; b) the amount of money
representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service of removal of the graffiti; and c) the date or dates when such cost or expense was
incurred by the village. The lien of the village shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in or to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the
graffiti removed and prior to the filing of such notice, nor shall the lien of the village be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienholder
whose rights in and to such real estate arose prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or person interested
in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the
release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien. (Ord. 96-46, 5-16-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
6-9-5: PENALTIES:
A. Upon a finding of guilty for violation of section 6-9-1 or 6-9-2 of this chapter, there shall be imposed a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Additionally, the court may, as a condition of probation, supervision, or conditional
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 197/618
discharge, require that the full and complete restitution be made to the owner of the property for expenses incurred in the removal of the graffiti and/or
restoration of the structure or wall to its previous condition. (Ord. 96-46, 5-16-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Until such time as all liens placed upon the real estate by the village have been satisfied, the village shall not issue any type of permit or license to the
owner of the property. (Ord. 96-46, 5-16-1996)
Chapter 10
DISCRIMINATION IN REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
6-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:
FAMILIAL STATUS: A. One or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being domiciled with:
1. A parent or other person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or
2. The designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person.
B. The protections afforded by this chapter against discrimination on the basis of familial status apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process
of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATIONS: Includes any improved or unimproved real property, or part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged
or designed to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one or more individuals.
LEASE: Includes sublease, assignment, and rent (or rental) and includes any contract to do any of the foregoing.
LENDING INSTITUTION: Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association, other person in the business of lending money or guaranteeing
loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying
loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by title to or a security interest in real property, but shall not include any religious
institution or organization nor any charitable or educational organization operated, supervised or controlled by a religious institution or organization.
NATIONAL ORIGIN: Includes national origin and ancestors.
OWNER: Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any beneficial interest in, any real property or who holds legal or equitable title to shares
of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any real estate cooperative which owns any real property.
PURCHASE: Includes any contract to purchase.
REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESMAN: A person, whether licensed or not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells,
purchases, exchanges, rents, or leases real property, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself or herself out
as engaged in these.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: Includes the sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property and also includes the brokering or appraising of residential
real property and the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance:
A. For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or
B. Secured by residential real estate.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds, interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums, and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.
SALE: Includes any contract to sell, exchange or convey, transfer or assign legal or equitable title to or beneficial interest in real property.
SOLICITATION: Any conduct designed or intended to induce the owner of any real property to sell, rent, exchange, convey, transfer or list for sale or rental
such real property. (1978 Code § 4-12-1)
6-10-2: PROHIBITIONS:
A. No owner, lessee, or sublessee of real property, real estate broker or salesman, lender, financial institution, advertiser, or agent of any of the foregoing,
shall discriminate against any person because of that person's race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, order of protection status, marital
status, physical or mental disability, familial status, unfavorable discharge from military service, or sexual orientation with respect to any real estate
transaction. (Ord. 2006-51, 9-7-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Any act of discrimination in a real estate transaction shall be considered an unfair housing practice, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Refusal to engage in a real estate transaction with a person or discriminate in making available such a transaction.
2. Altering the terms, considerations or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith.
3. Refusal to receive or failure to transmit a bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction from a person.
4. Refusal to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 198/618
5. Representing to a person that real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so available, or failure to bring a
property listing to his or her attention, or refusal to permit him or her to inspect real property.
6. Printing, circulating, posting, mailing, publishing or causing to be published a written or oral statement, advertisement or sign, or using a form of
application for a real estate transaction, or making a record of inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction which expresses any
limitation founded upon, or indicating, directly or indirectly, an intent to engage in unlawful discrimination.
7. Offering, soliciting, accepting, using or retaining a listing of real property with knowledge that unlawful discrimination or discrimination on the basis of
familial status in a real estate transaction is intended. (Ord. 2006-51, 9-7-2006)
8. Soliciting for sale, leasing, listing or purchasing any residential real estate within the village on the grounds of loss of value due to the present or
prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
age, sex, marital status, familial status, physical or mental disability, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, or order of protection
status.
9. Distributing or causing to be distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner of residential real estate in the village to sell or
lease his or her property because of any present or prospective changes in the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, marital status,
familial status, physical or mental disability, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, or order of protection status of residents in the
vicinity of the property involved.
10. Intentionally creating alarm, among residents of any community, by transmitting communications in any manner, including a telephone call whether
or not conversation thereby ensues, with a design to induce any owner of residential real estate in the village to sell or lease his or her property
because of any present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, age, sex, marital status, familial status, physical or mental disability, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the
military, or order of protection status. (Ord. 2006-51, 9-7-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
11. a. Discriminating or participating in discrimination in connection with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any real property in
the village.
b. For the purposes of this subsection B11, discrimination in lending shall include:
(1) Refusal to make loans; or
(2) Differentiation in the type of loans, including interest rates, charges to buyer or seller, duration and amount of loan; or
(3) Influencing appraisals in connection with loans; or
(4) Delaying processing of loan applications. (Ord. 2006-51, 9-7-2006)
6-10-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. The village shall act as a local source for assistance and information for persons who have complaints related to unfair housing practices.
B. The village shall provide assistance and information to any such person, which shall include, but is not limited to:
1. The rights and remedies available to a person who has been discriminated against by virtue of an unfair housing practice;
2. The types of discrimination which are considered to be unfair housing practices;
3. The names, addresses and phone numbers of county, state and federal agencies where such person may file formal complaints; and
4. Such other relevant information or assistance as the village may have available to assist such person.
C. The village administrator shall be responsible for coordinating and directing the village fair housing procedures. (1978 Code § 4-12-3)
Chapter 11
LOST, ABANDONED, CONFISCATED PROPERTY
6-11-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS; EXEMPTIONS:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all personal property in the possession of the police department under such circumstances as to justify a
reasonable belief that said property has been abandoned, lost, stolen or illegally possessed.
B. This chapter shall also apply to property confiscated or seized by the police department and held as evidence which has not been returned to the owner
or owners or persons lawfully entitled to possession nor otherwise disposed of pursuant to state statute or order of court.
C. The provisions of this chapter specifically exclude that property for which custody and disposition is prescribed by article 2 of chapter 4 of the Illinois
vehicle code1. (Ord. 96-57, 6-6-1996)
6-11-2: CUSTODY OF PROPERTY; OWNER IDENTIFICATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 199/618
A. All property reasonably believed to be lost, abandoned, stolen or illegally possessed or which has been seized by the police or is deemed to be
contraband shall be retained in the custody of the chief of police or his designee for a minimum period of six (6) months next commencing from the
date of possession.
B. The chief of police or his designee shall be the custodian of all such property and shall make reasonable inquiry and efforts to identify and notify the
owner, owners, or persons lawfully entitled to possession of said property. Upon satisfactory proof of ownership or lawful possession, said property
shall be returned to the rightful owner or owners or person entitled to possession so long as possession of said property is lawful and upon payment by
that person to the general corporate fund of the village of an amount equal to the reasonable cost incurred in retaining and storing said property.
C. In the event that said property has been retained as evidence in any criminal prosecution or ordinance violation prosecution, said property shall be held
and retained pending final court disposition. (Ord. 96-57, 6-6-1996)
6-11-3: DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY:
In the event that the identity or location of the owner, owners, or other persons lawfully entitled to possession of the property has not been ascertained
within six (6) months after the date of custody by the police department, that property shall be deemed to have been abandoned. If, after six (6) months,
the property retained in custody has not been claimed by the rightful owner or owners or person lawfully entitled to possession thereof, then, in the
discretion of the chief of police and with approval of village administrator, the property may be disposed of as follows:
A. By sale of the property to the highest bidder at public auction, notice of which, including time, place and a brief description of the property, shall be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the village at least ten (10) days prior to the auction. Any proceeds realized from
the sale of said property shall be deposited in the general corporate fund of the village; or
B. In the event that the chief of police determines that the interest of the public will best be served thereby, the chief of police may transfer custody of the
property to the village for its use; or
C. In the event the chief of police determines that the value of the property is such that the cost associated with a sale at public auction is greater than the
value of the property, or in the event that the property is perishable, is contraband, or may not otherwise be lawfully possessed by the owner, owners or
persons entitled to possession, then, and in that event, the chief of police or his designee may order the destruction of the property in such a manner
as the chief of police deems prudent or proper. (Ord. 96-57, 6-6-1996)
Title 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC CODE
7-1-1: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
Pursuant to the authority granted by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/20-204, the village hereby adopts the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time, the same being a public record of the state, to be applied within the corporate
limits of the village to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 2008-48, 6-26-2008)
7-1-2: REFERENCE IN CITATIONS:
Any provisions of the Illinois vehicle code adopted herein shall be cited using the appropriate Illinois vehicle code section and prefixed by "7-1". (Ord.
2008-48, 6-26-2008)
7-1-3: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The following amendments, modifications, and/or additions are hereby made to the Illinois vehicle code:
A. All references in the Illinois vehicle code to "this code" shall be to sections of the Illinois vehicle code.
B. References to a state employee or official may be to a corresponding village employee or official where such reference is applicable or necessary.
However, the village does not assume any power or authority which, by law, can only be undertaken by the state of Illinois or the Illinois department of
transportation.
C. Unless a higher minimum fine is otherwise provided in the Illinois vehicle code or the Illinois supreme court rules, a violation of any section of the Illinois
vehicle code classified as a petty offense or business offense shall be punishable by a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than
the maximum applicable amount for the offense as set forth in the Illinois vehicle code or Illinois supreme court rules.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 200/618
D. Unless a higher minimum fine is otherwise provided in the Illinois vehicle code, Illinois supreme court rules, or other Illinois Compiled Statutes, a
violation of any section of the Illinois vehicle code classified as a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not less than three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00) nor more than the maximum applicable amount for the offense as set forth in the Illinois vehicle code, Illinois supreme court rules, or other
Illinois Compiled Statutes.
E. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501. The minimum fine for a violation of this section shall be one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00). The
minimum fine shall be paid in addition to all costs, fees, and additional penalties imposed by the Illinois vehicle code, Illinois supreme court rules, other
Illinois Compiled Statutes, and the clerk of the county circuit court.
F. 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-611. The last paragraph is amended to read as follows:
The first violation of this provision within a one (1) year period shall be a petty offense punishable by a fine not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
The second violation of this provision within a one (1) year period shall be a petty offense punishable by a fine not less than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
The third and subsequent violations of this provision within a one (1) year period shall be a petty offense punishable by a fine not less than three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
(Ord. 2008-48, 6-26-2008)
Chapter 2
VEHICLE LICENSES
7-2-1: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "resident of the Village" shall include any corporation or business in the Village. (Ord. 2009-49, 6-4-2009)
7-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; INVALIDITY:
A. License Required:
1. All residents of the Village who own, operate, maintain, house, store, rent, lease, or have custody of a vehicle or series of vehicles that is/are
registered with the Illinois Secretary of State to an address within the Village shall obtain a Village vehicle license for the current year for the use of
such vehicle on any public street or highway within the Village. Residents of the Village are required to present a valid current Illinois registration
showing that the vehicle is registered to them at their Glendale Heights address prior to obtaining a vehicle license.
2. No resident of the Village shall use, cause or permit any of his agents or employees to use any motor vehicle upon the public streets or highways in
the Village unless such vehicle is licensed by the Village.
B. Proof Of Residency:
1. All residents to whom the Village mails a current year vehicle license application shall not be required to present a valid current Illinois registration
showing that the vehicle is registered to them at their Glendale Heights address prior to obtaining a vehicle license as long as the information
contained in the application is current and valid.
2. All residents of the Village who are in possession of a rented or leased vehicle and the vehicle is not registered to them at their Glendale Heights
address shall present a valid current rental or lease agreement for the vehicle prior to obtaining a vehicle license. The rental or lease agreement
must reflect the resident's Glendale Heights address.
3. Students attending college or a technical/trade school who reside in the Village, but are not residents of the Village, and who do not possess a
vehicle registered to their Glendale Heights address, may nonetheless obtain a vehicle license by presenting a valid current housing lease or rental
agreement and current valid student identification. The housing lease or rental agreement must reflect the student's Glendale Heights address.
4. All residents of the Village who operate, maintain, house, store, or have custody of a vehicle or series of vehicles that is/are owned, rented, or leased
by their employer and not registered with the Illinois Secretary of State to an address within the Village shall present proof from their employer that
the vehicle is in the possession of the resident of the Village and that the resident is authorized to use the vehicle. In addition, the resident of the
Village must present proof that the vehicle is owned, rented, or leased by his employer.
5. If a resident is unable to present a valid current Illinois registration, then the Finance Director, or her designee, in her or her designee's sole
discretion, may accept a current utility bill, a current lease, a valid driver's license, or any other valid form of proof deemed acceptable to evidence
residency within the Village of Glendale Heights.
6. If a resident is unable to present evidence of residency, the Finance Director, or her designee, may issue a Village vehicle license to such resident at
an annual fee that is double the normal fee for a vehicle license under this chapter.
C. Invalidity Of License If Obtained Through Fraud: It shall be a violation of this chapter to obtain a Village vehicle license by or through fraud,
misinformation, misrepresentation or falsifying documentation. Any Village vehicle license obtained or displayed by such means shall be invalid and
void. (Ord. 2019-25, 4-18-2019)
7-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 201/618
Any person desiring a license required by this chapter shall prepare an application upon a form provided by the Finance Director, setting forth the name
and address within the Village of the applicant, a description of the automobile or vehicle for which the license is desired, its license plate number, the
place where such automobile or vehicle is to be kept when not in use, the number and kind of other automobiles or vehicles kept by applicant at such
place, whether the place where such automobile or vehicle is to be kept is rented or owned by the applicant, and such other information as may be
prescribed. The application shall be transmitted to the Finance Director and upon payment by the applicant of the required license fee, the Finance
Director shall issue a license which shall be attested by such Director authorizing the use of such automobile, or other vehicle, within the Village until the
expiration of the license. (Ord. 2019-25, 4-18-2019)
7-2-4: LICENSE FEES:
A. Annual Fees:
1. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, the charge for the annual vehicle license for vehicles registered with the Illinois Secretary of State to an
address within the Village shall be as follows:
Motor vehicles not in commercial use $ 15.00
Motorcycles, motorbikes and motor scooters 12.00
Recreational vehicles 18.00
Motor trucks, motor omnibuses and other motor vehicles used for commercial purposes or for hire:
8,000 lbs. or less 25.00
8,001 lbs. to 12,000 lbs. 35.00
12,001 lbs. to 16,000 lbs. 55.00
16,001 lbs. to 26,000 lbs. 60.00
26,001 lbs. to 32,000 lbs. 70.00
32,001 lbs. to 50,000 lbs. 75.00
50,001 lbs. to 64,000 lbs. 80.00
64,001 lbs. to 80,000 lbs. 100.00
(Ord. 2009-26, 4-2-2009)
2. The weight of a vehicle, for the purpose of establishing the license fee for such vehicle, shall be determined in the manner provided by 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes for determining these factors for the purpose of fixing the State license fees. (1978 Code § 11-7-5; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Transfer Fee: The fee for transfer of any license required by this section shall be one dollar ($1.00). (1978 Code § 11-7-3)
7-2-5: TERM OF LICENSE; EXPIRATION; FEES PRORATED; LATE PAYMENT CHARGE:
A. Term Of License: For the purpose of this section, the licensing year shall run from July 1 of the current year to June 30 of the following year.
B. Expiration Of License; Fees Prorated: All licenses required by this chapter shall expire on June 30 of the licensing year for which they were issued, and
the fee to be paid shall be the full annual rate for that year; provided, however, that if such vehicle has been purchased or otherwise acquired by the
applicant on or after January 1 of the licensing year for which a license is applied, or if the applicant has moved to the Village from another municipality
on or after January 1 of the licensing year for which a license is applied, the fee to be paid for the remainder of the licensing year shall be an amount
equal to one-half (1/2) of the annual license fee, but the applicant shall be entitled to such reduced fee only upon submission to the village clerk of
evidence satisfactory to him that the vehicle was purchased or otherwise acquired on or after January 1.
C. Late Charge: A late charge shall be charged in the event that such license is acquired after the date when the license shall have been obtained in
accordance with this section as follows:
1. There shall be a late charge of ten dollars ($10.00) in the event the vehicle license is purchased during the month of July.
2. There shall be a late charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) in the event the vehicle license is purchased during the month of August.
3. There shall be a late charge of thirty dollars ($30.00) in the event the vehicle license is purchased during the month of September.
4. The maximum late charge shall be thirty dollars ($30.00).
D. Payment And Collection Of Fee:
1. When a resident applies for the current year's vehicle license, the village clerk shall determine whether or not the resident has purchased a vehicle
license for the same vehicle for the prior year. In the event the resident owned the same vehicle during the prior year, had been a resident of the
village during the prior year, and has not purchased a vehicle license, the village clerk shall collect the fee owed for the prior year's license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 202/618
2. When an individual moves to the village or begins his/her temporary residence in the village or acquires a vehicle that has not previously been
licensed with the village, the individual shall be allowed a forty five (45) day grace period within which to pay the required fee and obtain a vehicle
license. (Ord. 2007-71, 6-21-2007)
7-2-6: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
A. Every person who pays the required license fee shall receive a vehicle license sticker, and such sticker shall be affixed permanently to the inside front
windshield on the passenger side (lower right hand corner) of the vehicle. In the case of motorcycles, such sticker shall be affixed to the license plate or
where authorized by the state.
B. Village license stickers for motor vehicles shall be kept conspicuously and readily readable at all times when such vehicle is operated, stored, housed or
maintained within the village. (Ord. 2007-71, 6-21-2007)
7-2-7: AUTOMOBILE DEALERSHIPS:
Any automobile dealership operating within the corporate limits of the village shall be required to purchase village vehicle licenses in the form and style
furnished by the village, and shall attach such vehicle license to the Illinois state license plates. The fee for said dealer vehicle license shall be seven
dollars fifty cents ($7.50) per annum, and shall be transferable among all vehicles owned by the automobile dealership. At the time of application, the
automobile dealership shall inform the village as to the number of dealer vehicle licenses it shall require, and upon receipt of said application, the village
clerk shall assign certain dealer vehicle license numbers to the automobile dealership, and maintain a record of the numbers issued to said automobile
dealership. (1978 Code § 11-7-4)
7-2-8: CARDS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
The village clerk shall issue, without charge, upon the application of any person with a disability a special motorist card or decal for persons with
disabilities furnished by the Illinois secretary of state pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code for the purpose of allowing said card or decal to
be used and displayed on a vehicle being used to transport said person with a disability but not owned thereby or not displaying a special license plate for
a person with a disability, so as to identify said vehicle and entitle it to all the parking privileges afforded to a vehicle possessing such special license plate
for a person with a disability. Such card or decal shall be issued only to persons with disabilities who are residents of the village, and the same shall be
displayed along the right border of the front windshield of a vehicle and shall allow the vehicle to utilize special parking privileges for persons with
disabilities when used to transport such person with disabilities. (1978 Code § 11-7-10; amd. 2011 Code)
7-2-9: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Citation And Fine:
1. Any person violating any provision of this chapter relating to the purchase and display of an annual vehicle license for a vehicle registered with the
Illinois secretary of state to an address within the village shall immediately be issued a citation by the village police department.
2. The village clerk may also request the village police department issue a citation.
3. The fine for a citation issued pursuant to this chapter shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), plus proof that the subject license has been obtained as herein
required. (Ord. 2009-49, 6-4-2009)
B. Settlement And Compromise Of Violations: Any person accused of violating any provision of this chapter relating to the purchase and display of an
annual vehicle license shall be allowed to settle and compromise such violation in the manner provided in section 7-7-13 of this title, plus proof that the
subject license has been obtained and has been displayed as herein required. (1978 Code § 11-7-9)
7-2-10: EXEMPTIONS:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to owners or operators of any government vehicle.
B. No license fee shall be required for vehicles owned by the village, the village police department, the Glenside fire protection district, school districts
located within the village, or school buses operated by nonprofit corporations, public or parochial schools, by a company on a certificate of convenience
and necessity from the Illinois commerce commission, or as part of a transportation system operated by the village or by the regional transportation
authority.
C. 1. The following persons shall not be required to pay the fee associated with a vehicle license upon presentation of proper identification illustrating that
the individual is one of the following:
a. A volunteer member of the village auxiliary police department or the Glenside fire department;
b. An active duty member of any branch of the United States armed forces;
c. A disabled veteran eligible for the disabled veterans' plate under state law;
d. A person who is sixty two (62) years of age or older; or (Ord. 2007-112, 12-6-2007)
e. A person with a disability who presents current proof thereof from the social security administration. (Ord. 2007-112, 12-6-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 203/618
2. Only one such exempt vehicle license shall be issued hereunder to each household. (Ord. 2007-112, 12-6-2007)
Chapter 3
ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS
7-3-1: AUTHORITY TO DIRECT TRAFFIC:
Members of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions of this title, or in emergencies as public
safety or convenience may require. Except in case of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law to direct traffic. (1978 Code
§ 11-1-2)
7-3-2: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer, fireman or school crossing guard invested by law and
authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. (1978 Code § 11-1-3; amd. 2011 Code)
7-3-3: TICKETS AND BAIL:
A. Issuance Of Tickets: Police officers of the village are hereby authorized to issue uniform traffic tickets as authorized by state law.
B. Bail: Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title shall be released upon proper bail being furnished as required by statute. (1978
Code § 11-1-12)
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM
7-3A-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created a system for the administrative adjudication of standing, parking and compliance violations and a system for vehicle
immobilization. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3A-2: AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND EFFECT:
A. The provisions of this article shall provide a system of administrative adjudication as required by section 11-208.3 of the Illinois vehicle code in order to
provide for fair and efficient enforcement of vehicular parking, standing and compliance regulations through administrative adjudication.
B. The provisions of this section shall also permit the village to adopt those procedures pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5 providing for
the authority to file a certified report to the Illinois secretary of state upon a person's failure to satisfy any fine or penalty imposed by this article or by a
final judgment from a court of law for ten (10) or more standing, parking, and/or compliance violations.
C. Furthermore, notwithstanding any provision of this article, the village may continue to prosecute in any court of competent jurisdiction any person
receiving vehicular standing, parking, and/or compliance violations. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3A-3: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS:
A. Traffic Compliance Administrator: The village chief of police or his designee shall designate any person to serve as traffic compliance administrator, and
that person shall be authorized to adopt, distribute and process parking and compliance violation notices and other notices required by this article,
collect monies paid as fines and penalties for violation of standing, parking and compliance ordinances and operate the administrative adjudication
system. The traffic compliance administrator may also make a certified report to the secretary of state as required under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-306.5.
B. Hearing Officer: An individual to be named by the village president shall serve as hearing officer and shall perform such duties as defined within this
article. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3A-4: ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS; CONTENTS:
A. Any officer or employee of the village authorized to issue vehicle parking, standing and compliance citations and who detects a violation of any section
of this title restricting or prohibiting parking or standing of motor vehicles or requiring display of a village vehicle license shall issue a standing, parking
and compliance violation notice by either affixing it to an offending vehicle or handing it to the operator of such vehicle if he or she is present. Any
person authorized to issue and serve parking violation notices shall certify as to the correctness of the facts entered on the violation notice by signing
his or her name at the time of service.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 204/618
B. The violation notice shall specify the date, time and place of violation, the particular regulation violated, the fine and penalty that may be assessed for
any late payment, the vehicle make and state registration number, and the identification number of the person issuing the notice. The violation notice
shall further state that the payment of the indicated fine, and of any applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of the
violation. Notice shall also contain information as to the availability of a hearing in which the violation may be contested on its merits. The violation
notice shall specify the time and manner in which a hearing may be had. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3A-5: ACTION BY RECIPIENT OF CITATION:
A person receiving a citation or notice for a violation may make an appearance in one of the following manners:
A. By payment of a fine indicated on the citation. Such payment shall be made by the deadline stated on the citation and shall operate as the final
disposition of the violation; or
B. By requesting a hearing on the merits of the violation notice in the time and manner specified on the notice and attendance at the hearing at the time,
date and place specified by the traffic compliance administrator. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures set forth in section
208.3(b)(4) of the Illinois vehicle code1. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3A-6: FAILURE TO APPEAR; ADDITIONAL VIOLATION NOTICES:
Failure to make an appearance shall result in additional notices of violation as indicated in this section being sent by first class United States mail, postage
prepaid, to the registered owner of the cited vehicle at his or her address as recorded with the secretary of state or to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the
last address known to the lessor of said vehicle at the time of the lease. Service of notices shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States
mail.
A. Second Notice Of Violation: A second notice of violation shall be sent to the responsible party as set forth in the above paragraph upon the failure of the
recipient of a violation notice to make an appearance as prescribed in section 7-3A-5 of this article. The recipient may appear by either paying the
indicated fine and assessed penalty for late charges or by requesting a hearing on the merits of the citation in the time and manner specified on the
second notice and attending such hearing at the time, date and place specified by the traffic compliance administrator. The second notice shall specify
the date and location of the violation cited in the violation notice, the particular regulation violated, the vehicle make and state registration number, the
fine and any late penalty which may be assessed, the availability of a hearing in which the violation may be contested on its merits, and the time and
manner in which such hearing may be had. The notice shall also state that failure either to pay the indicated fine and any applicable penalty or to
appear at a hearing on the merits will result in a final determination of liability for the cited violation in the amount of fine or penalty indicated thereon,
and that upon the occurrence of a final determination of violation liability for such failure, and the exhaustion of, or failure to exhaust, available
administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the village.
B. Notice Of Final Determination Of Violation Liability: A notice of final determination of violation liability shall be sent to the responsible party upon the
failure to appear pursuant to the second notice of violation and after a final determination of liability has been rendered and the conclusion of judicial
review procedures in accordance with section 7-3A-7 of this article. The recipient may appear by paying the fine and penalty within the time specified
on the notice and shall be advised that failure to do so may result in the village filing a petition in the county circuit court to have the unpaid fine or
penalty rendered a judgment as provided by paragraph 11-208.3 of the Illinois vehicle code2, or may result in suspension of the person's driver's
license pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5 for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more standing, parking or compliance
violations.
C. Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension: A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to the person for whom a final
determination of liability was rendered for any fine that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more violations. The notice shall state that failure to pay
the fines and/or penalties owing within forty five (45) days of the notice date shall result in notification to the secretary of state of said person's eligibility
for initiation of driver's license suspension proceedings. The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to the registered owner of the
vehicle, by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, at the address recorded with the secretary of state. The notice shall also inform the person
that he may obtain a photostatic copy of an original citation imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self-addressed stamped envelope to the village
along with a request for the photostatic copy. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3A-7: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY; PETITION TO SET ASIDE:
A. A final determination of violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty after a hearing officer's determination of violation liability
and the exhaustion or failure to exhaust administrative review procedures as set forth herein.
B. A determination of violation liability may be set aside by filing a petition with the traffic compliance administrator within ten (10) working days after the
hearing officer's determination. Petitions to set aside a determination shall specify the grounds upon which a challenge is based and shall be limited to
the following:
1. The person owing the unpaid fine and/or penalty was neither the owner nor lessee of the cited vehicle(s) on the date or dates the violation notice
was issued;
2. The fine and/or penalty was paid for the violation in question; or
3. Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
C. The traffic compliance administrator shall render a decision within fourteen (14) days of the petition's receipt and shall immediately notify the hearing
officer and petitioner of such decision in writing sent to the petitioner by first class United States mail, postage prepaid. If the petitioner has shown just
cause, the traffic compliance administrator shall set aside the violation liability determination.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 205/618
D. If the petition is granted and the determination of liability set aside, the registered owner or lessee shall be provided a hearing on the merits of the
violation and shall be given notice of the time and manner in which it will take place. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3A-8: ADJUDICATION PROCEDURES:
The violation notice and the second notice of liability shall provide the alleged violator with the time and manner in which a hearing contesting the merits of
the alleged violation shall be held. Neither formal nor technical rules of evidence shall apply. Such hearing shall be recorded, and the person conducting
the hearing on behalf of the traffic compliance administrator shall be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers. Persons appearing at such hearing may be represented by counsel at their own
expense. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3A-9: CERTIFIED REPORT; CONTESTING REPORT:
A. Upon failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth herein for ten (10) or more
violations, the traffic compliance administrator shall make a certified report to the secretary of state stating that the registered owner of a vehicle has
failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing as a result of ten (10) or more violations of the village vehicular parking, standing, or compliance
regulations and thereby causing the suspension of that person's driver's license. A copy of the certified report shall be sent to the registered owner.
B. Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by completing a form provided by the office of the traffic compliance administrator within ten
(10) days after the date of the certified report which specifies grounds on which such challenge is based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the
following:
1. The person was neither the owner nor lessee of the vehicle(s) receiving ten (10) or more violation notices on the date or dates such notices were
issued; and
2. The person has already paid the fine and penalty for the ten (10) or more violations indicated on the certified report.
C. The traffic compliance administrator shall render a determination within ten (10) business days of receipt of the objection form and shall notify the
objector of the determination.
D. The traffic compliance administrator shall take no further action to initiate suspension if the fines and penalties due and owing are paid or upon
determination that the inclusion of the person's name on the certified report was in error, and the traffic compliance administrator shall submit to the
secretary of state a notification which shall result in the halting of a driver's license suspension proceeding. The person named therein shall receive a
certified copy of such notification upon request and at no charge. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3A-10: PROCEDURE FOR NONRESIDENTS:
A. Persons who are not residents of the village may contest the merits of the alleged violation without attending a hearing as provided herein by submitting
a waiver of hearing and a notarized statement of facts specifying grounds for challenging the notice of violation. Such documentation must be received
by the traffic compliance administrator within the time for requesting a hearing.
B. The hearing officer shall issue to the traffic compliance administrator a finding based on the statement of facts.
C. The traffic compliance administrator shall notify the nonresident of the hearing officer's determination.
D. In all other respects, the procedures set forth in this article shall apply to nonresidents. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
ARTICLE B. VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION
7-3B-1: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this article shall provide for a program of vehicle immobilization for the purpose of facilitating enforcement of vehicular standing, parking
and compliance regulations, and this program of vehicle immobilization shall provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle found to be on the public way by
the installation of a device of restraint to prevent the operation of said vehicle. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3B-2: SCOPE:
Any vehicle shall be eligible for immobilization when, at the time of immobilization, the registered owner of said vehicle has accumulated ten (10) or more
unpaid final determinations of parking, standing or compliance violations in accord with article A of this chapter or by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3B-3: NOTICE OF INTENDED IMMOBILIZATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 206/618
At least twenty one (21) days prior to vehicle immobilization, a notice of intended vehicle immobilization and a right to a hearing to challenge the validity of
the notice of impending immobilization by disproving liability for unpaid final determinations of parking, standing, or compliance violations listed on the
notice, shall be sent to the vehicle's registered owner by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, at the address of the registered owner recorded
with the secretary of state or, in the event that a vehicle bearing a registration number of a state other than the state of Illinois, at the address of the
registered owner recorded in that state's registry of motor vehicles. The impending immobilization notice shall state the name and address of the
registered owner, the state registration number of the vehicle, the nature of the ordinances violated and the numbers and issue dates of the outstanding
violation notices. The notice shall also advise that a person may challenge the validity of the notice of impending vehicle immobilization by appearing in
person on the date, time and location as set forth in the notice and submitting evidence which would conclusively disprove liability. Evidence shall be
limited to the following:
A. That the person was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle on the date or dates the notices of violations were issued; or
B. That the fines or penalties for the violations cited in the notice were paid; or
C. The registered owner has not accumulated ten (10) or more violation notices which are unpaid, not adjudicated or for which no appearance has been
filed. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3B-4: IMMOBILIZATION, TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLE:
A. Immobilization Of Vehicle: In the event the registered owner of the vehicle fails to challenge the validity of the notice in a timely manner, or fails to satisfy
those fines and penalties determined to be due and owing, then the vehicle shall be immobilized.
B. Notice Of Immobilization: Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous place, and such notice shall
warn that the vehicle is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in damage to the vehicle. In addition, the notice shall also
state that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the immobilizing restraint is a violation of sections 16-1 and 21-1 of the Illinois criminal code. The
notice shall further provide information specifying how release of immobilizing restraint may be had and how the registered owner may obtain an
immobilization hearing.
C. Towing And Impoundment Of Vehicle: In the event the immobilizing restraint has not been released, as hereinafter provided, within forty eight (48) hours
of its placement on the vehicle, then the restraint shall be released and the vehicle towed and impounded at the direction of the village chief of police.
(Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3B-5: RELEASE OF IMMOBILIZED VEHICLE PRIOR TO HEARING:
Prior to a hearing on the validity of vehicle immobilization as hereinafter provided, the owner of an immobilized vehicle or other authorized person shall be
permitted to secure the release of the vehicle by paying a deposit in an amount equal to the immobilization, towing and storage fees, if applicable, as
hereinafter specified. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3B-6: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT; HEARING; IMMOBILIZATION FEE AND TOWING AND STORAGE COSTS:
A. Notice Of Impoundment: Within ten (10) days after a vehicle has been impounded, notice of impoundment shall be sent by United States certified mail,
return receipt requested and first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the registered owner of the vehicle. The notice of impoundment shall
state that the owner has a right to a postimmobilization and posttowing hearing as hereinafter provided and that if the vehicle is not claimed within thirty
(30) days from the date of the notice, the vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with applicable state law.
B. Hearing: The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall have the right to a hearing to determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent towing was
erroneous if the registered owner of said vehicle files a written demand for a hearing with the village traffic compliance administrator within fourteen
(14) days after issuance of the immobilization notice or within fourteen (14) days of the immobilization, whichever is later. Any such hearing requested
shall be conducted within forty eight (48) hours of receipt of the written demand for hearing unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the parties.
Failure to request or attend a scheduled hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. In the event of such failure, any amounts deposited
pursuant to section 7-3B-5 of this article shall be forfeited. A hearing provided pursuant to this subsection shall not determine the validity of or
otherwise adjudicate any citation or notice of parking, standing, or compliance violation issued relative to the immobilized vehicle.
C. Immobilization Fee; Towing And Storage Costs: The fee for immobilization shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). In addition thereto, the registered
owner shall be responsible for all costs associated with towing subsequent to immobilization as well as any and all storage fees incurred.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no fee shall be assessed for immobilization, towing, or storage when such action has been determined to be
erroneous. (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000)
7-3B-7: RELOCATING OR TOWING RESTRAINED VEHICLE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to relocate or to tow any vehicle restrained by an immobilizing device without the prior approval of the traffic compliance
administrator. Any person who relocates or otherwise moves an immobilized vehicle or attempts to remove an immobilization device in violation of the
provisions of this article shall be fined in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 2000-17, 3-2-2000; amd. 2011 Code)
ARTICLE C. TOWING ABANDONED, HAZARDOUS OR UNLAWFUL VEHICLES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 207/618
7-3C-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings stated in this section. Any term not defined herein shall have the meaning
ascribed to it in other ordinances of the village, and if not defined in any other village ordinances, it shall have the meaning ascribed in the Illinois vehicle
code, chapter 625 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A. A vehicle parked or otherwise located on the public way and:
1. In such a state of disrepair that it is incapable of being driven; or
2. That has been unmoved for a period of at least seven (7) days and, from its condition, the period during which it has not been moved, or some
other circumstance, appears to have been abandoned by its owner; or
B. Vehicles parked in a public parking lot or in a private parking lot without the consent of the lot owner, proprietor or agent of the property, which
person has requested that the vehicle be towed by the village of Glendale Heights or its approved towing service operators; or
C. A vehicle defined as abandoned or capable of being towed by any other ordinances of the village of Glendale Heights and which does not fall into
the categories of "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicles, and therefore is not subject to an immediate tow.
HAZARDOUS VEHICLE: A. A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is disabled or cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of
the vehicle; or
B. A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or welfare of the members of the public; or
C. A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street, way or alley that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger to pedestrians
and other operators of vehicles.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle or the right of possession of the motor vehicle.
UNLAWFUL VEHICLE: A. A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject of a search and seizure by the police department; or
B. A vehicle parked in violation of state of Illinois statutes or ordinances of the village of Glendale Heights which prohibit parking at the location in
question or for the period of time for which the vehicle has been parked, and where either the statute or the ordinance authorizes the vehicle to be
towed and the signs posted at the location in question note that fact.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a street, highway or any public way, including trailers
and other devices designed to be pulled by a propelled device. (1978 Code § 11-11-1; amd. 2011 Code)
7-3C-2: AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING:
The towing of vehicles by the village or its approved towing service operators shall be authorized only by the police department and only under the
circumstances herein provided. Towed vehicles shall be impounded at facilities designated by the police department until lawfully claimed or disposed of
pursuant to state law, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes. (1978 Code § 11-11-2; amd. 2011 Code)
A. Towing Without Notice; Hazardous Or Unlawful Vehicles: Vehicles may be towed without notice where the vehicle is a hazardous or unlawful vehicle.
Within twenty four (24) hours after towing a vehicle pursuant to this article, a notice shall be sent to the owner of the vehicle affording the opportunity
for a hearing as provided in sections 7-3C-4 and 7-3C-5 of this article.
B. Towing With Prior Notice; Abandoned Vehicles: Abandoned vehicles may be towed after prior notice and the affording of an opportunity for a hearing as
provided in section 7-3C-3 of this article. (1978 Code § 11-11-2)
7-3C-3: PRETOW NOTICE AND HEARING FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES:
A. Notice Requirements:
1. Notice pursuant to this subsection shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the owner of the
vehicle as indicated in the most current registration list of the secretary of state. In the event that an out of state vehicle is proposed to be towed,
inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made to the secretary of state of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing of the most current
registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address furnished, though in no case
will the village be required to delay towing more than seven (7) days after the date of the mailing of the notice. The notice, in all cases, shall specify:
(1978 Code § 11-11-3; amd. 2011 Code)
a. A description of the vehicle;
b. The present location of the vehicle;
c. The legal and factual basis for the towing which is proposed;
d. The citation and a general description of the particular section of the ordinance or statute which authorizes the towing;
e. The opportunity to request a pretow hearing and the procedure for filing a written request for hearing;
f. An advisement that a request for hearing must be filed within seven (7) days from mailing of the notice;
g. The address and telephone number of the office to which a request for a hearing must be made.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 208/618
2. A notice of intent to tow sticker with the earliest date upon which the tow may take place and the address and phone number of the police
department shall be placed on the vehicle. (1978 Code § 11-11-3)
B. Hearing Procedures:
1. The owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned vehicle shall have seven (7) days after the date of mailing of
the notice to request, in writing, a pretow hearing. Subsequent to this seven (7) day period, and in the event no written request for a pretow hearing
has been filed, the vehicle may be towed and any hearing rights under the provisions of this article will be deemed waived.
2. In the event that a pretow notice is not received by the owner of the vehicle, posttow hearing procedures shall be available, upon request of the
owner, as provided in sections 7-3C-4 and 7-3C-5 of this article.
3. Requests for a pretow hearing are to be made in person to the office indicated on the notice. Requests for hearing by persons who reside more than
fifty (50) miles from the village may be made by phone or by mail to the police department, with hearings to be scheduled at some time prior to the
scheduled towing. Forms for such requests shall be made available at the police department. At the time of making the request, the owner will be
provided a hearing date and time by telephone, by mail or in person, as the circumstances require.
4. The chief of police, or any officer or employee of the police department designated by the chief of police, shall serve as hearing officer. In no case
shall that hearing officer be an individual who was involved in the initial decision to tow the vehicle. The hearing officer shall have the authority to
require the presence of the enforcement officer who initiated the proposed tow or any other municipal personnel and to request the presence of other
witnesses at the hearing.
5. After receiving all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall make a written decision based upon a preponderance of the evidence as to whether
towing of the vehicle is authorized by the laws of the state of Illinois or this title with a specific statutory or village code section cited in the decision.
The owner shall be provided a copy of such pretow hearing decision. (1978 Code § 11-11-4)
6. If the preponderance of the evidence supports towing in compliance with the provisions of this article, the hearing officer shall direct that the vehicle
be towed with any towing and storage costs to then be imposed upon the owner thereof. The fees to be charged for towing and storage services
shall be at the rates established in section 7-3C-4 of this article. The owner of said vehicle having had such a hearing may avoid the towing by
immediately removing the vehicle from the improper location to a proper, lawful location and correcting any unlawful condition of the vehicle. (1978
Code § 11-11-4; amd. 2011 Code)
7. If the preponderance of the evidence fails to support towing or immobilization of the vehicle, the hearing officer shall direct that the vehicle shall not
be towed. The village shall furnish a copy of such decision to the owner, who may place it inside the vehicle in a location plainly visible from the
outside, such as the dashboard or rear window. No vehicle about which such a decision has been rendered shall be towed by the village unless the
circumstances under which the decision was rendered have changed. If at some subsequent time the village should wish to tow that same vehicle
from the same location, it shall follow the same procedures required for the towing of any other similarly situated vehicle, including the sending of an
additional pretow notice as outlined in subsection A of this section.
8. All pretow hearing decisions, towing reports, and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the police department for a period
of at least five (5) years after each hearing, or after each tow if no hearing was requested or held.
9. Any such hearing will not be determinative of or adjudicate any citation issued relative to the vehicle. (1978 Code § 11-11-4)
7-3C-4: POSTTOW NOTICE FOR HAZARDOUS OR UNLAWFUL VEHICLES:
A. Issuance And Contents: The police department shall transmit information relating to the right to a hearing as provided in section 7-3C-5 of this article
when mailing a notice of impoundment. Notice pursuant to this section shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the
address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current registration list of the secretary of state. In the event that the village has towed an
out of state hazardous or unlawful vehicle, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made to the secretary of state of the particular jurisdiction
for the furnishing of the most current registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the
address furnished. The notice, in all cases, shall specify: (1978 Code § 11-11-5; amd. 2011 Code)
1. A description of the vehicle.
2. The present location of the impounded vehicle.
3. The legal and factual basis for the particular tow.
4. The citation and the language of the code section or statute which authorizes the towing.
5. The opportunity to request a posttow hearing and the procedure for filing a written request for hearing.
6. An advisement that a request for hearing must be filed within fifteen (15) days from mailing of the notice.
7. The address and telephone number of the office to which the request for the hearing must be made. (1978 Code § 11-11-5)
B. Right To Hearing Signs: All approved towing service operators shall prominently post two (2) large signs with dimensions of at least twelve inches by
eighteen inches (12" x 18"), indicating the opportunity and procedures for a hearing to contest the validity of a vehicle towed pursuant to this article.
These signs shall be placed in locations readily visible to the public transacting business at any towing facility. (1978 Code § 11-11-5; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Request For Hearing:
1. Requests for hearings may be made in person at the office indicated on the notice within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the notification of tow or
release of the vehicle, whichever occurs first; otherwise, the right to the hearing shall be deemed waived. Requests for hearings by persons who
reside more than fifty (50) miles from the village may be made by telephone or mail to the police department.
2. Towing service personnel receiving requests for hearings shall direct the owner to the police department and shall direct the owner's attention to the
posted signs referred to in subsection B of this section concerning notice and hearings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 209/618
3. Any police personnel receiving inquiries in the field for hearings shall direct such person to the police department.
4. Police personnel in the police department headquarters, when receiving a tow inquiry, shall advise the person making the inquiry of the right to a
hearing as set forth herein. If the inquiry is made in person, the police department shall provide a hearing request form and assist the person in
preparing the hearing request form.
D. Redemption Of Vehicle:
1. Proof Of Ownership: Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove same, the owner or
other person entitled to possession shall furnish evidence of his identity, ownership of the vehicle, or his right to possession, sign a receipt for the
vehicle, and pay an amount or arrange for a hearing as set forth in subsections D2 and D3 of this section. The police chief is authorized to
promulgate regulations as to the documents or other proof necessary to establish these facts. (1978 Code § 11-11-5)
2. Fees; Time For Redemption: The owner shall pay fees in accordance with the village franchise agreement to cover the cost of towing, removal, or
storage of the vehicle, and thereupon must take possession of his vehicle within twenty four (24) hours of payment. The owner may pay the full
amount of fees and subsequently request a hearing pursuant to this section and section 7-3C-5 of this article. (Ord. 2001-10, 1-18-2001)
3. Hearing:
a. The owner may request a hearing at the time of obtaining his vehicle. In that case, the owner shall submit a request for hearing and obtain
immediate release of his vehicle after full payment of all such fees currently owed. A hearing shall take place within fifteen (15) days after such
release and request unless the vehicle owner requests a later date; or
b. If the owner wishes a hearing but cannot or does not wish to post the current amount of towing and storage fees, he may submit a request for
hearing and allow the motor vehicle to remain impounded, and request either:
(1) A hearing under section 7-3C-5 of this article to be held within twenty four (24) hours of his request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays; or
(2) If acceptable to the owner, a hearing within fifteen (15) days of said request on a date convenient to the vehicle owner and the village. (1978
Code § 11-11-5)
7-3C-5: POSTTOW HEARING:
A. Right To Hearing:
1. The owner or person entitled to possession of a vehicle towed, as an immediate tow, by or pursuant to the authority of the police department as set
forth herein, shall be provided the opportunity for a posttow hearing to determine the validity of such tow and any towing or storage charges. The
hearing will not be determinative of or adjudicate any citation issued relative to any towed vehicle.
2. Any owner otherwise entitled to a pretow hearing, as set forth in subsection 7-3C-3B of this article, to whom actual or mailed notice, pursuant to
subsection 7-3C-3A of this article, was not accomplished, shall have the opportunity to have a posttow hearing under this section, upon request, as
provided in section 7-3C-4 of this article.
B. Hearing Officer: The chief of police, or any other officer or employee of the police department designated by the chief of police, not involved in the initial
decision to tow the vehicle shall be designated as hearing officer by the village and shall conduct said hearing. The hearing officer may be the same
person designated for pretow hearings pursuant to subsection 7-3C-3B of this article. The hearing officer shall have the authority to require the
presence of the enforcement officer who ordered the tow, or any other municipal personnel, and to request the presence of other witnesses at such
hearing.
C. Time For Hearing: Hearings shall take place as follows: In those instances where the vehicle is still impounded, the hearing shall take place at the
option of the owner:
1. Within twenty four (24) hours after an owner's request for such hearing, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; if such request is made after
three o'clock (3:00) P.M., then a hearing shall be held on the second working day following the request; or
2. If acceptable to the owner, within fifteen (15) days of said request on a date convenient to all parties.
D. Notice Of Hearing: The hearing officer, or other designated personnel of the village, processing the owner's request for hearing shall have authority to
designate in writing a hearing date and time, and to so inform the owner of the date and time of the hearing by personal service of the writing at the
time the owner files a hearing request. In the event that a hearing request is made by telephone or mail by a person residing more than fifty (50) miles
from the village, the written designation of the hearing date and time shall be mailed to the owner not less than seven (7) days before the designated
hearing date, unless the owner waives such seven (7) day period by requesting an earlier hearing date.
E. Findings And Decision:
1. The hearing officer shall review all evidence presented by the vehicle owner and the police department and make a finding based upon the
preponderance of the evidence presented as to the lawful authority for the towing and storage of the vehicle. The village must establish such
authority by a preponderance of the evidence.
2. For each hearing, the hearing officer shall complete a vehicle tow hearing decision and attach such decision to the police department's original
vehicle towing report and supply a copy of the vehicle tow hearing decision to the owner by personal delivery if the owner is present, otherwise by
mail.
3. After receiving all relevant evidence, the hearing officer shall make one or more of the following written findings, which must be incorporated into the
vehicle tow hearing decision:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 210/618
a. Tow Authorized: The towing and storage of the vehicle was authorized by the laws of the state of Illinois or this title. One or more specific statutory
or code sections and the amount owed for towing and storage shall be stated in such a finding.
b. Tow Not Authorized: There was no authorization by law for the towing and storage of the vehicle, or the municipal employee causing the vehicle to
be towed did not comply with the requirements of the statute or section of this title authorizing the tow.
c. Tow Authorized; Storage Reimbursement: The towing of the vehicle was authorized by law, but the owner was caused to incur additional storage
charges because of late notification of towing or other reasons not the fault of the owner. The specific amount owed by the owner and the specific
amount excused shall be stated in the decision.
d. Request Not Timely: The request for hearing was not made within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of notice of towing or the date the vehicle was
released from the towing company, whichever was earlier.
e. Owner Failed To Appear; No Continuance Requested: A hearing was requested but the person requesting the hearing failed to appear and failed
to request a continuance.
4. The hearing officer shall advise the owner of his findings at the conclusion of the hearing.
a. If the towing and storage was authorized by law, and is not otherwise reimbursable, the owner shall be so informed and further advised as to the
amount due.
b. Should the towing and/or storage be found to be unauthorized or reimbursable, the hearing officer shall:
(1) If the vehicle has been released to the owner:
(A) Note the amount of the cash deposit or towing and storage fees prepaid by the owner on the vehicle tow hearing decision.
(B) Complete a printed voucher form for the amount to be reimbursed.
(C) Transmit said decision and voucher form to the chief of police for his authorization for payment.
(D) Advise the owner that a refund of said cash deposit or fees will be transmitted to the appropriate officials of the village for payment.
(E) Transmit a copy of said hearing decision along with the original voucher and original payment receipt to the appropriate officer of the village
within forty eight (48) hours of the hearing.
(F) Unless the village files a lawsuit to contest the decision of the hearing officer, the owner shall be paid the money due within twenty eight (28)
days after the decision of the hearing officer.
(2) If the vehicle is still in the possession of the towing company at the time of the hearing, the following procedure shall be followed:
(A) An order for the release of the vehicle shall be prepared in duplicate; the owner shall be provided with the original, and a copy shall be
attached to the vehicle tow hearing decision.
(B) Upon presentation by the owner to the towing company of the order for release, said vehicle shall immediately be released to the owner
without payment of any service charge excused by the hearing decision.
5. All vehicle tow hearing decisions, towing reports, and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the police department for a
period of at least five (5) years after each hearing, or after each tow if no hearing was requested or held.
6. The village or the owner may contest the decision of the hearing officer in any manner provided by law. (1978 Code § 11-11-6)
7-3C-6: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS TO TOWING SERVICE:
Notwithstanding any other statutory provisions or provisions of this title to the contrary, any towing service operator authorized to perform tows on behalf of
the village must perform its services subject to the provisions of this article. However, the towing company shall have the right to recover the reasonable
value of its services, not paid by the vehicle owner, from the village. (1978 Code § 11-11-6)
ARTICLE D. IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES USED IN COMMISSION OF OFFENSES
7-3D-1: IMPOUNDMENT AUTHORIZED; COSTS:
Any motor vehicle operated, used or in the physical control of person within the village with the express or implied permission of the registered owner or
lessee of record, during the commission of or in furtherance of any offense or violation set forth in section 7-3D-2 of this article shall be subject to
impoundment by the village, and the owner or lessee of record of the vehicle may be liable to the village for an administrative fee in an amount not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), in addition to any towing and storage fees as hereinafter provided. Any and all fees for towing and storage of a
vehicle impounded pursuant to this article shall be those approved by the chief of police for all towing companies authorized to tow for the village. (Ord.
2014-36, 6-5-2014)
7-3D-2: VIOLATIONS OR OFFENSES SUBJECT TO IMPOUNDMENT:
The following are violations or offenses subject to vehicle impoundment:
A. Driving while driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303; provided,
however, motor vehicles shall not be subject to impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation, whether parking or moving, or suspension is
due to failure to comply with emissions testing.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 211/618
B. Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-501.
C. Unlawful use of a weapon (UUW), 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1; aggravated discharge of a firearm, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.2;
reckless discharge of a firearm, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.5; or unlawful possession of a firearm and/or firearm ammunition, 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1.
D. Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting or attempting to solicit cannabis or a controlled substance as defined by the Illinois cannabis control
act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., or the Illinois controlled substances act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq.
E. Solicitation of a sexual act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14.1; or patronizing a minor engaged in prostitution, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
18.1.
F. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or attempted commission of any offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited
pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1.
G. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or attempted commission or any offense in violation of the Illinois controlled substances act, 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq.
H. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the commission or attempted commission of any felony offense in violation of the provisions of
the Illinois cannabis control act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.
I. Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/6-101, where the period of expiration is greater than one year.
J. Operation or use of a motor vehicle without having ever been issued a driver's license or permit in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101; or
operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101.
K. Fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-204. (Ord. 2014-36, 6-5-2014)
7-3D-3: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT; RELEASE OF VEHICLE PRIOR TO IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to impoundment pursuant to this article, and the police officer has
effected an arrest for any of the offenses set forth in section 7-3D-2 of this article, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility
authorized by the village. At the time the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner or lessee of the
vehicle, or any person identifying himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at
the time of the alleged offense, with written notice of the fact of the impoundment and of the vehicle owner's or lessee's and any lienholder of record's
right to request a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing to be conducted in accordance with section 7-3D-4 and subsection 7-3D-5B of this article.
The vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearing(s) provided in section 7-3D-4 and subsection 7-3D-5B of this article, unless the
owner, lessee or lienholder of record of the vehicle posts with the village a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and pays the
towing and storage charges.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the arresting police officer may release the vehicle prior to towing if the vehicle subject to
impoundment was not owned by the person placed under arrest, and the registered owner, lessee or person legally authorized to possess the vehicle
shall arrive at the scene of the arrest prior to the actual removal or towing of the vehicle, and the lawful owner, lessee or person lawfully entitled to
possession of the vehicle possesses a valid operator's license, proof of ownership or registration, proof of liability insurance and would not, as
determined by the arresting police officer, indicate a lack of ability to operate the motor vehicle in a safe manner, or who would not otherwise, by
operating the motor vehicle, be in violation of the Illinois vehicle code; or
C. If the vehicle subject to impoundment is owned or leased by the person under arrest, the arresting officer may, prior to the actual removal or towing of
the vehicle, release the vehicle to another person with the written consent of the owner or lessee; provided, that such other person possesses a valid
operator's license, proof of liability insurance and would not, as determined by the arresting police officer, indicate a lack of ability to operate the motor
vehicle in a safe manner, or who would not otherwise, by operating the motor vehicle, be in violation of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 2014-36, 6-5-
2014)
7-3D-4: PRELIMINARY HEARING:
A. If the owner or lessee of record of a vehicle impounded desires to contest the impoundment of the vehicle at a preliminary hearing, he or she must
make a request for a preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours of the impoundment. The request shall be deemed filed upon delivery to the
chief of police care of the Glendale Heights police department. The preliminary hearing request shall be in writing, and the chief of police or his
designee shall conduct the preliminary hearing within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or village
holidays, in which case, the preliminary hearing shall be heard on the next business day.
B. All interested parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the
preliminary hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is of the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the
conduct of their affairs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 212/618
C. If, after the hearing, the chief of police or his designee determines there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle is subject to impoundment, he/she
shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this article, unless the owner, lessee or person entitled to possession of the vehicle
posts with the village a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and pays any applicable towing and storage fees. If the chief of
police or his/her designee determines that there is no such probable cause to believe the vehicle was used or operated during the commission or
attempted commission of any of the offenses set forth in section 7-3D-2 of this article, then the vehicle shall be returned to the registered owner without
penalty or other fees. (Ord. 2014-36, 6-5-2014)
7-3D-5: HEARING OFFICER; PROCEDURES; HEARING:
A. Hearing Officer: A hearing officer shall be appointed by the village administrator, and he or she shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state
of Illinois for a minimum of three (3) years next preceding the date of his/her appointment.
B. Procedures:
1. Notice Of Hearing: Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is impounded, the village shall notify the registered owner, lessee and any lienholder of record
by personal service or first class mail, postage prepaid, at the address as registered with the secretary of state of the date, time, and location of a
hearing that will be conducted pursuant to this section.
2. Owner/Lessee Present:
a. The owner or lessee of record and any lienholder of record may appear at the hearing to contest the basis for the impoundment. Hearings shall be
scheduled and held no later than forty five (45) days after the vehicle was seized, unless otherwise continued by order of a hearing officer.
Continuances shall be granted only for good cause shown. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the
hearing. At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the request of any party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at
the hearing. Subpoenas for the production of witnesses and records may be issued upon request and for good cause.
b. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is of the type commonly relied upon
by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
c. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used or operated in connection with or
during the commission or attempted commission of those offenses set forth in section 7-3D-2 of this article, the hearing officer shall enter an order
finding the owner or lessee of record of the vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative fee in an amount not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00), and requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded until the owner or lessee pays the administrative fee to the village, plus
any and all fees, to the tower or village for the towing and storage of the vehicle as the case may be.
3. Owner/Lessee Not Present: If, after proper service of notice, the owner or lessee of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall
conduct the hearing in absentia and, if appropriate, enter a default order in favor of the village, a copy of which default order shall be sent to the
registered owner or lessee by first class mail, postage prepaid. If, at the hearing, the hearing officer finds that the vehicle was not operated or used
during the commission or in furtherance of any offense or violation set forth in section 7-3D-2 of this article, the hearing officer shall order the
immediate return of the vehicle and cash bond, if any, without assessing any fees or penalties.
C. Appeal: Any party may appeal a final decision of the hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois administrative review law. (Ord. 2014-36, 6-
5-2014)
7-3D-6: PAYMENT OF FEE AND COSTS; LIEN AND DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE:
If an administrative fee is imposed pursuant to this article, the fee shall constitute a debt due and owing to the village. If a cash bond has been posted
pursuant to this article, the bond shall be applied to the fee. If a vehicle is impounded when a fee is imposed, the village may seek to obtain a judgment on
the debt and enforce such judgment against the vehicle as provided by law. Except as otherwise provided in this article, a vehicle shall continue to be
impounded until the fee is paid to the village and any applicable towing and storage fees are paid to the tower or village, as the case may be, in which
case, possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle or the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to
satisfy a judgment and lien as provided by law. If the administrative fee and applicable towing and storage fees are not paid within thirty (30) days after the
expiration of time in which administrative review of the hearing officer's determination may be sought, or within thirty (30) days after an action seeking
administrative review has been resolved in favor of the village, whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in
the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 2014-36, 6-5-2014)
7-3D-7: REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE:
Except as may otherwise be provided by law or by order of the hearing officer, no owner, lessee, lienholder, or other person shall be legally entitled to take
possession of an impounded vehicle until the administrative fee and towing and storage fees have been paid. However, whenever a person or other entity
with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings prior to the date of vehicle impoundment, possession of the
vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she agrees in writing to refund to the village the amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any
amounts required to pay all lienholders of record, not to exceed the administrative fee, plus the applicable towing and storage fees. For purposes of this
section, the owner of record or lessee of record of a vehicle shall be the record titleholder as registered with the secretary of state, state of Illinois. (Ord.
2014-36, 6-5-2014)
7-3D-8: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. This article shall be in addition to and shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal law or ordinance that relates to the seizure
and/or impoundment of motor vehicles, and any penalty provided in this article shall be in addition to any and all penalties that may be assessed or
imposed by a court for violation of any criminal offense or local ordinance offense.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 213/618
B. The provisions of this article are inapplicable if, at the time of the offense, the vehicle used in the offense or violation was stolen or otherwise operated
without the knowledge and express or implied consent of the registered owner or lessee, and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authority
within twenty four (24) hours after the theft was discovered. (Ord. 2014-36, 6-5-2014)
ARTICLE E. AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM
7-3E-1: ADOPTION:
There is hereby adopted an Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System of the Village of Glendale Heights. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM: Means a device(s) located within the Village of Glendale Heights with one or more motor
vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce clear recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a steady
red or flashing red signal indication in violation of section 11-306 or 11-309 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or subsection 7-5-2C of this title. The system is
designed to obtain a clear recorded image of a violating motor vehicle and its license plate, as well as the date, time and location of the violation.
DISREGARDING A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE: Means failure to stop and remain stopped before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as
provided for in section 11-306 of the Vehicle Code or subsection 7-5-2C of this title.
NO TURN ON RED: Means where the motor vehicle comes to a complete stop and does not enter the intersection as defined by section 1-132 of the
Vehicle Code, during the cycle of the red signal indication, unless one or more pedestrians are present, even if the motor vehicle stops at a point past a
stop line or crosswalk where a driver is required to stop, as specified in subsection (c) of section 11-306 of the Vehicle Code or this article.
RECORDED IMAGES: Means images recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement system, on two (2) or more photographs; two (2) or more
micrographs; two (2) or more electronic images; or a video recording showing the motor vehicle, capturing and displaying images of the motor vehicle
violating a traffic-control signal, and with at least one clearly recorded image identifying the vehicle's license plate. The recorded image shall also display
the time, date and location of the violation.
TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR: Means a person appointed by the Village's Chief of Police or his designee who shall have the following
power and authority: adopt, distribute and process automated traffic law violation notices and other such notices as may be required by this article, collect
and audit money paid to the Village as fines and/or penalties, operate the automated traffic law enforcement system, and make certified reports to the
Office of the Illinois Secretary of State, as required by this article and section 208.6 of the Vehicle Code. If the Traffic Compliance Administrator is the
person who reviews the recorded images on behalf of the Village to determine whether a violation has occurred, then the Traffic Compliance Administrator
shall be a Village police officer or retired Village police officer.
VEHICLE CODE: Means the Illinois Vehicle Code1.
VILLAGE: Means the Village of Glendale Heights, DuPage County, Illinois.
VILLAGE CODE: Means the Village Code of Ordinances of the Village of Glendale Heights, DuPage County, Illinois. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-3: SIGNAGE; COMPLIANCE WITH MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
A. Any intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement system shall have a sign posted which is visible to approaching traffic indicating
that the intersection is being monitored by an automated traffic law enforcement system.
B. The location of all intersections equipped with an automated traffic enforcement system shall be posted on the official Village website.
C. All intersections equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement system shall have a yellow light change interval that conforms with the Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-4: VIOLATION:
It shall be a violation of this article for a motor vehicle to be operated in violation of section 11-306 of the Vehicle Code, or similar violation of subsection 7-
5-2C of this title. Liability for any such violation shall be imposed upon the registered owner or lessee of the violating vehicle. All violations must be
approved by a law enforcement or retired law enforcement officer employed by the Village. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-5: VIOLATIONS, REVIEW, NOTICE, SERVICE:
A. When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor vehicle entering an intersection in spite of a steady red signal indication, or fails to
completely stop on a steady red signal indication prior to turning right, in violation of section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or in violation of
subsection 7-5-2C of this title, the Village shall, for each violation recorded, issue or direct to be issued, a written Notice of Violation to the owner of the
vehicle as the alleged violator. The Notice of Violation shall be delivered by first class mail, postage prepaid, within thirty (30) days after the Illinois
Secretary of State notifies the Village of the identity of the registered owner of the vehicle or the lessor notifies the Village of the identity of the lessee of
the vehicle, but in no event later than ninety (90) days after the violation. If any notice to an address is returned as undeliverable, a second notice shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 214/618
be sent to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office database of the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle. The second notice shall
be made by first class mail, postage prepaid. Prior to service of a Notice of Violation, the associated recorded image shall be first reviewed by a
technician(s) employed or contracted by the Village. A final review shall be conducted by a Village of Glendale Heights police officer or retired Village of
Glendale Heights police officer employed by the Village, who shall inspect the image and determine whether the motor vehicle was operated in
violation of section 11-306 of the Vehicle Code or similar violation of subsection 7-5-2C of this title, and whether one of the defenses enumerated
hereinafter is visibly apparent upon inspection of the recorded image(s). Upon determination that the recorded image captures a violation of one of the
foregoing provisions and that no defense, as set forth in subsections 7-3E-6A1 through A5 of this article, applies, the notice of violation shall be served
upon the registered vehicle owner or lessee in the manner herein provided. The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall retain a copy of all contested
violation notices, recorded images and other correspondence mailed to the owner or lessee of the vehicle. Each notice of violation shall constitute
evidence of the facts contained in the notice and shall be admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation under this article and shall establish prima
facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal including rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in section 7-3E-6 of this article. Each notice
of violation shall include the following:
1. The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Illinois Secretary of State or the lessor, or,
if such information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database;
2. The make, (only if discernable) and the registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the violation;
3. The violation charged;
4. The location where the violation occurred;
5. The date and time of the violation;
6. A copy of the recorded images;
7. The amount of the civil penalty/fine imposed under section 7-3E-18 of this article and the date by which the civil penalty/fine should be paid (14 days
from the date of issuance) if liability for the violation is not contested and a statement that payment of the fine shall operate as a final disposition of
the violation;
8. A statement that failure to pay the civil penalty/fine or contest liability by the date stated may result in a final determination of liability and a
suspension of driving privileges of the registered owner of the vehicle or of the lessee of the vehicle for failure to pay five (5) or more final
determinations of liability to the Village;
9. A statement that the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle may elect to proceed by: a) paying the fine stated in the notice of violation; or by b)
challenging the charge in court, by mail or at an administrative hearing;
10. A statement that the recorded images constitute prima facie evidence of a violation;
11. A statement of law, an administrative hearing or court hearing may be requested;
12. The signature or identification number, electronic or otherwise, of the technician(s) and/or police officer or retired police officer of the Village
reviewing the recorded images and confirming that a violation took place; and
13. A website address, accessible through the internet, where the person may view the recorded images of the violation. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-6: DEFENSES:
A. A court or Hearing Officer may consider the following in defense of a violation of section 11-306 of the Vehicle Code or subsection 7-5-2C of this title:
1. The motor vehicle and/or registration plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the exclusive control of or in the
possession of the owner at the time of the red light signal violation, which defense may be demonstrated through the submission of a certified copy
of a report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates filed with a law enforcement agency prior to the time of the alleged violation;
2. The driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection in spite of a red light either to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle, or as part of a
funeral procession;
3. The driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection in spite of a red light at the direction of a police officer acting within the scope of his/her
duties;
4. The operator of the motor vehicle received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer for violating section 11-306 of the Vehicle Code or subsection
7-5-2C of this title;
5. The license plate number or other source of identification on the vehicle cannot be determined;
6. The vehicle was leased to another and within sixty (60) calendar days after the citation was mailed to the lessor, lessor submitted to the Municipality
the correct name and address of the lessee of the vehicle identified in this notice of violation at the time of the alleged violation, together with a copy
of the lease agreement, the lessee's driver's license number and any additional information that may be needed;
7. Other affirmative matter asserted that defeats the legal effect of the claim as determined by the Hearing Officer. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-7: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of section 7-3E-5 of this article notwithstanding, no notice of violation shall be issued to the owner or lessee of a motor vehicle in those
instances where a motor vehicle comes to a complete stop, as defined by section 1-199 of the Vehicle Code prior to entering the intersection, as defined
by section 1-132 of the Vehicle Code, during the cycle of the red signal indication, even if the motor vehicle stops at a point past the stop line or crosswalk
where a driver is required to stop, as specified in subsection (c) of section 11-306 of the Vehicle Code or subsection 7-5-2C of this title, unless one or more
pedestrians or bicyclists are present. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 215/618
7-3E-8: HEARING:
The owner or lessee of a vehicle being operated in violation of section 11-306 of the Vehicle Code or subsection 7-5-2C of this title may request a hearing
no later than the respond-by date on the Notice of Violation, (14 days from the date of issuance), to challenge the evidence or set forth an applicable
defense. The Notice of Violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice, and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of
section 11-306 of the Vehicle Code or subsection 7-5-2C of this title.
The owner's or lessee's failure to appear at the hearing or timely contest the violation by mail shall result in a finding of liability. In the event of a failure to
appear, a "Findings, Decision and Order Notice" will be sent to the vehicle owner or lessee. The owner's or lessee's failure to pay the fine amount by the
date specified in that notice will result in a final determination of liability. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-9: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A final determination of automated traffic law violation(s) liability shall occur:
A. Following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty twenty five (25) days after the Hearing Officer's or court's determination of automated
traffic law violation liability, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, any administrative review procedures as provided by this Code, the Illinois
Administrative Review Law or all other applicable law; or
B. Where a person fails to appear at a prior requested hearing to contest the violation on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or
mailed notice, or fails to contest the violation by mail in a timely manner. The Hearing Officer's determination of liability for automatic traffic law violation
shall become final upon the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust, any judicial review procedures as provided by this Code or other applicable law. (Ord.
2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-10: NOTICE OF DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A determination of automated traffic law violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty, or to contest the alleged violation within
fourteen (14) days of the Notice of Violation. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified
in a prior mailed notice, the Hearing Officer or court shall enter findings, decision and orders of a determination of automated traffic law violation liability,
which shall become final: a) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination or b) upon expiration of the period for filing a petition to set
aside a determination of liability without having filed such petition. If a person appears at a hearing and is found liable, or contests the violation by mail and
is found liable, the Hearing Officer or court, as the case may be, shall enter a findings, decision and order, which is a final determination of automated
traffic law violation liability which is a final, appealable order. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-11: NOTICE OF FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A notice of final determination of liability shall be sent following the final determination of liability and after the conclusion of the period for judicial review.
The notice of final determination of liability shall include the following information:
A. A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing to the Village of Glendale Heights; and
B. A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing to the Village of Glendale Heights within fourteen (14) days may result in a petition to the Circuit
Court of the 18th Judicial Circuit to have the unpaid fine rendered as a judgment, or may result in the suspension of the person's driver's license for
failure to pay fines or penalties for five (5) or more final determinations of liability for violations under this article. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-12: CONTEST BY MAIL:
The registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle may contest the merits of the alleged violation by mail. Such person may contest the charges using the
same available defenses set forth in section 7-3E-6 of this article, but rather than attend the administrative or court hearing, the registered owner or lessee
may submit any and all documentary evidence to the Traffic Compliance Administrator or other duly appointed official no later than the scheduled reply
date, together with a written statement setting forth with specific reason(s) as to why the owner or lessee of the vehicle believes that he/she is not liable for
the violation. The Traffic Compliance Administrator or other duly appointed official shall forward all timely-submitted materials to the Hearing Officer for
review and determination. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-13: PETITIONS TO SET ASIDE DETERMINATION:
A Petition to Set Aside a determination of automated traffic law violation liability must be filed with or mailed to the Traffic Compliance Administrator or
other designated official within fourteen (14) days of the date of mailing of the Notice of Determination of Liability. The grounds for such petition are limited
to:
A. The cited person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued;
B. The cited person already paid the fine for the violation in question;
C. The driver of the vehicle was issued a uniform traffic citation by a Village police officer; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 216/618
D. Excusable failure to appear at a hearing, contest by mail, or request a new date for a hearing.
Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of liability, the Traffic Compliance Administrator or other designated official shall immediately
forward the petition to the Hearing Officer who shall review the petition to determine if cause has been shown to set aside the determination. If cause has
been shown, the Village shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on which the petitioner must appear to present his case or contest the violation by
mail in a timely manner. The Village shall notify the petitioner of the Hearing Officer's decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within fourteen (14)
days of the Hearing Officer's decision to grant or deny the petition. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-14: NOTICE OF IMPENDING DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
A. A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to any person or entity found liable for violations, and for which the fines or penalties
remain due and owing on five (5) or more final determinations of liability for violations of this article. The notice of impending driver's license suspension
shall state the following information:
1. The failure to pay the fine due and owing within forty five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the Village of Glendale Heights notifying the
Secretary of State of the State of Illinois that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under section 6-306.5 of the Vehicle Code;
and
2. A statement that the person may obtain a copy of the original Notices of Violation imposing fine(s) by sending a self-addressed, stamped return
envelope to the Village, attention Traffic Compliance Administrator, along with a request for a copy of the Notice of Violation imposing the fine(s).
The Notice of Impending Driver's License Suspension shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Illinois
Secretary of State or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office
approved database. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-15: DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
A. The Traffic Compliance Administrator or other duly appointed official, by certified report, shall request that the Illinois Secretary of State suspend the
driving privileges of an owner of a registered vehicle who has failed to pay fines or penalties due and owing as a result of five (5) final determinations of
liability. The report shall be certified and contain the following:
1. The name, last known address of the owner of the vehicle as recorded with the Illinois Secretary of State, or as provided by the lessor of the cited
vehicle at the time of lease, or as recorded in a United States Post Office approved database if any notice sent under this article is returned as
undeliverable, and driver's license number of the person who failed to pay the fine(s) or penalty(ies), and the registration number of any vehicle
known to be registered to such person in another state;
2. The name of the Village of Glendale Heights as making the report; and
3. A statement that a Notice of Impending Driver's License Suspension has been sent to the person named in the report at the address recorded with
the Office of the Illinois Secretary of State, or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease, or, if any notice sent
under this article is returned as undeliverable, at the last known address recorded at a United States Post Office approved database, the date on
which such notice was sent and address to which such notice was sent.
The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall notify the Illinois Secretary of State whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the
previously recorded fines or penalties or whenever the Village determines that the original report was in error. A certified copy of such notification
shall also be given, upon request, and at no additional charge to the person named therein.
Any person receiving notice from the Secretary of State that their driving privileges may be suspended at the end of a specified period may challenge
the accuracy of the certified report prepared by the Traffic Compliance Administrator. The person shall, within seven (7) days after having received
notice from the Secretary of State, request an opportunity to speak with the Traffic Compliance Administrator to challenge the accuracy of the
certified report. If the Traffic Compliance Administrator determines that the original report was in error due to the fact that the person challenging the
report was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle or that the person has already paid their fine for the five (5) or more automated traffic violations, the
Traffic Compliance Administrator shall immediately notify the Secretary of State of such error in a subsequent certified report. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-
2018)
7-3E-16: EXCLUSIVITY:
Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, and unless a moving violation citation is issued, the provisions of this article shall be the
exclusive method of notice, citation, processing, adjudication and final disposition and review of automated traffic enforcement of violations of section 11-
306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or subsection 7-5-2C of this title. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-17: CONFIDENTIALITY:
Recorded images made by the automatic traffic enforcement system shall be confidential and shall be made available only to the alleged violator and
his/her attorney, governmental agencies, technicians employed or contracted by the Village for purposes of reviewing the recorded images, and the Village
of Glendale Heights Police Department and its personnel for purposes of adjudicating violations, statistical or other governmental purposes. (Ord. 2018-
106, 12-13-2018)
7-3E-18: PENALTY:
The owner (or lessee) of a motor vehicle is subject to a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per automated traffic law violation. In the event that such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 217/618
penalty is not paid within fourteen (14) days after service of a final determination of liability, an additional one hundred dollar ($100.00) late payment
penalty shall be imposed. A penalty shall not apply if the driver of the motor vehicle received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer at the time of the
violation. The Village may not charge court costs or hearing fees to persons found liable after exercising their right to appear and contest the violation at an
administrative hearing. (Ord. 2018-106, 12-13-2018)
Chapter 4
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
7-4-1: APPLICATION TO BICYCLES AND ANIMALS:
Every person riding a bicycle or an animal, or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a roadway, shall be subject to the provisions of this title applicable
to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions of this title which by their nature can have no application. (1978 Code § 11-1-4)
7-4-2: EMERGENCY STREET CLOSURES:
In the event of a vehicular accident; fallen trees, light standards or power lines; snow, flooding, ice or mud slide; pavement damage due to explosion,
buckling or other means; sudden obstruction in a traffic lane; or of any other emergency situation rendering a street hazardous and unsafe for public travel,
the chief of police, or the ranking officer of the police department acting in his stead, is hereby authorized to close any street or streets so affected to traffic
and to reroute or to direct traffic away from such street or streets for such period of time as is necessary to correct the emergency situation. (1978 Code
§ 11-1-2)
7-4-3: ACCIDENTS:
The driver of a vehicle which has collided with or been in an accident with any vehicle, person or property in such a manner as to cause injury or damage
shall stop immediately and render such assistance as may be possible, and give his true name and residence to the injured person or any other person
requesting the same on behalf of the injured person, or the owner of the property damaged and to a police officer, if one is present. A report of each such
accident shall be given by the driver of each vehicle concerned in the accident to the chief of police within twenty four (24) hours after the accident. (1978
Code § 11-1-10)
7-4-4: VEHICLE NOISE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any public street, alley or highway in the village in such a manner as to cause or
produce unnecessary loud, raucous, excessive or unusual noise by the racing of the motor, by lack of a muffler or use of a muffler bypass or cutout, by tire
friction upon rapid turning or weaving, by spinning of the wheels from standing or slow moving position produced by sudden unnecessary motor
acceleration, or by continuous unnecessary sounding of a horn or other signal device. (1978 Code § 11-6-3)
7-4-5: VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
A. Weight Limit Established; Exceptions: No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be operated, with or without a load, upon any public street or highway
under the exclusive control of the village if the gross weight thereon exceeds ten thousand (10,000) pounds except for vehicles making deliveries of
materials or products to local residences, hospitals or governmental buildings.
B. Prima Facie Evidence: If a vehicle displays a registration above a class D license plate, it shall constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle is in
violation of the limitations of this section. (Ord. 2005-61, 10-6-2005)
C. Signs Posted: The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to cause the posting of signs at the entrances to and upon such public
streets and highways so as to give reasonable notice of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2005-61, 10-6-2005; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-
2014)
D. Penalties: Any driver of a vehicle operated in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a
first offense, nor less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second and subsequent offense, but not more than a maximum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for any offense, if found to be guilty of the offense. (Ord. 2005-61, 10-6-2005; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 5
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS AND SIGNALS
7-5-1: SPECIFICATIONS:
All signs and signals established by direction of the governing body shall conform to the Illinois state manual and specifications. (1978 Code § 11-3-5;
amd. 2011 Code)
7-5-2: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 218/618
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with lighted green arrows, only the
following colors shall be used, and such terms and lights and lighted green arrows shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as
follows:
A. Circular Green (Alone):
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. Vehicular
traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian
signal.
B. Steady Yellow:
1. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be
exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic may not enter the intersection.
2. Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time
to cross the roadway, and no pedestrian shall start to cross.
C. Steady Red Indication:
1. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone must stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of an intersection, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown, except as
provided in subsections C2 and E1 of this section.
2. When a sign is in place permitting a turn, vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make the turn indicated
by such sign after stopping as required by subsection C1 of this section. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully
within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
3. No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely without interfering with any vehicular traffic or unless a separate
"walk" indication is shown.
D. Green Straight Through Arrow (Alone):
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through, but shall not turn right or left. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians legally within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
2. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within the appropriate marked or unmarked crosswalk, unless otherwise directed by
a pedestrian signal.
E. Green Turn Arrow (With Circular Green, With Steady Yellow, With Steady Red Or With Green Straight Through Arrow):
1. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall comply with the meaning of the circular green, steady yellow, steady red or green straight through arrow
indication as if it were shown alone; except, that such vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the
green turn arrow. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within the crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
2. Pedestrians facing such signal shall comply with the meaning of the circular green, steady yellow, steady red or straight through arrow indication as if
it were shown alone, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal. (1978 Code § 11-3-1)
7-5-3: SIGNAL NOT AT INTERSECTION:
In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of section 7-5-2 of this chapter
shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a traffic sign or a marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made or, in the absence of such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. (1978 Code § 11-3-1;
amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 6
DRIVING RULES
7-6-1: SPEED LIMITS:
A. Generally: Except as otherwise provided herein, the speed limit on all streets under village jurisdiction shall be posted and set at twenty five (25) miles
per hour. (Ord. 97-03, 1-2-1997; amd. 2011 Code)
B. School Zones:
1. Speed Limit: No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling
upon any public thoroughfare on or across which children pass to and from school during school days when schoolchildren are present.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 219/618
2. Signs Posted: This subsection shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are posted to indicate the restriction. Such signs shall give proper
due warning that a school zone is being approached and shall indicate the school zone and the maximum speed limit in effect during school days
when schoolchildren are present. (1978 Code § 11-2-6; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Use Of Speed Detecting Devices By Police; Restrictions: The village police department is hereby authorized to use radar or other speed detecting
devices on any street within the village upon which maximum speed limit signs are posted, but not within five hundred feet (500') beyond any such sign
in the direction of travel. If used in violation of this subsection, evidence obtained thereby shall be inadmissible in any prosecution for speeding.
D. Violation: No person may drive a vehicle upon any highway or street within the village at a speed limit which is greater than the applicable posted
maximum speed limit, as established by this code or statute. (1978 Code § 11-2-6)
7-6-2: MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Emerging From Building, Private Road Or Driveway: The driver of a vehicle emerging from a building, private road or driveway within an urban area
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving into the sidewalk area extending across such building entrance, road or driveway, or in the event
there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon, and shall
yield the right of way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right of way to all
vehicles approaching on the roadway. (1978 Code § 11-2-17; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Pedestrian Right Of Way On Sidewalks: The driver of a vehicle emerging from or entering an alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the right
of way to any pedestrian approaching on any sidewalk or any sidewalk area extending across such alley, building entrance, road or driveway. (1978
Code § 11-2-18)
C. Entering, Leaving Restricted Access Roadways: No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled or limited access roadway except at such
entrances and exits as are established by public authority. (1978 Code § 11-2-33)
7-6-3: CRUISING:
A. Definitions: The following words or phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
CRUISING OR TO CRUISE: To operate a motor vehicle, or as a custodian or owner of a motor vehicle, to permit its operation, past a point in a
prohibited cruising area more than four (4) times in any direction during a two (2) hour period between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and three
o'clock (3:00) A.M.
PROHIBITED CRUISING AREA: Any village park, as defined in section 8-4-1 of this code, and the immediate area surrounding said park(s) that is so
designated by clearly marked and permanently fixed signs advising the public that the area is subject to the regulation prohibiting cruising.
B. Cruising Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle for the purpose of cruising or for any custodian or owner of a motor
vehicle to permit or allow any person to operate said vehicle for the purpose of cruising in a "prohibited cruising area" as defined in subsection A of this
section.
C. Exemptions: This section shall not apply to any municipal, emergency, police, fire, ambulance, or other governmental vehicle when same is being
operated in an official capacity, nor shall this section apply to any duly licensed public transportation vehicle or any vehicle utilized for business and/or
commercial purposes while in the course of that business or commercial purpose. (Ord. 2002-42, 6-20-2002)
7-6-4: TOY VEHICLES:
A. Use Of Roadways Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person upon any coaster, sled, skates or other toy vehicle to go upon any roadway other than
at a crosswalk. (1978 Code § 11-1-7)
B. Motorized Skateboards And Motorized Scooters:
1. Definitions: For purposes of this subsection, the following words and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them as follows:
MOTORIZED SKATEBOARD OR MOTORIZED SCOOTER: Any wheeled, seated or seatless device, unregistered by the Illinois secretary of state,
consisting of a board or other horizontal platform surface or some form of framework whereby the wheels are operated or propelled, in whole or in
part, by some form of attached gasoline powered motor or engine of less than fifty (50) cubic centimeter displacement or designed to obtain a
maximum speed of less than thirty (30) miles per hour and primarily designed to hold or carry one or more persons, excluding: a) motorized Segways
or similar devices used by the village or any other governmental agency in the performance of its business, affairs, or duties; and b) those motorized
devices designed or manufactured primarily for the transport of disabled persons.
PARKING LOT: Any public or quasi-public area primarily used for the parking or temporary storage of motor vehicles including, but not limited to,
shopping centers, public parks, apartment or housing complexes, and municipally maintained parking areas.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line or lateral lines of any street or roadway, and adjacent to property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians, or any similar walkway located in any public park, shopping center, school, multi-family housing or apartment complex, including hiking
paths and nature trails.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 220/618
STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel, including alleys, bicycle paths, and service roads.
2. Prohibited Operation: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized scooter or motorized skateboard, as defined in subsection B1 of
this section, upon any street, public or quasi-public parking lot, sidewalk, or public park within the village.
3. Exemptions: The prohibition of this subsection shall not apply to the use of motorized scooters or motorized skateboards when such use is approved
as part of any village sponsored or approved parade or similar event. (Ord. 2004-48, 6-17-2004)
4. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be fined as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2004-
48, 6-17-2004; amd. 2011 Code)
7-6-5: RIDING OUTSIDE OF, CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
A. Riding Outside Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running boards or outside step of any vehicle. (1978 Code § 11-1-9)
B. Clinging To Vehicles: Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, motor driven cycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach
the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. (1978 Code §§ 11-1-9, 11-8-1)
Chapter 7
PARKING REGULATIONS
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle of the second division, as defined by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-146, used for the transportation of
persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for hire or not for hire, having a gross weight, as evidenced by the weight
and use classification code contained on the license plate, in excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds, having a maximum length in excess of two
hundred sixty four inches (264"), and having a maximum height and width in excess of ninety six inches (96") (exclusive of mirrors); construction
equipment; and permanently mounted equipment trailers, not including however, a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement or a
recreational vehicle not being used commercially.
TYPE II COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle of the second division, as defined by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-146, used for the
transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for hire or not for hire, having a gross weight, as
evidenced by the weight and use classification code contained on the license plate, not in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds, having a maximum
length not in excess of two hundred sixty four inches (264"), and having a maximum height and width not in excess of ninety six inches (96") (exclusive of
mirrors); construction equipment; and permanently mounted equipment trailers, not including however, a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially.
TYPE II SCHOOL BUS: A school bus with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1-213.5. (Ord. 2001-04, 1-4-2001)
7-7-2: MANNER OF PARKING:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section and except for those streets that have been marked for angle parking, every vehicle stopped or parked
upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right hand wheels parallel to and within twelve inches (12") of the right hand curb or as
close as practicable to the right edge of the right hand shoulder. On those streets marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the
curb indicated by such marks.
B. Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of
authorized traffic movement, with its right hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the right hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of
the right hand shoulder, or with its left hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the left hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left
hand shoulder. (1978 Code § 11-4-6; amd. 2011 Code)
C. No vehicle shall be parked on any lines or markings designating parking spaces or in such a position so that the vehicle is not entirely within the area
designated by lines or markings. (1978 Code § 11-4-6)
7-7-3: UNATTENDED VEHICLE:
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key
from the ignition, effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any perceptible grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the
street. (1978 Code § 11-4-7; amd. 2011 Code)
7-7-4: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (1978 Code
§ 11-4-8)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 221/618
7-7-5: PARKING PROHIBITED AT SPECIFIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a police officer or official traffic sign or signal:
A. Within an intersection.
B. On a crosswalk.
C. Upon any bridge or viaduct or in any subways and the approaches thereto.
D. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of the safety zone.
E. Within thirty feet (30') of an official traffic signal or stop sign on the approaching side.
F. Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk.
G. At any curb within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant; said distance to be measured from that point on the curb perpendicular to the exact location of the
fire hydrant. (Ord. 2006-34, 6-1-2006)
H. At any place within twenty feet (20') of the entrance to any fire station, and on the side of any street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within
seventy five feet (75') of said entrance, when properly signposted. (Ord. 2006-34, 6-1-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
I. At any place where the standing of any vehicle will block the use of any public or private driveway.
J. Within any sidewalk area; however, residents may park across the sidewalk on their respective driveways between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., or within twenty four (24) hours after a snowfall of one inch (1") or more between November 1 and March 31.
K. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
L. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
M. At any place where official traffic signs have been erected prohibiting stopping, standing or parking.
N. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
O. Within any designated bus zone, where such zone is marked by signs or pavement markings.
P. In any alley within twenty feet (20') of the inner sidewalk line projected across such alley, or in such position as to block a driveway or entrance to any
abutting property, or such position as to leave less than ten feet (10') of alleyway width available for free movement of vehicular traffic, or for any period
of time longer than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicle.
Q. Under the lowest portion of any fire escape. (Ord. 2006-34, 6-1-2006)
R. Upon a railroad track or between any railroad track and a line parallel with and fifty feet (50') distant from the outer rail thereof. (Ord. 2006-34, 6-1-2006;
amd. 2011 Code)
S. Upon any park or parkway, except in the case of emergency. However, vehicles parked upon a driveway perpendicular to the street between the curb
and the property line, without parking on or above the sidewalk, shall be permitted. Furthermore, vehicles parked upon a driveway parallel to the street
between the curb and the property line, without parking on or above the sidewalk, shall be permitted only on the designated street maintenance day for
the address where the vehicle is parked. (Ord. 2018-76, 11-29-2018)
T. Within twenty five feet (25') of any highway divider or roadway median strip. (Ord. 2006-34, 6-1-2006)
U. Within any properly designated fire lane or bus stop area. (Ord. 2006-34, 6-1-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
7-7-6: COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING:
A. It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle or vehicle for hire on or upon any street, alley or public way within the corporate limits of the Village,
except a commercial vehicle or vehicle for hire may park on such streets for the purpose of:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 222/618
1. Making an immediate delivery or pick up for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) minutes;
2. Loading or unloading passengers of vehicles for hire for a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes;
3. Waiting for a passenger of a vehicle for hire for a period of time not to exceed five (5) minutes, when instructed by the passenger to do so;
4. Residential construction and repair and landscaping, while such vehicles are needed for use in conducting the work, during the hours of seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.; or
5. Loading or unloading of a person's household belongings when such person is in the process of moving his residence from one location to another,
between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight only. (Ord. 2007-84, 9-20-2007)
B. It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle of the second division, as defined by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-146, in a Commercial District, unless the
property has designated parking spaces for such vehicles pursuant to an approved site plan. This subsection shall not apply to second division vehicles
parked on property wherein the sale of such vehicles is lawfully conducted, or when these vehicles are in the process of loading or unloading.
C. Nothing in this section is intended to permit any type II commercial vehicle to operate upon any public street or way in the Village with an actual gross
weight in violation of the size and weight limitations as set forth in section 7-4-5 of this title. (Ord. 2001-04, 1-4-2001)
7-7-7: ON STREET PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAILERS:
Parking of all nonmotorized recreational vehicles, trailers, boats (whether on a trailer or otherwise), any camper not mounted on a vehicle, and any motor
home or mini-motor home of any length on any public way within the Village is prohibited. However, a motor home or trailer attached to a tow vehicle may
be parked in an otherwise legal manner on the public way for a period not to exceed forty eight (48) hours for the purpose of loading or unloading. (Ord.
2007-69, 6-21-2007)
7-7-8: PARKING DURING SNOWFALL:
A. Prohibitions:
1. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street designated as a snow route in the Village at any time within twenty four (24) hours after a
snowfall of one inch (1") or more has occurred.
2. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any other public street in the Village at any time within twenty four (24) hours after a snowfall of two inches
(2") or more has occurred.
3. In the event of a continuous heavy snowfall of five inches (5") or more having occurred, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street in
the Village at any time within a period of seventy two (72) hours after such snowfall unless the Village Administrator should, in the interim, declare
that parking may be earlier resumed on any named street or streets.
B. Impoundment Of Vehicle: The Chief of Police, or any member of the Police Department designated by the Chief of Police, is hereby authorized to
remove or have removed, at the owner's expense, any vehicle parked on any public street within the Village in violation of the provisions of this section;
provided, that before such removal action is undertaken, efforts shall be made to identify the vehicle owner and to notify such owner to voluntarily
remove his vehicle. (1978 Code § 11-4-3)
7-7-9: MISCELLANEOUS PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Private Residential Property:
1. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on private property which is zoned for residential uses except within a garage, upon a paved driveway or upon
a paved parking lot. (1978 Code § 11-4-2)
2. It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle on private property which is zoned for residential uses except within a garage or except type II
school buses parked in driveways on school days between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (Ord. 2001-05, 1-4-2001)
B. Property Used For Fire Prevention And Firefighting Purposes: It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property used for fire
prevention or firefighting purposes when the property is properly posted to that effect. (1978 Code § 11-4-4)
C. Vehicles For Sale; Sale Of Merchandise:
1. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from
which vehicle merchandise is peddled.
2. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any commercial or industrial property for the purpose of displaying it for sale without the expressed
approval of the property owner or tenant. Commercial property specifically licensed for the sale of vehicles is exempt. (Ord. 98-72, 12-17-1998)
D. Parking On Certain Sides Of Streets Generally:
1. Where a fire hydrant or fire hydrants are located on a street, parking shall be restricted to the side of the street opposite to that wherein such fire
hydrant or hydrants are located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 223/618
2. Where there are no fire hydrants located on a street running in a northerly and southerly direction, parking shall be restricted to the east side of the
street.
3. Where there are no fire hydrants located on a street running in an easterly and westerly direction, parking shall be restricted to the north side of the
street.
4. The parking restrictions provided in subsections D1, D2 and D3 of this section shall not apply to that portion of any public street which is a cul-de-sac
area. (Ord. 2005-48, 6-3-2005)
E. Overnight Parking: Parking of any vehicle on any public street within the Village, when parking on such street is otherwise permitted, shall be prohibited
from the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M., unless the vehicle displays a Village vehicle license pursuant to chapter 2 of this
title. (Ord. 2007-81, 9-4-2007)
7-7-10: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING PLACES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
A. Definition: As used in this section, "authorized holder" means an individual issued a disability license plate under section 3-616 of the Vehicle Code, an
individual issued a parking decal or device under section 11-1301.2 of the Vehicle Code, or an individual issued a disabled veteran license plate under
section 3-609 of the Vehicle Code. (Source: P.A. 94-619, effective 1-1-2006.) (Ord. 2006-12, 3-16-2006)
B. Unauthorized Use:
1. It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle which is not properly displaying registration plates, decals, or devices issued pursuant to provisions of
the Illinois Vehicle Code ("Vehicle Code") to persons with disabilities or to disabled veterans in any parking place, including any private or public off
street parking facility, specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign as designated under section 11-301.1 of the Vehicle Code, for motor
vehicles displaying such registration plates, decals, or devices. It shall be further unlawful to park any motor vehicle in a designated access aisle
adjacent to any parking place specifically reserved for persons with disabilities.
2. An official parking decal or device must be displayed either by hanging the decal or device from the rearview mirror or by placing it on the dashboard
of the vehicle in clear view. Any motor vehicle properly displaying a disability license plate or a parking decal or device containing the international
symbol of access issued to persons with disabilities by any local authority, state, district, territory or foreign country shall be recognized by the village
as valid, and that vehicle shall receive the same parking privileges as residents of the village. (Ord. 2006-12, 3-16-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
3. An individual with a vehicle displaying disability license plates or a parking decal or device issued to qualified persons with disabilities or to disabled
veterans shall be in further violation of this section if:
a. The person using the disability license plate or parking decal or device is not the authorized holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or
device or is not transporting the authorized holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or device to or from the reserved parking location;
and
b. The person uses the disability license plate or parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted to the person with disabilities.
C. Removal Of Vehicle: Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or private off street parking facility may, after notifying the village
police department, remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved
for use by a person with a disability which does not display disability registration plates or a special decal or device as required under this section. (Ord.
2006-12, 3-16-2006)
D. Prohibited Defense: Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, it shall not be a defense to a charge under this section that either the sign posted
pursuant to this section or the intended accessible parking place does not comply with the technical requirements of section 11-301.1 of the vehicle
code, department regulations, or this section, if a reasonable person would be made aware by the sign or notice on or near the parking place that the
place is reserved for persons with disabilities. (Ord. 2006-12, 3-16-2006; amd. 2011 Code)
E. Penalties: Any person found liable or guilty of violating the provisions of subsection B1 of this section shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) nor more than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each offense in addition to any costs or charges connected with the removal or
storage of any such motor vehicle removed and stored pursuant to this section. Any person found liable or guilty of violating the provisions of
subsection B3 of this section shall be fined not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2011-70, 9-1-2011)
7-7-11: UNAUTHORIZED MOVING OF PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any prohibited area or away from the curb such a distance as is unlawful. (1978 Code
§ 11-4-2; amd. 2011 Code)
7-7-12: SIGNS POSTED:
Where a provision of this title or a provision of the Illinois vehicle code requires signs to be posted limiting or prohibiting parking, the chief of police shall
cause signs to be posted indicating such limitation or prohibition in those areas. (1978 Code § 11-4-1)
7-7-13: SETTLEMENT AND COMPROMISE OF PARKING VIOLATIONS:
A. Citation:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 224/618
1. Any person accused of violating any provision of this chapter relating to or restricting the place or length of time for vehicle parking, and other similar
parking regulations, may be issued a citation without the filing of a complaint in court against him for such violation, which citation may be affixed to a
motor vehicle owned or operated by him or owned by him and operated with his consent. (1978 Code § 11-4-10)
2. Said citation shall be in a form suitable for mailing, shall state the specific section of this chapter or chapter 8 of this title that was violated and shall
inform the alleged violator that he may avoid the filing of a complaint in court charging him with such violation upon payment of an amount hereinafter
prescribed in full settlement of his liability for such violation. (1978 Code § 11-4-10; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Payment Of Fine; Amounts:
1. Payment shall be due on or before the date set forth in the citation and, in any event, not more than thirty (30) days from the date the violation was
committed. Such payment shall be made at either the village hall or the village police department during normal business hours, either in person or
by mail with the envelope portion of the citation. A receipt shall be issued for all monies so paid, and the amount paid shall be forwarded to the
village treasurer for deposit in the proper fund. (1978 Code § 11-4-10)
2. Liability of any person for any violation specified in a citation pursuant to provisions of this section may be settled without court action upon payment
by the violator of the sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00) for such violation on or before the due date set forth in the citation; except that liability for a
violation specified in a citation issued pursuant to the provisions of section 7-7-10, "Unauthorized Use Of Parking Places For Persons With
Disabilities", of this chapter may be settled without court action upon the payment by the violator of the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for
such violation on or before the date set forth in the citation. (Ord. 2011-70, 9-1-2011)
C. Failure To Pay; Notice To Appear: In the event that no payment is received during the period set forth in the citation or in a subsequent final notice (if
one is issued), then the issuing police officer shall cause a notice to appear to be served upon the alleged violator and shall file and prosecute a
complaint for the violation in the county circuit court, or unpaid citations shall be enforced pursuant to administrative adjudications established in
chapter 3, article A of this title. (Ord. 2007-24, 3-8-2007)
D. Payment During Additional Period; Amounts: Where payment is made during the additional period set forth in a final notice, the amount to be paid shall
be fifty dollars ($50.00) for such violation, except in the case of a violation issued pursuant to the provisions of section 7-7-10, "Unauthorized Use Of
Parking Places For Persons With Disabilities", of this chapter the amount to be paid shall be two hundred sixty five dollars ($265.00) for such violation.
E. Suit To Recover Fine: Where suit is brought to recover the fine due for violations of this chapter, the amount of the fine required to be paid shall be
determined by the court or administrative hearing officer, but shall not be less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each offense, exclusive of costs, except where suit is brought to recover the fine due for a violation of section 7-7-10, "Unauthorized Use Of Parking
Places For Persons With Disabilities", of this chapter the amount of the fine required to be paid shall be determined by the court or administrative
hearing officer, but shall not be less than two hundred sixty five dollars ($265.00), exclusive of costs. (Ord. 2011-70, 9-1-2011)
F. Prima Facie Evidence: The fact that an automobile or motor vehicle which is illegally parked is registered with the secretary of state in the name of said
alleged violator, or in the alternative, the fact that a municipal vehicle sticker has been issued in the name of the alleged violator, shall be prima facie
evidence that such person was in control of or was the operator of the automobile or motor vehicle at the time of such alleged violation. (1978 Code
§ 11-4-10)
Chapter 8
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
7-8-1: ONE-WAY STREETS:
The following streets are hereby designated as one-way streets by indicating the street, direction of travel, and portion of the street limited to one-way
traffic:
ARDMORE AVENUE, southbound during the hours from 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. on days when school is in session along that portion lying south of
Fullerton Avenue from Fullerton Avenue to Gerald Avenue. School hours are from 9:00 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
ARMITAGE AVENUE, eastbound along that portion lying south of the Armitage Avenue Ditch from Glen Ellyn Road to Wayne Avenue.
ARMITAGE AVENUE, westbound along that portion lying north of the Armitage Avenue Ditch from Wayne Avenue to Glen Ellyn Road.
CIRCLE DRIVE, northbound and westbound, beginning at its easternmost intersection with Armitage Avenue counterclockwise to its westernmost
intersection with Armitage Avenue.
GLEN HILL DRIVE, eastbound and then northbound along that portion of both of its intersections with Oxford Lane during the hours of 7:30 A.M. to 3:30
P.M. on days when school is in session.
NOLAN AVENUE, westbound during the hours of 3:00 P.M. to 4:00 P.M. on days when school is in session between Wayne Avenue and Jill Court. School
hours are from 9:00 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
WAYNE AVENUE, northbound during the hours from 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. on days when school is in session on that portion of Wayne Avenue running
between the north edge of the entrance drive to the water pollution control facility and Dickens Avenue. School hours are from 9:00 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
(Ord. 2001-34, 5-3-2001)
7-8-2: STOP INTERSECTIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 225/618
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby declared to be stop intersections with the traffic signals, stop signs or signs posted on the corner or
corners indicated to stop traffic whose direction of travel is at right angles to face the signal or sign:
A. One-Way Stops:
Alberta Armitage Avenue Southeast
Almond Whitman Southeast
Alta Lane North Brandon Drive Northwest
Altgeld Avenue Amy Avenue Northeast
Bloomingdale Road Southwest
Westburg Street Southwest
Amy Avenue Lincoln Avenue Southeast
Ardmore Avenue Polo Club Drive Southeast
Armitage President Northeast
Aspen Lane South Brandon Northwest
Audubon Gladstone Southeast
Harding Northwest
Baldwin Court Gladstone Southeast
Barclay Drive London Drive Southwest
Basswood Lane Brandon Drive South Southeast
Blair Whitman Southeast
Bloomingdale Court Bloomingdale Road Southwest
Burr Oak South Brandon Drive Northwest
Cambridge Lane Westchester Drive Southwest
Cardinal Army Trail Road Southeast
Chadwick Lane Whitman Drive Northwest
Chaucer Lane Whitman Drive Northwest
Circle Drive Armitage Avenue Northwest
Civic Center Plaza (east entrance) Fullerton Avenue Northwest
Civic Center Plaza (west entrance) Fullerton Avenue Northwest
Clifford Street Lincoln Avenue Northwest
Club Drive Club Drive Southwest
Golfview Northwest
Clubhouse Court Club Drive Southwest
Cynthia Lane Wayne Avenue Southwest
Dale Road Bloomingdale Road Northeast
Darlene Pleasant Avenue Northeast
Sidney Avenue Southeast
Davine Drive Armitage Avenue Southeast
Nolan Northwest
Winthrop Avenue Southeast
Devon Avenue President Street Southwest
Dickens Avenue Davine Drive Northeast
Wayne Avenue Southwest
Drummond Avenue Bloomingdale Road Southwest
Street Intersection With Corner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 226/618
Clifford Street Northeast
President Southwest
Dunteman Drive Bloomingdale Road Southwest
Eagle Court Golfview Drive Northwest
Easy Street Glen Ellyn Road Northeast
Ellen Court James Court Southeast
Evergreen Avenue North Avenue Southeast
Fairway Drive Golfview Drive North portion
Golfview Drive South portion
Floyd Brown Lane Marilyn Avenue Northwest
Forest Avenue North Avenue Southeast
Friedrich Street Schubert Avenue Southeast
Garland Court Gladstone Southeast
Gerald Avenue Fullerton Avenue Southeast
Glen Hill Drive Bloomingdale Road Southwest
Hartford Street Northwest
Oxford Lane (school walk) Northwest
Glen Pointe Drive Internationale Boulevard/Exchange Boulevard Northeast
Glengary Drive Glen Hill Road Northwest
Glenrise Avenue North Avenue Southeast
Golden Drive Schmale Road Northeast
Golfview Court Golfview Drive Southwest
Golfview Drive Schmale Road Northeast
Goodrich Avenue Easy Street Northwest
Leslie Lane Southeast
Greenbriar Drive 2nd Place Southeast
Greens Court Club Drive Northeast
Harding Gladstone Southeast
Harold Avenue Lincoln Avenue to west/Charles Drive to south Northwest
Hartford Street Armitage Avenue Southeast
Hesterman President Southwest
Highgrove Boulevard (East) Regency Drive Southwest
Internationale Boulevard Exchange Boulevard Southeast
Jacobsen Avenue Bloomingdale Road Southwest
Westchester Drive Northwest
James Court Glen Ellyn Road Southwest
Pearl Avenue Northeast
Jamison Drive Whitman Drive Northeast
Jill Court Fullerton Avenue Southeast
Joyce Armitage Avenue Southeast
Keating Street Nevada Avenue Northwest
Schubert Avenue Southeast
Lake Ridge Drive Gladstone Northwest
Lincoln Avenue Westberg Street Southwest
Street Intersection With Corner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 227/618
London Drive Roland Drive Northeast
Lynn Court Glen Ellyn Road Southwest
Marilyn Avenue Amy Avenue Southwest
Bloomingdale Road Northeast
Jill Court Northeast
Liberty Drive Southwest
Mill Pond Drive Schmale Road Northeast
Montana Avenue Amy Avenue Northeast
Bloomingdale Road Southwest
Friedrich Street Northeast
President Street Southwest
Morse Lane Whitman Drive Northwest
Newport Street Schubert Avenue Northwest
Newton Avenue North Avenue Southeast
Nolan Avenue Glen Ellyn Road Northeast
Wayne Avenue Southwest
Norton Avenue Pearl Avenue Northeast
Winthrop Avenue Northwest
Opal Avenue Stevenson Drive (east entrance) Northwest
Stevenson Drive (west entrance) Northwest
Oriole Army Trail Road Southeast
Paddock Circle (East) Polo Club Drive Northwest
Paddock Circle (West) Polo Club Drive Northeast
Paul Avenue Fullerton Avenue Northwest
Payson Whitman Drive Northwest
Pearl Avenue North Avenue Northwest
Petersen Drive Bloomingdale Road Northeast
Pine Drive Bloomingdale Road Southwest
Placid Avenue Bloomingdale Road Southwest
Pleasant James Court Southwest
Polo Club Court Polo Club Drive Southeast
Polo Club Drive Bloomingdale Road Northeast
Windy Point Drive Southeast
Prairie James Court Northwest
Reeves Drive Golden Drive Southeast
Regency Drive Highgrove Boulevard (West) Southwest
Sandburg Gladstone Southeast
Schmale Court Schmale Road Northeast
Schmale Road Hesterman Drive Northeast
Schubert Avenue Northeast
Stevenson Drive Northeast
Schubert Avenue Bloomingdale Road Southwest
Scott Street Drummond Avenue Northeast
Lincoln Avenue Southwest
Street Intersection With Corner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 228/618
Montana Avenue Southwest
Shorewood Drive Bloomingdale Road Northeast
Sidney Avenue Glen Ellyn Road Southwest
Pleasant Southeast
Stonefield Oriole Northeast
Terry Road Armitage Avenue Southeast
Van Meter Drive Fullerton Northwest
Vantroba Northwest
Vantroba Drive Armitage Northwest
Bloomingdale Road Southwest
Westberg Street Drummond Avenue Southeast
Western Avenue North Avenue Southeast
Whitman Drive Bloomingdale Road Northeast
Wildwood South Brandon Drive Southeast
Windsor Lane Westchester Drive Southwest
Windy Point Drive Glen Ellyn Road Southwest
Winthrop Avenue Glen Ellyn Road Southwest
Pearl Avenue Northeast
Woodside North Brandon Drive Southeast
Wrightwood Avenue Bloomingdale Road Northeast
Clifford Street Northeast
President Street Southwest
Westberg Street Southwest
Wyatt Lane Whitman Drive Northwest
(Ord. 2014-68, 11-20-2014; amd. Ord. 2016-48, 9-1-2016; Ord. 2017-37, 6-22-2017; Ord. 2018-71, 11-8-2018)
B. Two-Way Stops:
Ardmore Avenue Lincoln/Charles Northwest
Southeast
Armitage Avenue Highland Avenue Northeast
Southeast
Vantroba Drive Northwest
Southeast
Army Trail Road Gladstone Drive Northwest
Southeast
Chapman Court Armitage Avenue Northwest
Southeast
Charles Drive Fullerton Avenue Northwest
Southeast
Evergreen Drive Shorewood Drive Northwest
Southeast
Fullerton Avenue Schmale Road Northwest
Northeast
Gilberto Street Golden Northeast
Southwest
Glen Hill Road Armitage Avenue Northwest
Southeast
Street Intersection With Corner
Street Intersection With Corner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 229/618
Glengary Drive Armitage Avenue Northwest
Southeast
Highland Avenue Fullerton Avenue Northwest
Southeast
Jill Court Armitage Avenue Northwest
Southeast
Lake Ridge Drive East Lake Ridge Drive Northwest
Southwest
Larry Lane Fullerton Avenue Northwest
Southeast
Lincoln Avenue Bloomingdale Road Northeast
Southwest
Mark Avenue Amy Avenue Northeast
Southwest
Marilyn Avenue Northwest
Southeast
Nevada Avenue President Street Northeast
Southwest
Pleasant Sidney Avenue Northwest
Southeast
Prairie Sidney Avenue Northwest
Southeast
Schubert Avenue Gilberto Street Northwest
Southeast
Thorncliffe Whitman Drive Northeast
Southwest
Timber Lane South Brandon Drive Northwest
Southeast
Towner Lane North Brandon Drive Northwest
Southeast
South Brandon Drive Northwest
Southeast
Westchester Drive Armitage Avenue Northwest
Southeast
Wrightwood Avenue Gilberto Street Northeast
Southwest
(1978 Code § 11-9-3; amd. Ord. 96-40, 5-2-1996; Ord. 96-105, 12-5-1996; Ord. 97-72, 11-6-1997; Ord. 99-44, 6-3-1999; Ord. 2003-07, 2-6-2003; Ord.
2003-48, 6-5-2003; Ord. 2003-51, 6-19-2003; Ord. 2018-81, 12-13-2018)
C. Three-Way Stops:
Amy Avenue Belden Avenue Northeast
Northwest
Southwest
Burdette Avenue Goodrich Avenue Northeast
Southeast
Southwest
College Drive Whitman Drive Northeast
Northwest
Southwest
Gladstone Drive Brahms Court Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Glen Hill Drive Westchester Drive Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Street Intersection With Corner
Street Intersection With Corner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 230/618
Gregory Avenue Brandon Drive Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Scarboro Drive Northeast
Northwest
Southwest
Hesterman Drive Chippendale Lane Northeast
Northwest
Southwest
Mill Pond Drive Chippendale Lane Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
President Street Northeast
Southeast
Southwest
Montana Avenue Westberg Street Northeast
Northwest
Southwest
Newport Stevenson Drive Northeast
Southeast
Southwest
Paul Street Windy Point Drive Northeast
Southeast
Southwest
Sidney Avenue Pearl Avenue Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Wayne Avenue Dickens Avenue Northwest
Southwest
Southeast
Western Avenue Second Place Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Whitman Drive London Drive Northeast
Northwest
Southwest
Windy Point Drive Polo Club Drive Northeast
Southwest
Southeast
Winthrop Highland Avenue Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
(1978 Code § 11-9-3; amd. Ord. 99-65, 7-22-1999; Ord. 2002-102, 11-21-2002; Ord. 2003-05, 1-16-2003; Ord. 2003-80, 11-6-2003)
D. Four-Way Stops:
Amy Avenue Fullerton Avenue Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Ardmore Avenue,
Charles Drive and Lincoln Avenue
Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Brandon Drive Timber Lane Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Street Intersection With Corner
Street Intersection With Corner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 231/618
Burgess Drive Oriole Lane Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Dickens Avenue Jill Court Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Fullerton Avenue Ardmore Avenue Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Gilberto Street Altgeld Avenue Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Schubert Avenue Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Hesterman Drive Harvest Lane Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Paul Avenue Lincoln Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Polo Club Drive Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
President Street Fullerton Avenue Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Schubert Avenue Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Stevenson Drive Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Schubert Avenue President Street Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Shorewood/Second Place Evergreen Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Stevenson Drive Gilberto Street Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Towner Lane North Brandon Drive Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
Vail Lane North Brandon Drive Northeast
Northwest
Southeast
Southwest
(1978 Code § 11-9-3; amd. Ord. 96-92, 10-17-1996; Ord. 96-105, 12-5-1996; Ord. 97-72, 11-6-1997; Ord. 99-44, 6-3-1999; Ord. 99-65, 7-22-1999; Ord.
99-98, 12-2-1999; Ord. 2003-48, 6-5-2003; Ord. 2003-51, 6-19-2003)
Street Intersection With Corner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 232/618
7-8-3: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, parking of any vehicle on any public street within the village, where parking is otherwise permitted on such
street, shall be restricted as follows:
A. Temporary Parking: Parking shall be permitted on the west side of Sandburg Court in front of 2031 Sandburg Court for the purpose of visiting Gladstone
Park only. (Ord. 2005-48, 6-30-2005)
B. School Day Parking: The following parking restrictions apply on those days when school is in session ("school days"):
1. Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets on school days:
Ardmore
Avenue
Both From its intersection with Fullerton Avenue south to its intersection with Belden Avenue at the easterly boundary line of lot 15
in block 3 of Reskin's 7th Addition to Glendale Heights, between 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
Belden
Avenue
Both From its intersection with Ardmore Avenue at the easterly boundary line of lot 15 in block 3 of Reskin's 7th Addition to Glendale
Heights, south and west to its intersection with Gerald Avenue, between 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.
Both From its intersection with Orchard Lane east to its intersection with Mildred Avenue during the hours between 8:00 A.M. and
4:00 P.M.
Fullerton
Avenue
South
Within 429 feet west of the east driveway of Glenside Junior High School from 7:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.
South
Within 40 feet west of the west driveway of Glenside Junior High School from 7:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.
Glen Hill
Drive
East From the intersection of Glen Hill Drive and Oxford Lane and extending 175 feet south, shall be posted and designated "school
bus parking only"
North
Between that portion extending from 132 Glen Hill Drive easterly and then northerly to its intersection with Oxford Lane
between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M.
Nolan
Avenue
West
Between Wayne Avenue and Jill Court
Orchard
Lane
West
From its intersection with Marilyn Avenue southbound to its intersection with Belden Avenue during the hours between 8:00
A.M. and 4:00 P.M.
President
Street
East From its intersection with Schubert northward to the north edge of the driveway located at 1747 President Street between the
hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M.
Stevenson
Drive
North
From Newport to President from 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.
Wayne
Avenue
Both Between Armitage Avenue and Nolan Avenue from 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.
(Ord. 2005-14, 3-3-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-48, 6-30-2005; 2011 Code)
2. Parking shall be permitted on the following streets on school days only and only when school is in session:
Street Side Area
Gladstone
Drive
North and
east
From Audubon to 75 feet south of Army Trail Road between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M.
Glen Hill
Drive
South From its intersection with Oxford Lane and proceeding in an easterly direction between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:00
P.M. for 15 minutes
President
Street
East A distance of 500 feet north of Fullerton for 15 minutes
East From the north edge of the driveway located at 1747 President Street northward to its intersection with Stevenson Drive
between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. for 15 minutes
Stevenson
Drive
South From President to Newport, 15 minutes only
(Ord. 2005-48, 6-30-2005; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Permit Parking:
Street Side
Area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 233/618
1. Permit Required For Certain Streets: Parking permits are required to park on the following streets:
Audubon Drive
Baldwin Court
Bell Lane
Brahms Court
Garland Court
Handing Drive
Harding Court
London Drive
Sandburg Court
Wren Court (Ord. 2007-20, 2-15-2007; amd. Ord. 2017-77, 12-14-2017)
2. Issuance Of Permit: The Village Police Department shall issue each resident of the streets referenced in subsection C1 of this section one parking
permit for each vehicle registered to that respective address, and in addition, guest parking permits will be issued to the residents of said streets
upon request.
3. Display Required: Any vehicle failing to display a parking permit clearly visible through the windshield of said vehicle is in violation of this subsection.
4. Violations: Any vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of subsection C1 of this section is an unlawful vehicle as stated in section 7-3C-1,
definition of "unlawful vehicle", subsection B, of this title, and said vehicle shall be ticketed and is subject to immediate towing without notice pursuant
to section 7-3C-2 of this title.
5. Exemptions: This subsection shall not apply to construction or landscaping vehicles parked on said streets while such vehicles are needed to
perform work at residences located on said streets. (Ord. 2005-48, 6-30-2005)
D. Parking During Street Maintenance: Parking on Village streets shall be prohibited between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00)
P.M. in April, May, October, and November for street maintenance based upon the following schedule: (Ord. 2011-66, 9-1-2011)
1. Mondays: All Village streets north of the Canadian National Railway line to the northern boundaries of the Village.
2. Tuesdays: All Village streets west of Bloomingdale Road to the western boundaries of the Village and north of Fullerton Avenue to the Canadian
National Railway line, and on all Village streets west of President Street to the western boundaries of the Village and from Golfview Drive north to
Fullerton Avenue.
3. Wednesdays: All Village streets east of Bloomingdale Road to the eastern boundaries of the Village and from the Canadian National Railway line
south to North Avenue.
4. Fridays: All Village streets south of North Avenue to the southern boundaries of the Village, all Village streets west of Bloomingdale Road to
President Street and from Armitage Avenue north to Fullerton Avenue, and all Village streets west of President Street to Schmale Road and West
Lake Drive south to North Avenue. (Ord. 2010-46, 6-17-2010)
7-8-4: NO PARKING AT ANY TIME; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any of the following designated places during the times specified in this section:
Almond Lane
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with the south curb lines of Whitman Drive, south to and including its
southernmost turnaround, at all times
Alpine Drive
East
Both Throughout its length from its easternmost point adjacent to a certain street parking inset, west to its intersection with Alpine
Drive North, at all times; except, that vehicles may park for no more than 15 minutes on the north side of the street,
provided they have activated hazard lights. All other parking restrictions remain in effect
Alpine Drive
North
Both From its intersection with Alpine Drive East, north to its intersection with South Brandon Drive, at all times; except, that
vehicles may park for no more than 15 minutes on the west side of the street, provided they have activated hazard lights. All
other parking restrictions remain in effect
Army Trail
Road
Both Throughout its length from its easternmost boundary of the corporate limits of the village lying east of Bloomingdale Road,
westerly to the westernmost boundary with the corporate limits of this village lying west of Bloomingdale Road, at all times
Barclay Drive
Both Throughout its length from and including its easternmost turnaround, east to the west curb line of its intersection with
London Drive, at all times
Basswood
Lane
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with Alpine Drive East, north to its intersection with South Brandon Drive, at all
times; except, that vehicles may park for no more than 15 minutes on either side of the street, provided they have activated
hazard lights. All other parking restrictions remain in effect
Street Side
Area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 234/618
Bentley Court
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with North Brandon Drive, then south to its end, including the turnaround, at all
times
Blair Lane Both Throughout its length from its intersection with the south curb line of Whitman Drive, south to its intersection with the north
curb line of Thorncliffe Drive, at all times
Bloomingdale
Road
Both Throughout its length from its southernmost boundary with the corporate limits of the village lying south of North Avenue,
northerly to its northernmost boundary with the corporate limits of the village lying north of Army Trail Road, at all times
Brandon
Court
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with North Brandon Drive, then south to its end, including the turnaround, at all
times
North
Brandon
Drive
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with Bloomingdale Road, west, then north, then west to its intersection with
Cardinal Drive, at all times
Chadwick
Lane
Both Throughout its length from the north curb line of its intersection with Whitman Drive, north to its northernmost terminus
point, at all times
Chaucer
Lane
Both Throughout its length from the north curb line of its intersection with Whitman Drive, north to its intersection with the south
curb line of Barclay Drive, at all times
Circle Drive West
South
East
Throughout its length from its easternmost intersection with Armitage Avenue to its westernmost intersection with Armitage
Avenue, at all times
College Drive
West
Between Payson and Whitman Drive
Dunteman
Drive
South
Within 50 feet east of North Water's Edge
Exchange
Boulevard
Both In the Glen Pointe Business Park, except for the first 100 feet of the south side of Exchange Boulevard east of President
Street
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with President Street, east, then southeast, through its intersection with
Internationale Boulevard, then south to its intersection with Glen Pointe Drive, at all times
Flagstaff
Court
Perimeter, except where expressly permitted. In addition, parking shall be prohibited along the perimeter of the island
located within Flagstaff Court, except where expressly permitted
Gladstone
Drive
Between Bloomingdale Road and Army Trail Road, except on school days as provided in subsection 7-8-3B2 of this chapter
Glen Ellyn
Road
Both Throughout its length from its southernmost boundary with the corporate limits of the village south of North Avenue,
northerly to its northernmost boundary with the corporate limits of the village lying north of the Illinois Central Gulf Railway
right of way, at all times
Glen Pointe
Drive
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with Bloomingdale Road, then west to its intersection with Exchange Boulevard
and Internationale Boulevard, at all times
Golfview
Drive
North
West
From 10 feet east of the driveway at 72 Golfview Drive, easterly and northerly for a distance of 150 feet, at all times
Goodrich East From its intersection with North Avenue to the first driveway (approximately 82 feet from its intersection with North Avenue),
at all times
West
From 141 feet from its intersection with North Avenue to the first fire hydrant (approximately 146 feet from its intersection
with North Avenue), at all times; except, that vehicles may park for no more than 4 hours for loading and unloading
Hickory Lane
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with Alpine Drive East, north to its intersection with South Brandon Drive, at all
times; except, that vehicles may park for no more than 15 minutes on the west side of the street, provided they have
activated hazard lights. All other parking restrictions remain in effect
Highgrove
Boulevard
Both
Hilldale Lane
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with the south curb line of Jamison Drive, south to and including its southernmost
terminus point, at all times
Hilton Drive Both Throughout its length from its intersection with the east curb line of Roland Drive North, east to its easternmost turnaround,
at all times
Internationale
Boulevard
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with Exchange Boulevard, south and then east to its intersection with Glen Pointe
Drive, at all times
James Court
Both Within 200 feet west of Glen Ellyn Road
Jamison
Drive
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with the east curb line of Whitman Drive, east to its intersection with the west curb
line of Pepperwood Lane, at all times
Street Side
Area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 235/618
Jill Court East From its intersection with Fullerton, south to the northernmost driveway of 1505 Jill Court
Kronos Drive
Both Throughout its length
Lake Drive Both Throughout its length from its intersection with Schmale Road, east, and then southeast, to its end, including the
turnaround, at all times
Lake Ridge
Drive
West
Shall extend around the northwest corner to the east edge of the driveway at 164 East Lake Ridge Drive
Mark Avenue
West
North
Within 300 feet north and east of the intersection of Mark Avenue and Marilyn Avenue, at all times
Mitchell Drive
Both
North
Avenue
Both Throughout its length from its easternmost boundary with the corporate limits of the Village lying east of Glen Ellyn Road,
westerly to its intersection with Schmale Road, at all times
Payson
Circle
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with the north curb line of Whitman Drive, north, in a northerly, easterly and
southerly direction, to its intersection with the west curb line of College Drive, at all times
Pearl Avenue
East From 20 feet north of the northern entry off of Pearl Avenue to 414 E. North Avenue extending 20 feet south of the northern
entry off of Pearl Avenue to 414 E. North Avenue, at all times
Pepperwood
Lane
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with the south curb line of College Drive, south and east to its easternmost
terminus point, at all times
Polo Club
Drive
North
Within 250 feet west of Windy Point Drive
President
Street
West
From 50 feet north of the northern entrance to Glendale Lakes Golf Course to 115 feet south of the southern entrance to
Glendale Lakes Golf Course
Quincy Court
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with North Brandon Drive, then south to its end, including the turnaround, at all
times
Regency
Drive
Both
Roberta
Court
Perimeter, except where expressly permitted. In addition, parking shall be prohibited along the perimeter of the island
located within Roberta Court, except where expressly permitted
Roland Drive
East
Both Throughout its length from the east curb line of its intersection with London Drive, east to its intersection with the west curb
line of Roland Drive North, at all times
Roland Drive
North
Both Throughout its length from its southernmost intersection with Roland Drive East, north to and including its northernmost
turnaround, at all times
Schubert
Avenue
North
From the northeast corner of Newport and Schubert Avenue extending 40 feet east
Shorewood
Drive
Between Bloomingdale Road and Evergreen Avenue
Sidney
Avenue
North
From Glen Ellyn Road for the first 350 feet
Stevenson
Drive
North
Within 300 feet west of Bloomingdale Road
42 East
Stevenson
Immediately in front of Pheasant Ridge School
Thorncliffe
Drive
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with the east curb line of Almond Lane, east to its intersection with the west curb
line of Whitman Drive, and from its intersection with the east curb line of Whitman Drive, east to its intersection with the
west curb line of Pepperwood Lane, at all times
Timber Lane
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with Alpine Drive East, north to its intersection with South Brandon Drive, at all
times; except, that vehicles may park for no more than 15 minutes on the east side of the street, provided they have
activated hazard lights. All other parking restrictions remain in effect
Wall Street Both Throughout its length from its intersection with Army Trail Road, south and then west to its intersection with Schmale Road,
at all times
Whitman
Drive
East From Almond to Army Trail Road
North
From Bloomingdale Road to Almond
Street Side
Area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 236/618
Wildwood
Circle
Both Throughout its length from its southernmost intersection with South Brandon Drive West, north and easterly to its
northernmost intersection with South Brandon Drive, at all times; except, that vehicles may park for no more than 15
minutes on the north and west sides of the street, provided they have activated hazard lights. All other parking restrictions
remain in effect
Windy Point
Drive
Both Throughout its length from its intersection with Glen Ellyn Road, northwest through its intersection with Bloomingdale Road,
at all times
Winthrop
Avenue
Both From its intersection with Glen Ellyn Road, east and northerly to its intersection with Marilyn Avenue, at all times
South
Between Highland and Pearl
Wyatt Lane Both Throughout its length from its intersection with the north curb line of Whitman Drive, north to its intersection with the south
curb line of Hilton Drive, at all times
On the east side of any street within the Village extending generally in a northerly and southerly direction and on the north side of any street within
the Village extending generally in an easterly and westerly direction (see also subsections 7-7-9D2 and D3 of this title)
(Ord. 2005-14, 3-3-2005; amd. Ord. 2006-34, 6-1-2006; Ord. 2007-125, 12-6-2007; Ord. 2009-30, 4-2-2009; Ord. 2019-10, 3-21-2019)
7-8-5: SNOW ROUTES:
The following streets within the Village are hereby designated as snow routes for the purpose of establishing priority for snow removal to provide access to
schools and to each separate residential and commercial area within the Village:
Alta Lane, east from North Brandon Drive to Glenrock Lane.
Altgeld Avenue, west from Bloomingdale Road to Scott Street.
Amy Avenue, south from Fullerton Avenue to Belden Avenue.
Ardmore Avenue, north from Belden Avenue to Polo Club Drive.
Armitage Avenue, east from Glen Ellyn Road to its terminus and west from Bloomingdale Road to its terminus.
Belden Avenue, east from Amy Avenue to Ardmore Avenue.
North Brandon Drive, throughout its entire length.
South Brandon Drive, south and east from North Brandon Drive to its terminus.
Brookside Drive, east from Gilberto Street to Harvest Lane.
Cardinal Drive, south from Bloomingdale Road to North Brandon Drive.
Chippendale Lane, south from Mill Pond Drive to Hesterman Drive.
Clifford Street, south from Schubert Avenue to Drummond Avenue.
Drummond Avenue, west from Bloomingdale Road to Clifford Street.
Dunteman Drive, throughout its length.
Easy Street, east from Glen Ellyn Road to its terminus.
Exchange Boulevard, throughout its length.
Fox Avenue, east from Wayne Avenue to Liberty Drive.
Fullerton Avenue, throughout its entire length.
Gilberto Street, south from Brookside Drive to Montana Avenue.
Gladstone Drive, south and east from Army Trail Road to Bloomingdale Road.
Glen Hill Drive, west from Bloomingdale Road to Armitage Avenue.
Glen Pointe Drive, throughout its length.
Glenrock Lane, north from Alta Lane to Loveland Drive.
Gregory Avenue, west from Glen Ellyn Road to Brandon Drive.
Harvest, north from Brookside to Mill Pond.
Street Side
Area
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 237/618
Hesterman Drive, west from President Street to Schmale Road.
Jacobsen Avenue, west and south from Bloomingdale Road to Armitage Avenue.
James Court, west from Glen Ellyn Road to Pearl Avenue.
Jill Court, north from Winthrop Avenue to Fullerton Avenue.
John Street, south from Montana Avenue to Fullerton Avenue.
Joyce Avenue, south from Armitage Avenue to Terry Road East.
Liberty Drive, south from Fox Avenue to Fullerton Avenue.
Lincoln Avenue, west from Ardmore Avenue to Nevada Avenue.
Loveland Drive, east from Vail Lane to Glenrock Lane.
Marilyn Avenue, west from Amy Avenue to Bloomingdale Road.
Mill Pond Drive, from President Street to Schmale Road.
Montana Avenue, west from Bloomingdale Road to Van Meter Street.
Nevada Avenue, west from Lincoln Avenue to President Street.
Newport Street, south from Placid Avenue to Schubert Avenue.
Nolan Avenue, east from Glen Ellyn Road to its terminus.
Oriole Lane, south and west from Bloomingdale Road to Cardinal Drive.
Pearl Avenue, north from North Avenue to Sidney Avenue and north from Winthrop to Belden.
Placid Avenue, west from Bloomingdale Road to Newport Street.
Polo Club Drive, throughout its length.
President Street, throughout its length.
Scarboro Drive, east and south from North Brandon Drive to Gregory Avenue.
Schmale Road, south from Mill Pond Drive to Fullerton Avenue.
Schubert Avenue, west from Bloomingdale Road to Schmale Road.
Scott Street, south from Altgeld Avenue to Montana Avenue.
Shorewood Drive, throughout its length.
Sidney Avenue, west from Glen Ellyn Road to Pearl Avenue.
Stevenson Drive, west from Bloomingdale Road to Schmale Road.
Stonefield Drive, south and west from Oriole Lane to Cardinal Drive.
Terry Road East, south from Joyce Avenue to Easy Street.
Vail Lane, north from North Brandon Drive to Loveland Drive.
Van Meter Street, south from Montana Avenue to Fullerton Avenue.
Vantroba Avenue, west and south from Bloomingdale Road to Armitage Avenue.
Wayne Avenue, north from Armitage Avenue to Fox Avenue.
Wayne Avenue, south from Nolan Avenue to Armitage Avenue.
Whitman Drive, north and west from Army Trail Road to Bloomingdale Road.
Windy Point Drive, west from Glen Ellyn Road to Polo Club Drive.
Winthrop Avenue, east from Glen Ellyn Road to Jill Court.
Winthrop Avenue, west from Glen Ellyn Road to Pearl Avenue.
(1978 Code § 11-9-1; amd. 2011 Code)
7-8-6: PROHIBITED TURNS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 238/618
A. Prohibited Turns During School Hours:
1. Left Turns: The following are prohibited left turns on school days during school hours:
a. Motor vehicles traveling westbound on Stevenson Drive to turn left from westbound Stevenson Drive into any driveway of 43 East Stevenson Drive
(Pheasant Ridge School).
b. Motor vehicles to exit either driveway of 43 East Stevenson Drive (Pheasant Ridge School) by turning left onto westbound Stevenson Drive.
c. Turning left from southbound Gladstone Drive into the south driveway of Blackhawk School.
2. Right Turns: It shall be unlawful on school days during school hours for the operator of any motor vehicle to turn right from the north driveway of
Blackhawk School onto northbound Gladstone Drive. (Ord. 2006-24, 5-4-2006)
B. Right Turn On Red Prohibited: Right turns against a steady red signal are prohibited at the following intersections:
Fullerton Avenue, eastbound, turning north onto Bloomingdale Road, daily, between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
Fullerton Avenue, westbound, turning south onto Bloomingdale Road, daily, between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
(1978 Code § 11-9-5; amd. 2011 Code)
7-8-7: PARK ZONES AND PARK ZONE STREETS:
A. Park Zones Designated: The following recreational facilities and areas are designated "park zones" pursuant to the authority of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-605.3:
Glen Hill Park: Glen Hill Drive from its westernmost intersection with Oxford Lane to its intersection with Glengary Drive.
Greenbriar Park: 2nd Place from Greenbriar Drive to Victoria Lane.
Mill Pond Park And Tot Lots: Mill Pond Drive from Harvest Lane to Flagstaff Lane.
Pheasant Ridge Park: Placid Avenue from 138 East Placid Avenue to 162 East Placid Avenue.
Sidney Park: Sidney Avenue from Glen Ellyn Road to Darlene Lane.
B. Park Zone Streets Designated: The following are designated "park zone streets" pursuant to the authority of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-605.3:
Gilberto Tot Lot: From the intersection of Gilberto Avenue and Schubert Avenue to the intersection of Gilberto Avenue and Stevenson Drive.
Glen Hill Drive: From Glen Hill Drive's westernmost intersection with Oxford Lane to Glen Hill Drive's intersection with Glengary Drive.
Mill Pond Drive: From the intersection of Harvest Lane and Mill Pond Drive to the intersection of Mill Pond Drive and Flagstaff Lane, including all
intersections therein.
Placid Avenue: From 138 East Placid Avenue to 162 East Placid Avenue.
Sidney Avenue: From the intersection of Glen Ellyn Road and Sidney Avenue to the intersection of Sidney Avenue and Darlene Lane, including all
intersections therein.
2nd Place: From the intersection of 2nd Place and Greenbriar Drive to the point 2nd Place becomes Victoria Lane.
(Ord. 2007-36, 4-5-2007; amd. Ord. 2008-61, 8-21-2008; Ord. 2008-67, 9-18-2008; 2011 Code; Ord. 2015-48, 8-6-2015)
C. Enforcement: Park zones and park zone streets designated in this section shall be enforced in accordance with and pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-605.3. (Ord. 2007-36, 4-5-2007)
7-8-8: SIGNS POSTED:
The director of public works shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs at the appropriate locations designated in this chapter. (2011 Code; amd. Ord.
2014-15, 3-20-2014)
Chapter 9
PEDESTRIANS
7-9-1: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
At intersections when traffic is directed by a police officer or by a stop and go signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway other than
with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. (1978 Code § 11-5-4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 239/618
7-9-2: USE OF CROSSWALKS IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business district. (1978 Code § 11-5-5; amd. 2011 Code)
7-9-3: STANDING ON ROADWAYS:
No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway, other than in a safety zone, if such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. (1978 Code § 11-5-3;
amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 10
BICYCLES
7-10-1: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
Every bicycle owned or kept by a resident of the village shall register the same with the police department of the village upon forms supplied by the chief of
police. Each bicycle so registered will receive a registration tag which shall be permanently affixed to the frame of the bicycle. Such tag shall be
nontransferable and shall be retained upon the frame of the bicycle to which it is affixed until the same has been disposed of by gift, sale, junking or
permanent removal from the village. (1978 Code § 11-8-6)
7-10-2: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY:
A. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the Illinois vehicle code and by the provisions of this title except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which, by their nature, can
have no application. (1978 Code § 11-8-1; amd. 2011 Code)
B. The regulations of this title applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or public sidewalk or upon any public path
set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein. (1978 Code § 11-8-7)
7-10-3: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
A. Any person operating a bicycle shall comply with official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles unless otherwise
directed by a police officer.
B. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn or a turn in the opposite direction is permitted, no person operating a bicycle
shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event, such person
shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. (1978 Code § 11-8-3)
7-10-4: OPERATION OF :
A. Speed: No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
B. Emerging From Alley, Driveway Or Building: The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk
or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area and, upon
entering the roadway, shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. (1978 Code § 11-8-1)
C. Carrying Articles: No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the use of both hands on the handlebars at all
times.
D. Riding On Bicycles:
1. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
2. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped; except, that an adult rider may
carry a child securely attached to his person in a backpack or sling. (1978 Code § 11-8-1; amd. 2011 Code)
E. Riding On Sidewalks:
1. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
2. No person fifteen (15) or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any district. (1978 Code § 11-8-2)
3. A person propelling a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk shall yield the right of way to any
pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 240/618
F. Riding On Streets And Bicycle Paths:
1. Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle upon a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable and safe to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway except under the following
situations:
a. When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized pedal cycle or vehicle proceeding in the same direction; or
b. When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway; or
c. When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles,
motorized pedal cycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right hand
curb or edge. For purposes of this subsection F1c, a "substandard width lane" means a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedal
cycle and a vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane; or
d. When approaching a place where a right turn is authorized.
2. Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedal cycle upon a one-way roadway with two (2) or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left
hand curb or edge of such roadway as practicable. (1978 Code § 11-8-2; amd. 2011 Code)
3. Bicycles shall not be operated upon any street where the operation of bicycles has been prohibited, and signs have been erected indicating such
prohibition.
4. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride other than single file except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
5. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and not use the roadway. (1978
Code § 11-8-2)
7-10-5: PARKING BICYCLES:
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against
a building or at the curb in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. (1978 Code § 11-8-4)
7-10-6: EQUIPMENT:
A. Lights And Reflectors: Every bicycle operated on any street, sidewalk, alley or roadway or any other public area within the limits of the village during the
period from sunset to sunrise or at any other time when visibility is so limited as to require the use of lights for safety shall be equipped on the front with
a lamp which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front and shall be equipped on the rear with a red
reflector of a type approved by the Illinois department of transportation which shall be visible from all distances from one hundred feet (100') to six
hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a
distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. (1978 Code § 11-8-5; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Sirens: A bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle any siren; except, that this subsection shall not apply to a bicycle
that is a police vehicle or fire department vehicle. (1978 Code §§ 11-6-4, 11-8-5; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Brake: Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately control movement of, and stop and hold, the bicycle. (1978 Code § 11-8-5;
amd. 2011 Code)
7-10-7: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN:
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this
title applicable to bicycles. (1978 Code § 11-8-7)
Chapter 11
PARADES, PROCESSIONS AND MARCHES
7-11-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to participate in any manner in a parade, procession, or march on the public streets or sidewalks as described herein without first
having obtained a permit to do so as described in this chapter. (1978 Code § 11-10-2)
7-11-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE:
It is unlawful for any person, group of persons, or organization to conduct or participate in any parade, procession, or march, either pedestrian or vehicular,
or a combination thereof, in more than one specific area or location in the village or in conflict with any of the traffic laws, ordinances or regulations of the
village whereby normal vehicular or pedestrian traffic may be disrupted or impeded, except upon application in writing to the village clerk not less than
fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the parade, procession, or march. Each application shall contain the following information and be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) which may be waived by the village clerk upon request of the applicant for
good cause: (1978 Code § 11-10-1; amd. Ord. 2011-09, 4-7-2011)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 241/618
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person, group of persons, or organization organizing such parade, procession, or march and
responsible for its conduct.
B. The time of inception and duration of the parade, procession, or march; starting point and termination point and the specific route to be traveled for the
parade, procession, or march.
C. The composition of the parade, procession, or march; the approximate number and the maximum number of persons, vehicles and animals expected to
participate in such parade, procession, or march, together with a description of the type of animals and vehicles involved. (1978 Code § 11-10-1)
7-11-3: REFERRAL OF APPLICATIONS; APPROVAL OR DENIAL:
A. Referrals: Upon receipt of such application above described, the village clerk shall refer to the chief of police any application which has a maximum
number of vehicles or animals expected to participate of twenty five (25) or less or a maximum number of persons expected to participate of one
hundred (100) or less; and the clerk shall refer to the president and board of trustees any application which has a maximum number of vehicles or
animals expected to participate of more than twenty five (25) or a maximum number of persons expected to participate of more than one hundred
(100).
B. Action On Applications Referred To Chief:
1. On all applications referred to the chief of police, the chief of police shall determine whether that parade, procession, or march will unreasonably
interfere with the rights of others to use the streets and sidewalks with respect to time, route, composition, or number of participants, and based upon
this determination, the chief of police shall direct the village clerk to issue or deny a permit for the conduct of that parade, procession, or march.
2. In the event that the chief of police shall direct the village clerk to deny such permit, the chief of police shall designate the area or areas wherein the
plan for the parade, procession, or march shall be appropriately adjusted, including the setting of a limitation on the number of persons allowed to
participate, with the provision that a new application setting forth such changes in the plan be delivered to the chief of police within five (5) days of his
direction to the village clerk to deny the permit.
3. In the event the person or group making application for a permit shall change the plan for the parade, procession, or march to conform to the
designation of the chief of police, and provided the new application is received by the chief of police within the time limits set forth hereinabove for
the submission of a changed plan, the chief of police shall direct the village clerk to issue a permit for that parade, procession, or march. (1978 Code
§ 11-10-1; amd. Ord. 2011-09, 4-7-2011)
C. Action On Applications Referred To Board Of Trustees:
1. On all applications referred to the board of trustees, the board of trustees shall determine whether that parade, procession, or march will
unreasonably interfere with the rights of others to use the streets and sidewalks with respect to time, route, composition, or number of participants,
and based upon this determination, the board of trustees shall direct the village clerk to issue or deny a permit for the conduct of that parade,
procession, or march. (1978 Code § 11-10-1)
2. In the event that the board of trustees shall direct the village clerk to deny a permit, the board of trustees shall designate the area or areas wherein
the plan for the parade, procession, or march shall be appropriately adjusted, including the setting of a limit on the number of persons allowed to
participate, with the provision that a new application setting forth such changes in the plan be delivered to the village board of trustees within five (5)
days of the board of trustees' direction to the village clerk to deny the permit.
3. In the event the person or group making application for a permit shall change the plan for the parade, procession, or march to conform to the
designation of the board of trustees, and provided the new application is received by the village board of trustees within the time limits set forth
hereinabove for the submission of a changed plan, the village board of trustees shall direct the village clerk to issue a permit for that parade,
procession, or march. (1978 Code § 11-10-1; amd. 2011 Code)
7-11-4: EVENTS REQUESTED FOR SAME DATE:
In the event the village clerk receives applications for more than one parade, procession, or march to be held on the same date, the chief of police may
route each of said parades, processions, or marches so that they will not conflict with each other, or the chief of police may deny one or more permits for
such parades, processions, or marches. The first applicant shall have priority over later applicants. (1978 Code § 11-10-1; amd. Ord. 2011-09, 4-7-2011)
7-11-5: PROHIBITED HOURS:
It shall be unlawful to participate in any manner in any parade, procession, or march between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. (1978 Code § 11-10-3)
7-11-6: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Funeral processions proceeding by vehicle under the most reasonable route from the funeral home, church, or residence of the deceased to the place
of interment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 242/618
B. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. (1978 Code § 11-10-1)
7-11-7: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined an amount not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2011-09, 4-7-2011; amd. 2011 Code)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
8-1-1: STREET OPENING DEPOSIT:
There shall be a deposit of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) paid to the village before any street opening is made in the village. (1978 Code § 8-2-5;
amd. 2011 Code)
8-1-2: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION PERMIT:
No sidewalk shall be constructed or replaced in the village without first obtaining a permit therefor. The fee for such permit shall be thirty dollars ($30.00).
(1978 Code § 8-2-3; amd. 2011 Code)
8-1-3: OBSTRUCTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way except as may be
specifically authorized by ordinance or by the director of public works. (1978 Code § 8-2-2; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
8-1-4: INJURY TO PAVEMENT PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to walk upon, drive any vehicle or animal upon or injure any newly laid street or alley pavement while the same is guarded by a warning
sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure or deface any street, sidewalk or alley pavement. (1978 Code § 8-2-1)
8-1-5: SNOW AND ICE DEPOSITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or institution, other than authorized village personnel, to plow, place, or cause to be placed, deposit or
cause to be deposited, any snow or ice upon any public street or portion of any public street in the village. (1978 Code § 8-2-2-1)
8-1-6: LOCATION OF MAILBOXES IN PARKWAY AREAS:
Public parkway areas may be used for the erection of mailboxes serving the premises adjacent to said parkway; provided, that no portion of any such
mailbox shall be closer than one foot (1') from the back of the curb line of said parkway area. (1978 Code § 8-2-7)
Chapter 2
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN RIGHTS OF WAY
8-2-1: PURPOSE; SCOPE; INTERPRETATION:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village's jurisdiction,
which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village rights of way and the
village as a whole.
B. Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its authority over the rights of way in the village and, in particular, the use of the public
ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
1. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
2. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
3. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the village utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or public property;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 243/618
4. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;
5. Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
6. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed;
7. Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that characterize the village residential neighborhoods;
8. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights of way; and
9. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
C. Scope: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way within the jurisdiction of the village. A
facility lawfully established prior to the effective date hereof may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
D. Franchises, Licenses Or Similar Agreements:
1. The village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of
locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into
such an agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the village may provide for terms and
conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
2. In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
3. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar
agreement between the village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and
control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
E. Conflicting Provisions:
1. This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
2. In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the utility shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
F. Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society For Testing And Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conduit.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The village code of the village of Glendale Heights.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 244/618
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conduit.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a right of way.
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: The village director of community development or his or her designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: Any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right of way for its intended
use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials,
equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or
equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way, or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. The term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by
the director of community development to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under a right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by a street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to section 8-2-4 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 245/618
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at the local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other
similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for its use or consumption
and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to subsection 8-2-6C of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates
or terminates the end to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in
the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject
to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal communications commission (47
CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this section.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
201(v).
VILLAGE: The village of Glendale Heights.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 2007-
102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies a right of way within the village shall register on January 1 of each year with the director of community development, providing
the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the
utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person,
and evidence of insurance as required in subsection 8-2-6A of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. Failure to register as an occupant of
the right of way under this section shall constitute cause for the village to deny any and all permit applications for further construction or renovation of
facilities in the right of way. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Exemptions: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any village right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility; 2) adds a new facility; 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter); or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way without first
filing an application with the village director of community development and obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 246/618
this chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no
disruption of the right of way.
B. Application For Permit:
1. All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in such number of duplicate
copies as the village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain
proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
2. The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
a. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
b. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
c. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant
with respect to the application;
d. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
e. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
(1) A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and
vehicular traffic; and
(2) An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the village
and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
f. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
g. Evidence of insurance as required in subsection 8-2-6A of this chapter;
h. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in subsection 8-2-6C of this chapter;
i. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this chapter (see section 8-2-16 of this chapter);
j. The applicant shall certify that it has registered as an occupant of the right of way as required by section 8-2-3 of this chapter;
k. If the application is made by a duly authorized representative of the utility, said representative shall submit documentation that it has the
contractual authority to act on behalf of the represented utility; and
l. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the village.
3. In addition to the requirements of subsection B2 of this section, the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
a. In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system, evidence that any certificate of public convenience and necessity or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required
by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
b. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
c. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies, have been
satisfied;
d. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control and other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
e. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
4. Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information
contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the
amendment.
C. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure maintenance fee law.
D. Action On Applications:
1. Review Of Applications; Grant Or Denial Of Permit: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
village director of community development within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village director of community development shall reject such application, in writing, stating the
reasons therefor. If the village director of community development is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 247/618
and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village director of community development shall issue a permit therefor as soon
as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the village director of community
development, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
2. Additional Review Of Telecommunications Retailers Applications:
a. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that
it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The telecommunications retailer and the village shall reach a mutual
agreement as to which portions of the right of way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed prior to the commencement of any
construction.
b. In the event that the village director of community development fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either: 1) ten (10) days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation
for new construction; or 2) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation
for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
c. Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to subsection A of this section, the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection D1 of this section.
3. Additional Review Of Holders Of State Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law: Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state
issued authorization under the cable and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days after submission to the village,
unless otherwise acted upon by the village, provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances, and regulations.
E. Effect Of Permit:
1. A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights of way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
2. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within that period and
is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
3. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and
subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held at a date, time
and place designated by the village with such village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the
purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including,
without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
4. The issuance of a permit by the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the village and applicable statutes,
laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
F. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
1. Grounds: The village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
a. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
b. Noncompliance with this chapter;
c. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way presents
a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
d. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
2. Notice Requirements: The village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter stating the
reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to the permittee under this subsection.
3. Options Of Permittee:
a. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
(1) Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
(2) Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to
the village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
(3) Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way to
the satisfaction of the village, providing written proof of such removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
b. The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in subsection F3a of this section.
4. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection F1 of this section.
5. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection F3 of this section, the village or its
designee may, at the option of the village: a) correct the deficiencies; b) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 248/618
subject facilities or equipment; or c) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-5: AS BUILT PLANS:
Within sixty (60) days after the completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the village with one set of as built plans on mylar, and three (3)
copies thereof, on sheets of twenty four inch by thirty six inch (24" x 36") drawings at a scale of one inch to twenty feet (1" = 20') and certified to the village
as accurately depicting the location of all facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-6: INSURANCE; INDEMNITY; SECURITY:
A. Insurance Requirements:
1. Coverages And Limits:
a. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying a right of way or constructing any facility in the right
of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the village and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections A1a(1) and A1a(2) of
this section:
(1) Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as
"X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
(A) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
(B) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
(C) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
(2) Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
(3) Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
(4) Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
b. If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this subsection A.
2. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this subsection A may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any
excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
3. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this subsection A to the village within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
4. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages:
a. The insurance policies required by this subsection A shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after
receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village President and
Village Administrator of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
b. Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this subsection A.
5. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A1 of this section. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under
subsection A1 of this section, or the requirements of subsections A2, A3 and A4 of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection
A1 of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
6. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters that are
the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this subsection A shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance
or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
7. Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this subsection A shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.
B. Indemnification: By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village
and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from, or
alleged to arise out of or result from, the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates,
officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering
service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar
agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 249/618
losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees,
agents or representatives.
C. Security:
1. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this subsection C. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this subsection C at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized
under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:
a. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this chapter;
b. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this chapter; and
c. The payment by the permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by the permittee in violation of this chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the
permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's
failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable law.
2. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this
subsection C2 shall, at a minimum:
a. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the village and the permittee;
b. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the village of any amounts covered thereby; and
c. Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the state of Illinois from which it can be drawn.
3. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at least
as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the village director of community development, and
may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration.
Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken
prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the village director of community development may, in the exercise of
sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit.
The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of
this subsection C3 for any single phase.
4. Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection C4, may withdraw an amount from the security fund; provided, that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such
amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
a. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
b. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
c. Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
d. Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
5. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund,
the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection C3 of this section.
6. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village; provided, that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum
balance required in subsection C3 of this section.
7. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the
security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of revocation of the permit,
the security fund and any and all accrued interest therein shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable
costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation; provided, that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall
be refunded to the permittee.
8. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to
any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-7: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of way or
change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under
the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right of
way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 250/618
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 2007-
102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-8: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the rights of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
1. "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
2. "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
3. "Highway Design Manual";
4. "Highway Standards Manual";
5. "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
6. "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm. code section 545);
7. "Flagger's Handbook"; and
8. "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
B. Interpretation Of Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this chapter, the
village director of community development shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply, and such decision
shall be final. If requested, the village director of community development shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction,
maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.
C. Identification: All personnel working at any construction site in the village on the behalf of a utility shall carry identification cards and copies of all
required permits for the execution of said construction. All identification cards shall identify the laborer's employer and the utility by which he or she has
been contracted to perform the construction services. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-9: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers,
when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility workers when performing any work
on the rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided,
however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 8-2-15 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
E. Compliance Required: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's
attention by the village. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-10: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
1. Interference With Village Facilities Prohibited: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the village director of community development
determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with
the operation or maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
2. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with, the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin
said right of way.
3. Interference With Travel Prohibited: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
4. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 251/618
5. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
B. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with a minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside
the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right of way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering
judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in an existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not more
than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line, and any aboveground appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of
way line or as near as practicable.
C. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways may require
the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting
from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC rules entitled "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83 Ill. adm.
code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
D. Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not highways, rather
than within particular highways.
E. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.
2. The village may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from view.
F. Aboveground Facilities: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single
pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable.
The installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 252/618
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk, and such
installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based
upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the
event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
H. Appearance Standards:
1. The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right of
way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 2007-102,
11-1-2007)
8-2-11: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the village
director of community development from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48)
hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While
pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so
that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored under or
around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section
603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only one-half (1/2) of
any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the village director of community development.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as
added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow
for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location.
c. Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 253/618
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the director of community development, the utility, at its expense,
shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore
new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the director of community development.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic.
If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is permitted under section 8-2-16 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the director of community development.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3)
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen
before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by
one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the village.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of the installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair; and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility: (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as determined by the village)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water lines Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage lines Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
(Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the national electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall
be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there are no feasible alternatives and if guywires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing; provided, that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only
if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved method which compresses the earth to make the opening
for cable installation; or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
d. Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snow
drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 254/618
shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days after placement.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code for
pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4).
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, stormwater sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois".
6. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area
may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the director of community
development. With the approval of the director of community development, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of a
vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois
commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the right of way without the prior written approval of the village director of
community development. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the
right of way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the
right of way and other property. If material is to be stored on the right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the village.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are
such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the director of community development when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services. (Ord.
2007-102, 11-1-2007)
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction are between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. CST and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. CST.
(Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and location of
existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-12: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control activities in the
right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations and, additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the village as
permitted by law.
B. Other Utilities; Tree Trimming:
1. Permit Requirements:
a. Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and
regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 255/618
b. Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are
experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work
will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the
tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society Of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation
for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning
would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
C. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
D. Chemical Use:
1. Except as provided in subsection D2 of this section, no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in
the village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease.
2. Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director
of community development that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-13: REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
A. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related
appurtenances within the rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the rights of way. A
facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of way of the village, as the village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful, in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the village shall attempt to notify the
utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
D. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such
notice, the village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the village director of community development determines that such
removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility that abandoned the
facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all
or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-14: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the right of way is
disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the village director of community
development. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the
right of way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section
may be extended by the village director of community development for good cause shown. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-15: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS:
A. General Maintenance Requirements: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the
utility in a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit.
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection
for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate
signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 256/618
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the village director of community development or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified
immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling
public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file with the village, in writing, a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight (48) hours
after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-16: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the village director of
community development as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested
and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The village director of community development shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this
chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions:
1. The village director of community development may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
a. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship that
would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
b. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
2. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the village director of community development may require the utility requesting the variance to meet
reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of this chapter.
D. Appeals: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the village director of
community development under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the village board, or such other board or commission as it
may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the village clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination. The village board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the board's next regularly scheduled
meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The village board shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 2007-102, 11-1-2007)
8-2-17: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the village costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost
apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned thereto.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
2007-102, 11-1-2007)
Chapter 3
STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERS
8-3-1: NAMES OF STREETS:
Street names are and shall be as they exist at the effective date hereof; provided, however, that the village president and board of trustees may, by
ordinance, change the name of any existing street or may, by ordinance, designate the name of any street provided in any plat approved by ordinance.
(1978 Code § 8-2-4)
8-3-2: BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM AND ADDRESS SCHEDULE:
A. Created: There is hereby created a street numbering system and address schedule for the village. The address schedule and street numbering system
of the village shall conform to and be a continuation and extension of the system used by the village of Glen Ellyn, Illinois. (1978 Code §§ 8-2-6-1, 8-2-
6-2)
B. Baselines: The baselines for the village street numbering system shall be as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 257/618
1. North-South:
a. North Avenue shall equal 1200.
b. Numbers shall increase to the north and decrease to the south.
2. East-West:
a. Pearl Street extended equals 400.
b. Numbers shall increase to the east and decrease to the west. (1978 Code § 8-2-6-3)
C. Layout And Manner Of Assigning Addresses: The area of the village shall be laid out, numbered and addressed as follows:
1. There shall be four (4) blocks per site.
2. Hundred digits shall change every one-fourth (1/4) of a mile.
3. Intersecting streets shall have no bearing on the numbering system.
4. Numbers shall be assigned at intervals of approximately twenty six and one-half feet (261/2').
5. Where more than one number may be assigned to a lot, the one nearest the center of the lot should be used.
6. Odd number addresses shall be on the east and south sides of the street.
7. Even number addresses shall be on the west and north sides of the street. (1978 Code § 8-2-6-4)
Chapter 4
PARK AND RECREATION AREAS
8-4-1: PUBLIC PLAYGROUND AND RECREATION AREAS DESIGNATED:
A. The following described or named parks and areas within the public parks of the village are set aside and designated as public playground and
recreation areas:
Park Location Approximately
Americana Park President Street and Fullerton Avenue 5.2 acres
Circle Park (dedicated to the memory of Edwin S. Czubak) Circle Drive and Armitage Avenue 1.3 acres
Civic center 300 E. Fullerton Avenue (village complex) 19.7 acres
College Park College Drive 4.1 acres
Gilberto Park Gilberto Street and Schubert Avenue 0.28 acres
Gladstone Park Gladstone Drive 8.9 acres
Glen Hill Park Glen Hill Drive 0.875 acres
Glendale Lakes Golf Club Fullerton and President Streets 117 acres
Greenbriar Park Second and Coventry 1.85 acres
Heritage Park Windy Point Drive and Paul Avenue 12.2 acres
James P. Nazos Park Joyce and Armitage 11.2 acres
Michael S. Camera Park Fullerton Avenue and Van Meter Street 63.8 acres
Mill Pond Park Mill Pond Drive 17.4 acres
Millennium Park (dedicated to memory of J. Ben Fajardo) Gladstone Drive 1.6 acres
Ollman Park South Brandon Drive 9.4 acres
Pheasant Ridge Park Placid Avenue 0.87 acres
Reskin Park Fullerton Avenue and Ardmore Avenue 8.5 acres
Ringneck Park Ringneck Drive 1.2 acres
Shorewood Park South of North Avenue, west of Evergreen 0.49 acres
Sidney Park Sidney Avenue 0.75 acres
Siems Park Cardinal Drive 15.7 acres
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 258/618
Veterans Memorial Park Bloomingdale and Fullerton Avenue 3.0 acres
B. The village president and board of trustees shall set aside and designate all portions of the public parks in the village which shall hereafter be used as
public playground and recreation areas. (Ord. 2006-80, 12-7-2006)
8-4-2: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
A. Hours: To be in any designated public playground and recreation area during the hours when such areas are closed to public use. Except as otherwise
provided, village park areas shall be open from sunrise in the morning until sunset in the evening that same day and shall be closed to the public from
sunset each day until sunrise the following day except under certain circumstances:
1. When the village is conducting a program or has issued a permit for a special activity, or providing a service; or
2. In any outdoor park facility that is equipped with either functioning general area or athletic lighting (excluding security lighting), the closing time shall
be extended to ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. when in actual use.
Exception: Athletic field lights one hundred (100) yards or more from the nearest residence may be used for organized programs until eleven thirty
o'clock (11:30) P.M., May through October.
B. Damage To Property: To destroy, deface, remove or intentionally damage any playground equipment, accessory facilities, signs or barricade gates or
chains therein.
C. Alcoholic Beverages: To have in his possession in any designated public park or playground and recreation area any alcoholic beverage, except when
such alcoholic beverage is possessed pursuant to proper permit issued by the liquor control commissioner for use in a specific recreation area at a
specific time.
D. Motor Vehicles: To operate any motor vehicle, motorbike, snowmobile, or other motor driven apparatus upon or across any designated public park or
playground and recreation area other than upon any road, lane or parking area set aside for such purpose.
E. Park And Recreation Village Policy: To violate the following "Village Of Glendale Heights Parks And Recreation Village Policy 2002-01":
1. Rules:
a. All parks are open from dawn to dusk unless otherwise posted. Certain lighted baseball fields, lighted tennis courts, lighted skatepark, lighted ice
rinks, and lighted basketball courts shall remain open as permitted.
b. Motorized vehicles are only allowed on designated roadways and parking areas. The speed limit is ten (10) miles per hour. Cruising is prohibited in
any restricted area.
c. Bicycles are only allowed on paved areas and bike paths.
d. Permits are available at the parks, recreation and facilities department administrative offices for group rentals and community events.
e. The director or designee may close areas to the public or otherwise restrict use until such time as the area or facility can be made available for
public use. Notice of closure shall be posted, and patrons shall not enter a restricted area.
f. Persons bringing pets or other animals into outdoor park areas shall keep them under confinement or direct control. Leads on leashes used to
control animals shall not be more than six feet (6') long. Patrons shall not permit a pet or other animal to remain unattended or create a
disturbance or a hazard. The pet owner shall be responsible to pick up and dispose of dog feces.
g. Outdoor grills are available for picnic use. No person may light, build or maintain a fire in any other area without permission from the director or
designee. Patrons must completely extinguish all fires before leaving the park. Never throw lighted matches, burning cigarettes or other flammable
material in any park area.
h. Alcoholic beverages are only permitted in the parks if approved in writing by the liquor control commissioner.
i. Swimming, bathing, and wading may take place only in places provided for these activities.
j. Trash must be placed in trash containers. If trash containers are not provided, trash must be taken with you to avoid littering.
k. Playground areas have been designed for age appropriateness, generally under the age of twelve (12) years old. Patrons should be mindful of the
appropriateness of the apparatus and use caution when engaged in play.
l. Patrons should cooperate in keeping the restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition.
2. The village prohibits:
a. Damaging, disturbing or removing any part of a park site including animal and plant life.
b. Dumping or storage of personal items, which includes yard waste (grass clippings, leaves, and branches).
c. The use of bikes, skateboards, rollerblades, or skates on tennis courts, patio areas, playground areas, and athletic fields.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 259/618
d. At no time shall skates, bikes, rollerblades, or skateboards be allowed on benches, rail ledges, and ramps within any park except within the
skatepark located at Camera Park.
e. Bottles, containers, or other items made of glass.
f. Golfing and golf practice.
g. Roller hockey, skateboarding, basketball, baseball, etc., on the tennis courts.
h. Feeding the geese.
i. Solicitation, vending, advertising, or signposting except by special permission of the director or designee.
j. Operate or use any audio device or musical instrument in such a manner and at such times so as to create excessive noise or nuisance.
k. Use obscene or objectionable language or gestures; engage in disruptive, destructive, or hazardous conduct.
l. Obstruct or reasonably interfere with the general public in their normal use of the park.
m. Overnight parking of vehicles that are not approved by the village. (Ord. 2005-19, 4-7-2005)
8-4-3: RESERVED PARK USAGE:
A. Permit Required: Upon due application to the village parks, recreation and facilities department, various village fields may be reserved by qualified
individuals/organizations for such activities permitted. Such permits shall impose any restrictions/fee as may be necessary to safeguard the park and
individuals using the park. Lighted sports fields can be used by permit only. (Ord. 96-82, 9-5-1996)
B. Insurance Required: Every applicant shall file a policy of insurance in which the village, its officials, agents and employees, are named insured against
any and all claims arising through the use of village parks. In lieu of filing the policy of insurance, a certificate evidencing the issuance of such
insurance, executed by a duly authorized agent, servant or employee of the carrier, may be so filed; provided, that such issuance shall be written by an
insurance carrier authorized to conduct such business in the state. (1978 Code § 8-1-3)
C. Revocation Of Permit: The permit of any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the president and village board of
trustees. (1978 Code § 8-1-3; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 5
TREES AND VEGETATION
8-5-1: FORESTRY PLAN ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by the village, and incorporated herein by reference, "Glendale Heights Municipal Forestry Plan - Parks, Recreation And
Facilities", revised 2013, for the control of trees and vegetation within the village, copies of which are on file in the office of the village clerk available for
public use, examination and inspection. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the village urban forestry plan are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section. (Ord. 2013-51, 9-5-2013)
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
MUNICIPAL FOREST: All trees, shrubs, bushes and woody vegetation on public grounds.
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks and other areas owned by the village.
PARKWAY TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all village streets. (Ord.
96-75, 8-1-1996)
8-5-3: TREE BOARD:
A. Created; Membership: There is hereby created and established a municipal tree board for the village. The tree board shall consist of three (3) members
who are citizens and residents of the village.
B. Appointment; Terms Of Office; Vacancies: The term of the three (3) members to be appointed by the village president shall be three (3) years; except,
that the term of office of two (2) of the members appointed to the first board shall be only one year, and the term of one member of the first board shall
be for two (2) years. In the event that a vacancy should occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired
portion of the term.
C. Compensation: Members of the board shall serve without compensation.
D. Duties And Responsibilities: It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer
the urban forestry plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, parkways and in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 260/618
other public areas. The urban forestry plan will be submitted annually to the village board and, upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the
official tree plan for the village. (Ord. 96-75, 8-1-1996)
Chapter 6
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
8-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards, and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on
rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use,
in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, Public Act 100-0585.
B. Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
C. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter,
the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or
regulations. (Ord. 2018-29, 5-24-2018)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODE: Uniform Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized National Code Organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to an authority for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
AUTHORITY: A unit of local government that has jurisdiction and control for use of public rights-of-way as provided by the Illinois Highway Code for
placements within public rights-of-way or has zoning or land use control for placements not within public rights-of-way.
AUTHORITY UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by an authority in public rights-of-way.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure
or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in
47 USC 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated
the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i through
section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the authority pursuant to a Preservation Program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the Preservation Program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in width,
and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
PERMIT: A written authorization required by an authority to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including an authority.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENT: The functional division of the Federal government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to respond
to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 261/618
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include authority-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES DEPLOYMENT ACT: Public Act 100-0585, as codified and amended.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more
than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power
transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility
does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is
acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the authority.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. This does not include and expressly excludes any person or
who is providing service to or for a private niche market.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory
basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord. 2018-
29, 5-24-2018)
8-6-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
A. Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in subsection B4 of
this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in rights-of-way in any zone,
or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
B. Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application received and
processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements:
1. Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village Administrator, after review and consultation with the Public Works, Police, and Community
Development Departments, shall reserve space on Village owned utility poles for future public safety uses. Such reservation may preclude
collocation of small wireless facilities if the Village reasonably determines that any such reserved Village utility poles cannot accommodate both
uses.
2. Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the following information to the Village as a material condition of any permit application
to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
a. Site specific structural integrity and, for an authority utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in
section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
b. The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed;
c. Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
d. The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
e. A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
f. Certification that the collocation complies with subsection B5, "Requirements", of this section to the best of the applicant's knowledge.
g. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the wireless
provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
h. In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by the Village, the wireless provider shall be
required to enter into a pole usage agreement in a form to be provided by the Village.
3. Alternate Placements: With respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the Village may
propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 262/618
the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the
alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village it shall provide written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or
material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph. It shall be the burden of the applicant, by presentation of
legally competent evidence, to establish that the Village's alternative proposed collocation imposes technical limits or additional material costs that
render the alternative collocation unreasonable.
4. Height Limitations: The Village maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless
support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
If an applicant proposes a height in excess of ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is
proposed for installation the applicant shall apply for a variation. Any variance when granted shall limit the height of any proposed wireless facility to
the higher of:
a. Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date
the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate which intersecting
right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or
b. Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
5. Requirements:
a. The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public
safety communications.
A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures
for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through
47 CFR 90.675.
The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not complying with the Code of
Federal Regulations cited above. The burden to establish the good faith effort shall be on the wireless provider which shall timely deliver to the
Village all information necessary to determine its efforts to resolve the interference consistent with the sections of the Codes of Federal
Regulations cited above. Failure to remedy the problem as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance and violation of this section subjecting
the wireless provider to injunctive relief and fines consistent with the Village Code.
b. The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the
pole.
For purposes of this subsection B5b, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
The wireless provider shall be required to accept maintenance responsibility of the Village's traffic signal or street lighting equipment for the
duration or the installation activity. The transfer of maintenance shall be to a qualified contractor that is prequalified by IDOT in the electrical
category. All traffic signal maintenance activity must be completed by personnel certified by IMSA as a level II traffic signal technician. Any
subsequent routine maintenance and/or modification to the wireless telecommunications facility may require a maintenance transfer of the Village's
traffic signal or lighting equipment at the discretion of the Village Administrator or his/her duly authorized designee.
c. The wireless provider shall comply with the applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
d. The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment, and aesthetic requirements that are identified by the Village in an ordinance, written policy adopted by the Governing Board of the
authority, a Comprehensive Plan, or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark
or in a historic district.
e. Subject to subsection A, "Permitted Use", of this section, and except for facilities excluded from evaluation for effects on historic properties under
47 CFR 1.1307(a)(4), the Village requires reasonable, technically feasible and non-discriminatory design or concealment measures in a historic
district or historic landmark.
6. Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village will determine whether the application is complete and
notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village will specifically identify any missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after the date upon which all documents, information, and
fees specifically enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
7. Application Process: The Village shall process applications as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 263/618
a. Multiple applications by different applicants for collocation on the same utility or wireless support structure shall be processed based on a first fully
complete application, then first served basis.
b. An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of
the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this section.
c. An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory
basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed
application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of
the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this section.
d. The Village shall deny an application not meeting the requirements of this chapter.
If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the requirements of subsection B5 of this
section require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider.
The Village will document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial was based,
and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies an application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of
denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty
(30) days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days
of denial shall require a new application, new full application fee and recommencement of the Village's review period.
The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the resubmitted application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application cure does not apply if
the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
8. Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
a. The express agreement in writing by both the applicant and the Village; or
b. A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay.
9. Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of a single authority shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. Each
consolidated application shall provide all the information required by subsection B2 of this section for each small wireless facility at each location.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or
that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
10. Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for an authority utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60)
days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed
three hundred sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the
applicant.
11. Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable
codes or local Code provisions or regulations in subsections B5 and B7c of this section.
If PA 100-0585 is repealed or found unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all permits granted by the Village under this chapter shall
terminate at the end of their current term.
12. Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information, and notices by personal delivery or as otherwise
required by the Village.
C. Application Fees: Application fees are hereby imposed as follows:
1. Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure and three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application to
collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 264/618
2. Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes
the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
3. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
4. The Village shall not require an application, approval, or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
a. Routine maintenance;
b. The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies
the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment
consistent with the requirements of subsections B2a through B2g of this section; or
c. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
Wireless providers shall secure a Village permit to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures.
D. Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
1. Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within rightsof-
way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;
2. Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation, or conservation
purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are
under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
3. Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities
are being used, developed, and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service
or video service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this chapter.
E. Existing Agreements Grandfathered For Existing Locations: Agreements between the Village and wireless providers that relate to the collocation of
small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on authority utility poles, that are in effect on June 1,
2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June
1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein.
F. Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village owned utility
pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year, per pole or 2) the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to
the wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility pole. This recurring rate shall be reflected in the Village pole usage agreement required for
connection to Village owned utility poles. If the Village has not billed the licensee actual direct and reasonable costs the fee shall be two hundred
dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to occupy and on each
annual anniversary date thereafter. Late payments shall carry simple interest of six percent (6%) per month, non-prorated.
G. Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned and the owner
of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the wireless provider
of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the wireless
provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for authority utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances
or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village. Such
notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. (Ord. 2018-29, 5-24-2018)
8-6-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of DuPage County has exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act. Pending
resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on authority utility poles within the right-of-way, the authority shall allow
the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per authority utility pole, with rates
to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute. (Ord. 2018-29, 5-24-2018)
8-6-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from
or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the authority improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Small Wireless
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 265/618
Facilities Deployment Act. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on any theory of liability. (Ord. 2018-29, 5-24-2018)
8-6-6: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance: a) property insurance for its property's
replacement cost against all risks; b) workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or c) commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the authority improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of authority
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to its collocation of any wireless facility. The wireless provider shall
disclose all self-insured retentions. (Ord. 2018-29, 5-24-2018)
Title 9
WATER AND SEWER
Chapter 1
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
9-1-1: SYSTEMS COMBINED:
The combined waterworks and sewerage system of the Village, in its entirety, together with all additions, improvements and extensions thereto, is hereby
declared to be a combined system which shall be operated as a single utility. (1978 Code § 9-3-1)
9-1-1-1: SEWER CHARGES MANDATORY:
As the waterworks and sewerage system of the Village is declared to be a combined system which is operated as a single utility, all sewer charges shall
apply to water usage regardless of whether or not water usage is separately metered for irrigation purposes. (Ord. 2018-84, 12-13-2018)
Chapter 2
WATER USE AND SERVICE
9-2-1: METER REGULATIONS:
A. Meter Required; Charge: All premises supplied with water by the village shall have meters installed thereon at the expense of the respective owners of
said premises. Such meters shall be of the kind designated from time to time by the village board of trustees, and the charge for such water meters,
where applicable, shall be determined by the market price of said meters as the village board may direct. (1978 Code § 9-5-10)
B. Test And Installation: All water meters shall be thoroughly tested by or under the direction of the water and sewer division before being put in place and
shall have two (2) shutoffs attached, one for the inlet and one for the outlet. All installations or repairs of water meters shall be made under the direction
and to the satisfaction of the water and sewer division.
C. Repair And Replacement: If the meter on any premises is out of order, the occupant of said premises shall immediately notify the water and sewer
division of this fact. The water and sewer division, on receipt of such notice or upon learning otherwise that any meter is out of order or not registering
properly, shall secure the repair of such meter or, if necessary, the installation of a new meter as soon as may be practicable. The owner shall pay for
the cost of repairs to or replacement of water meters required because of damage caused by frost, hot water, or negligent or improper act of the
consumer. (1978 Code § 9-5-10; amd. 2011 Code)
D. Damage To, Tampering With Meter:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, injure, alter, obstruct, or prevent the action of any meter provided for the purpose of measuring and
registering the quantity of water consumed or supplied to any water user, or cause or procure or aid the tampering with, injuring or altering of any
such meter or the obstruction or prevention of its action, or make or cause to be made with any water pipe any connection so as to conduct or supply
to any pipe, valve, orifice or appliance from which such water may be consumed or utilized without passing through or being registered by a meter or
without the consent of the company, municipal corporation, body corporate, commission or individual furnishing or transmitting such water through
such water pipe. (1978 Code § 9-5-10)
2. No person shall be permitted to test, repair, remove, or relocate any water meter, proportional, indicating or recording device installed in any building,
structure or premises for the control of the water supply thereto, excepting under authority granted by the water and sewer division. (1978 Code § 9-
5-10; amd. 2011 Code)
3. The owner of the building, structure or premises for which such meter is installed, or the person in possession, charge or control thereof, shall be
held responsible for any unauthorized tampering and interference with the operation of any water meter. The water supply to a building, structure or
premises wherein there has been tampering with or interference with the operation of any water meter shall be cut off and shall not again be
permitted to be turned on until such tampering or interference has been corrected and the owner or person shall have paid to the village the cost and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 266/618
expense of cutting off and turning on such water supply; provided, that where such person can show that such tampering or interference was done
contrary to his efforts to prevent the same, there shall be no such cutting off of the water supply.
4. Any person, firm or corporation who violates a provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (1978 Code § 9-5-10)
9-2-2: EXTENSION OF SYSTEM:
A. Permit Required: No person shall connect any water main extensions to the village waterworks system without first making application for a permit
therefor and issuance of a permit for such connection by the corporate authorities of the village. (1978 Code § 9-5-12-1)
B. Inspections: No permit required by this section shall be granted unless the village engineer or director of public works shall inspect all proposed
connections and extensions and advise the village authorities as to the conformity of the proposed connections and extensions with the existing system
and applicable codes and regulations of the village. (1978 Code § 9-5-12-2; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
9-2-3: WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the phrases "outdoor water use", "outdoor use of water" and "water used for outdoor purposes" shall mean
the outdoor use of water from the village municipal potable water system for watering of lawns, gardens, or shrubbery, motor vehicle washing, exterior
cleaning or maintenance purposes and filling of portable swimming pools employing the use of a hose, pipe, duct, sprinkler or sprinkler system, but
shall not include the use of rainwater or recycled water for any of the above named purposes nor the watering of plants or shrubbery using watering
cans, buckets or pails.
B. Water Usage Schedule: In order to comply with the village's Lake Michigan allocation permit issued by state of Illinois department of natural resources,
conservation practices shall be implemented within the village each year during the months from May through September. Due to increased water
demand for outdoor water use, including, but not limited to, lawn and garden watering, motor vehicle washing, outdoor cleaning and maintenance and
the filling of portable swimming pools, there is hereby established a water usage schedule which shall commence on May 1 of each year and which
shall remain in effect until September 30 of each year. Unless otherwise provided, the following outdoor water usage schedule shall apply:
1. Use On Odd Numbered Days: Persons or entities owning or controlling property in the village with an odd numbered street address may engage in
outdoor water use on odd numbered calendar days between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M., and between the hours
of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
2. Use On Even Numbered Days: Persons or entities owning or controlling property in the village with an even numbered address may engage in
outdoor water use on even numbered calendar days between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M., and between the hours
of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
3. Uses Permitted On All Days: Subsections B1 and B2 of this section notwithstanding, the following outdoor usage of water will be allowed during all
hours on all days, provided that hoses are used for outdoor water usage which are fitted with automatic shutoff devices, such that when the hose is
not being held in hand, it shuts off completely:
a. Allowed: Washing of motor vehicles by hand, sprinkling of flower or vegetable gardens by hand, cleaning of home siding, sidewalks, patios,
driveways, and other home maintenance all when done by handheld hoses fitted with automatic shutoff devices.
4. New And Existing Lawns:
a. New Lawns: The sodding or laying of new lawns shall be prohibited from June 1 through August 31. Except during a water supply declared
emergency in the manner provided in this section, if the installation of a new lawn is completed prior to June 1 or after August 31, the lawn may be
sprinkled each day for a period of up to two (2) weeks following the date of installation; provided, that the party in interest notifies the village public
works department as to the installation date of the newly sodded or seeded lawn.
b. Existing Lawns: The restoration of existing lawns shall be prohibited from June 1 through August 31. Except during a water supply declared
emergency in the manner provided in this section, if the restoration of the existing lawn as allowed in this subsection is completed prior to June 1
or after August 31, the lawn may be sprinkled each day for a period of up to two (2) weeks following the date of completed restoration; provided,
that the party in interest first notifies the village public works department as to the installation date of the restored lawn.
C. Water Shortages And Emergencies:
1. Declaration Of Emergency:
a. When the village administrator determines that a water supply emergency exists within the village as a result of the overall demand and/or failure
or malfunction of any portion of the water distribution system, or a shortage or malfunction in water supply from the source water supplier and that
the condition endangers the health, safety and welfare of the village, the village administrator shall declare, in writing, by a statement under oath,
that a water supply emergency exists, and it shall be his/her duty to issue an executive order setting forth such emergency water restrictions as
he/she deems appropriate to alleviate such emergency conditions.
b. The village administrator's sworn declaration that a water supply emergency exists, whether or not such condition endangers the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the village, shall contain facts to substantiate such determination and such declaration of a water supply emergency
shall be filed with the village clerk.
2. Issuance Of Water Restrictions:
a. Upon the declaration that a water supply emergency exists, the village administrator is authorized and empowered, but not exclusively so, to issue
emergency water restrictions limiting or prohibiting the drawing or use of water from the village water supply lines and system or to limit, suspend,
further restrict or prohibit the outdoor residential use of such water during the emergency period and/or prohibit or restrict the commercial or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 267/618
industrial outdoor uses of water beyond requirements for necessary industrial or commercial use or beyond that use necessary for sanitation or
preserving health, or any other use that is not directly connected with the preservation of health, sanitation, safety or the public welfare.
b. Except as hereinafter provided, the emergency water restrictions issued by the village administrator pursuant to the powers provided in this
section, shall, unless sooner terminated or rescinded by the village administrator, remain in effect until the next regular meeting of the village
board, at which time, the village board may, by motion or resolution, declare the existence of a water supply emergency and extend the operating
time of the emergency water restrictions established by the village administrator or modify such restrictions as the village board deems necessary
to remedy the water shortage condition. In the event the village board does not act upon the emergency water restrictions adopted by the village
administrator, the same shall expire and terminate at the conclusion of the first regular village board meeting next following the village
administrator's declaration.
c. Upon the declaration that a water supply emergency exists, the village administrator shall contact or direct village staff to contact the village
president and village trustees to notify them of the emergency and of the restrictions being imposed. The village administrator shall make
reasonable effort to notify the village residents and businesses of the emergency and the resulting restrictions imposed. (Ord. 2012-49, 8-16-2012)
D. Violation; Penalty:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section including the outdoor water use regulations established herein or the
provisions of any emergency water conservation regulations established pursuant to this section. (1978 Code § 9-5-13)
2. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction in a court of law, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day that such violation continues, and each and every day that such person violates this section shall
constitute a separate offense. (1978 Code § 9-5-13; amd. 2011 Code)
E. Enforcement: The director of public works, or his designee, shall, in addition to persons empowered or authorized by other provisions of this code, have
the following powers and authority to enforce any provision of this section including the outdoor water use regulations established herein or the
provisions of any emergency water conservation regulations established pursuant to this section: (1978 Code § 9-5-13; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15,
3-20-2014)
1. To execute all notices, complaints, citations, affidavits and other necessary documents in connection with any violation of any provision of this
section.
2. To serve all notices, complaints, citations, affidavits, orders, processes or other necessary documents on any person who violates any provision of
this section.
3. To appear as witness for any judge, court, board, agency or other tribunal and give testimony as necessary in connection with any violation of any
provision of this section. No village employee shall be entitled to any witness fees to be taxed against the village in any action of violation of any
provision of this section.
F. Settlement And Compromise Of Violations:
1. Citation: Any person accused of violating any provision of this section relating to or restricting the outdoor use of water may be issued a citation
without the filing of a complaint in court against him for such violation. Said citation shall be in a form suitable for mailing, shall state the specific
provision of this section that was violated and shall inform the alleged violator that he may avoid the filing of a complaint in court charging him with
such violation upon payment of an amount hereinafter prescribed in full settlement for his liability for such violation.
2. Payment Of Fine: Payment shall be due on or before the date set forth in the citation and, in any event, not more than thirty (30) days from the date
the violation was committed. Such payment shall be made either at the village hall or at the village police department during normal business hours,
either in person or by mail, with the envelope portion of the citation. A receipt shall be issued for all monies so paid, and the amount paid shall be
forwarded to the village treasurer for deposit in the proper fund.
3. Notice To Appear: In the event that no payment is received during the period set forth in the citation or in the subsequent final notice (if one is so
issued), then the issuing police officer shall cause a notice to appear to be served upon the alleged violator and shall file and prosecute a complaint
for the violation in the county circuit court.
4. Fines:
a. Liability of any person for any violation specified in a citation issued pursuant to provisions of this section may be settled without court action upon
payment by the violator of the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for such violation on or before the date set forth in the citation.
b. Where payment is made during the additional period set forth in a final notice (if one is issued), the amount of the fine required to be paid shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for such violation. (1978 Code § 9-5-13)
c. Where suit is brought in court to recover the fine due for violation of this section, the amount of the fine required to be paid shall be determined by
the court, but shall not be less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, exclusive of costs.
(1978 Code § 9-5-13; amd. 2011 Code)
5. Prima Facie Evidence: Whenever a violation of this section occurs, it shall be prima facie evidence that the owner(s) or person(s) in control of that
property, at the time of such alleged violation, is liable for the offense. (1978 Code § 9-5-13)
9-2-4: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
Any person who wilfully and maliciously cuts, injures, damages, tampers or destroys or defaces any fire hydrant, water main, or any other fixtures
pertaining to and a part of the village water system, and any person who intentionally opens any fire hydrant without proper authorization shall be subject
to the penalty prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1978 Code § 9-5-17; amd. 2011 Code)
9-2-5: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 268/618
A. The director of public works, or his designee, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection A of this section, the director of public works, or his designee, the
Illinois environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the village employees, and the village shall indemnify the
company against loss or damage to its property by village employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the metering and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
company to maintain safe conditions.
C. The Director of Public Works, or his designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the Village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the waterworks lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (1978 Code § 9-5-16; amd. 2011 Code; Ord.
2014-15, 3-20-2014)
D. Employees of the waterworks system shall have the right of access to any premises served by the waterworks system for the purpose of reading water
meters at the regular prescribed intervals or for the purpose of making inspections in order to maintain in good condition and provide for the protection
of the system and the efficient management thereof. Where such inspections are not of an immediate or urgent nature, employees of the system shall
arrange for appointments mutually convenient to the persons of the premises served and the employees. Any person refusing the right to permit the
employees of the waterworks system the above described right of access to his premises shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in section 1-4-1 of
this Code. (1978 Code § 9-5-16; amd. 2011 Code)
9-2-6: NONCOMPLIANCE; DISCONTINUANCE AND REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE:
A. Notices Of Noncompliance And Discontinuance Of Service: After a failure to comply with a written or verbal request by the Village of Glendale Heights
to grant access to a property serviced by the waterworks system to inspect, observe, measure, sample, repair, maintain, or exercise any other right
under this chapter, a notice of noncompliance shall be mailed to the property owner, occupant, or water service user notifying him or her that there is a
failure to comply with a request to grant access to the property and that access to the property must be granted within ten (10) days. In the event full
access to the property is not granted by the date set forth in the notice of noncompliance, the Finance Director or his or her designee shall cause a
written notice of discontinuance of water service to be served, either by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the owner,
occupant or water service user. This notice shall contain the following information:
1. The reason the Village of Glendale Heights is requesting access to the property;
2. Details relating to the previous attempt(s) that the Village of Glendale Heights made to gain access to the property;
3. The date by which access to the property must be granted to avoid discontinuance of water service. Discontinuance of water service shall not be
less than seven (7) business days after service of the notice of discontinuance;
4. The name, address and phone number of the Finance Director to contact for a hearing on the discontinuance of water service;
5. That the customer has seven (7) business days from the date the notice of discontinuance was mailed or personally served to request a hearing to
contest water service discontinuance; and
6. That there will be a standard charge of zero dollars ($0.00) for resumption of water service during normal business hours and one hundred twenty
five dollars ($125.00) outside of normal business hours or on Village observed holidays.
B. Discontinuance Of Service:
1. If no request for a hearing is made as herein provided, water service may thereafter be discontinued. No service shall be discontinued on a holiday
or the weekend. If a hearing is requested, water service shall be continued pending the outcome of the hearing. The hearing shall be convened
within seven (7) business days of the date the request for hearing is received by the Finance Director.
2. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent discontinuance of water service for reasons of safety, health, or cooperation with other civil
authorities.
C. Hearings: The Finance Director shall hear all matters relating to disputes or complaints regarding failure to grant the Village of Glendale Heights access
to property as required under this chapter. The Finance Director shall consider the complainant's allegations and shall explain those allegations and the
contention of the Village of Glendale Heights in connection therewith. The Finance Director shall be authorized to act on behalf of the Village of
Glendale Heights in resolving the complaint and shall have authority to order that water service be discontinued. The Finance Director shall be
available during all business hours for hearing complaints. In the event he or she is not available during business hours, the Finance Director may
designate another person to conduct the hearing.
D. Reinstatement Of Service: Once water service is disconnected, it shall not be reinstated until full access to the property has been granted to the Village
of Glendale Heights. A zero dollar ($0.00) charge shall be paid prior to the resumption of water service to cover the cost of shutting off and turning on
the water during normal business hours. If water service is reinstated outside of normal business hours or on Village observed holidays, a one hundred
twenty five dollar ($125.00) charge shall be paid. (Ord. 2019-26, 4-18-2019)
ARTICLE A. CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 269/618
9-2A-1: CONNECTION REQUIRED:
A. Use Of Groundwater As A Potable Water Supply Prohibited: Except for such uses or methods in existence before the effective date hereof, the use or
attempt to use as a potable water supply groundwater from within the corporate limits of the village of Glendale Heights, as a potable water supply, by
the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes the village of Glendale Heights.
B. Definitions:
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns.
POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption, including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes, or preparing foods, but does not include irrigation.
C. Penalties: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine in accordance with title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 2012-74,
11-15-2012)
9-2A-2: AUTHORITY TO CONNECT:
Every connection to the public water supply shall be made by bonded plumbers. The bond shall be properly executed and on file in the office of the village
clerk. (1978 Code § 9-5-11-2)
9-2A-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Plumbing work shall not be commenced until a permit for such connection to the public water supply has been obtained upon written application to the
director of community development. (1978 Code § 9-5-11-3; amd. 2011 Code)
9-2A-4: CONNECTION CHARGES:
A. Connection To System:
1. Generally: The charges for the privilege of connecting to the public water supply mains of the village for metered water shall be as follows:
a. Residential:
Single-family $1,250.00 each
Multi-family:
First 2 units 2,500.00 each
Next 8 units 1,200.00 each
10 units and over 1,125.00 each
b. Commercial; industrial; institutional: Based on the water tap connection size to service the total number of plumbing fixtures installed in the entire
building, as calculated according to the current plumbing code adopted by the village, whether the entire building is served by one meter or tenant
spaces are metered separately.
Tap Connection Size Charge
1 inch $ 1,500.00
11/2 inches 1,750.00
2 inches 2,000.00
3 inches 5,000.00
4 inches 10,000.00
6 inches 25,250.00
8 inches 47,000.00
10 inches 62,500.00
Plus, for each fixture:
Up to 5 62.50
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 270/618
6 through 10 50.00
11 and over 37.50
2. Additional Fixture Connections: Any additional number of plumbing fixtures installed after completion of an approved structure shall be subject to
connection charges at the following rates:
a. Residential: In excess of the total of ten (10) per dwelling: Thirty one dollars fifty cents ($31.50).
b. Commercial; industrial; institutional: In excess of the total approved at construction: Thirty seven dollars fifty cents ($37.50).
B. Fire Protection: The initial and annual charges for making connections to the public water supply mains of the village for unmetered water for the
purpose of fire protection shall be as follows:
Item Annual Charge Initial Charge
Private fire hydrant (not within a public right of way or easement) $ 60.00 None
Fire protection mains:
3 inches and smaller 50.00 $ 1,500.00
4 inches 85.00 3,000.00
6 inches 190.00 4,500.00
8 inches 335.00 6,000.00
10 inches 525.00 9,000.00
12 inches 765.00 12,000.00
C. Inspections: For the connection charges established by this section, the village will inspect the work during installation. Request for inspection shall be
made twenty four (24) hours prior to commencing. The following fee shall be paid at the time of issuance of a building permit:
For inspection of water service extensions: Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
D. Meters:
1. Water meters shall be furnished by the village, charges for which shall be paid by the permittee at the time permits are issued.
2. The installation of water meters shall be made as follows:
a. Sizes up to two inches (2"), by village personnel. (Ord. 2007-19, 2-15-2007)
b. Sizes three inches (3") and over, by the permittee at the discretion of the director of public works.
3. If outside reader terminals are required by the director of public works, the approved conductor wiring shall be installed by the permittee at a location
designated and approved by the director of public works. Reader terminals shall be located in places accessible at all times to meter readers. The
reader terminal shall be installed by the village. (Ord. 2007-19, 2-15-2007; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
E. Extensions: The installation and maintenance of water service extensions shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the premises served.
F. Deposit For Service:
1. Amount:
a. Any person desiring water from the village water supply shall make application to the village, and such application shall be accompanied by a cash
deposit determined as follows:
(1) For all residence uses, including within such uses, each unit in a multiple residential dwelling: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
(2) For all business and manufacturing uses, meter size shall determine the amount of the deposit as follows:
Meter Size Deposit
5/8 inch $ 75.00
3/4 inch 75.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 271/618
1 inch 75.00
2 inches 112.50
3 inches 150.00
4 inches 225.00
6 inches 300.00
b. No other form of deposit or security is acceptable. (Ord. 2007-19, 2-15-2007)
2. Refunds: Any applicant that made a deposit pursuant to subsection F1 of this section and that subsequently vacates the premises being served shall
have the right to request return of the deposit from the village upon termination of water services. Refunds requested by vacation of the premises
shall be made following a final meter reading by the water and sewer division, and the final billing so determined will be deducted from the refund
deposit. (Ord. 2007-19, 2-15-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
G. Water Softener Installation: It shall be unlawful for any person to install a water softener in the village without first obtaining a permit therefor. The fee
for such a permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 2007-19, 2-15-2007)
H. Disposition Of Charges: All charges established by this section shall be paid into the waterworks and sewerage fund of the village. (1978 Code § 9-5-
11-5)
9-2A-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The village president and board of trustees are hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations consistent with this chapter for the connections to
the waterworks system, specifying the types and sizes of pipes and all other appurtenances and extensions thereto and amend the same from time to time
as may be deemed necessary. All service pipes and connections to the waterworks system shall comply with the specifications and rules. (1978 Code § 9-
5-11-6)
9-2A-6: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; PROHIBITIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to or opening in the waterworks system in any manner different from the mode prescribed for
such opening or connection by the village president and village board of trustees. (1978 Code § 9-5-11-8)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to break, cut, or otherwise damage any curb, gutter or street pavement for the purpose of connecting water lines to
the village water system. (1978 Code § 9-5-11-9)
9-2A-7: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
A. Responsibility Of Director Of Public Works: The village director of public works, or his designee, shall inspect the plumbing in every building or premises
connected to the village potable water supply system as frequently as in his judgment may be necessary to ensure that such plumbing has been
installed in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of pollution of the water supply of the village by the plumbing. The director shall notify or cause
to be notified in writing the owner or authorized agent of the owner of any such building or premises, to correct within a reasonable time set by the
director any plumbing installed or existing contrary to or in violation of this section, and which, in his judgment, may therefore, permit the pollution of the
village water supply, or otherwise adversely affect the public health. (1978 Code § 9-5-11-7; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
B. Definitions:
AGENCY: The department of the municipal government invested with the authority and responsibility for the enactment and enforcement of this
section.
AIRGAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a
tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
APPROVED: Accepted by the agency as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this section or as suitable for the proposed use.
AUXILIARY SUPPLY: Any water source or system, other than the potable water supply, that may be available in the building or premises.
BACK SIPHONAGE: Backflow resulting from negative pressures in the distributing pipes of a potable water supply.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or
sources other than its intended source. Back siphonage is one type of backflow.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER: A device or means to prevent backflow.
BAROMETRIC LOOP: A loop of pipe rising at least thirty five feet (35') at its topmost point, above the highest fixture it supplies.
CHECK VALVE: A self-closing device which is designed to permit the flow of fluids in one direction and to close if there is reversal of flow.
CONTAMINATION: See definition of Pollution.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection between a potable water supply and any waste pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain or any unapproved
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 272/618
source or system. Furthermore, it is any potable water supply outlet which is submerged or can be submerged in wastewater and/or any source of
contamination. See definitions of Backflow and Back Siphonage.
DRAIN: Any pipe that carries water or waterborne wastes in a building drainage system.
FIXTURE PLUMBING: Installed receptacles, devices, or appliances supplied with water or that receive or discharge liquids or liquidborne wastes.
FLOOD LEVEL RIM: The edge of the receptacle from which water overflows.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in the water supply system and its operation which creates or, in the judgment of the director, may
create a danger to the health and well being of the water consumer.
HYDROPNEUMATIC TANK: A pressure vessel in which air pressure acts upon the surface of the water contained within the vessel, pressurizing the
water distribution piping connected to the vessel.
INLET: The open end of the water supply through which the water is discharged into the plumbing fixture.
PLUMBING HAZARD: Any arrangement of plumbing including piping and fixtures whereby a cross connection is created.
PLUMBING SYSTEMS: Includes the water supply and distribution pipes, plumbing fixtures and traps; soil, waste and vent pipes; building drains and
building sewers including their respective connections, devices, and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises; and water treating or
water using equipment.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTER: An assembly of differential valves and check valves including an automatically
opened spillage port to the atmosphere designed to prevent backflow.
SURGE TANK: The receiving, nonpressure vessel forming part of the airgap separation between a potable and an auxiliary supply.
VACUUM: Any pressure less than that extended by the atmosphere.
VACUUM BREAKER, NONPRESSURE TYPE: A vacuum breaker designed so as not to be subjected to a static pressure line.
WATER, NONPOTABLE: Water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable quality.
WATER, POTABLE: Water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. Its bacteriological and chemical
properties shall conform to the requirements of the federal drinking water standards or to the regulations of the public health authority having
jurisdiction.
C. General (Technical) Requirements:
1. General: A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner as to prevent contamination from nonpotable
liquids, solids or gases from being introduced into the potable water supply through cross connections or any other piping connections to the system.
2. Cross Connections Prohibited: Cross connections between potable water systems and other systems or equipment containing water or other
substances of unknown or questionable safety are prohibited except when and where, as approved by the authority having jurisdiction, suitable
protective devices, such as the reduced pressure zone backflow preventer or equal, are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper operation
on a continuing basis.
3. Interconnections: Interconnections between two (2) or more public water supplies shall be permitted only with the approval of the health authority
having jurisdiction.
4. Individual Water Supply: Cross connections between an individual water supply and the village water system shall not be made. Upon connection to
the village water system, these wells shall be abandoned and sealed according to county health department regulations.
5. Connections To Boilers: Potable water connections to boilers shall be made through an airgap or provided with an approved backflow preventer.
6. Prohibited Connections To Fixtures And Equipment: Connection to the potable water supply system for the following is prohibited unless protected
against backflow in accordance with subsection C8 of this section or as set out herein:
a. Bidets.
b. Operating, dissection, embalming and mortuary tables or similar equipment. In such installation, the hose used for water supply shall terminate at
least twelve inches (12") away from every point of the table or attachments.
c. Pumps for nonpotable water, chemicals or other substances. Priming connections may be made only through an airgap.
d. Building drainage, sewer or vent systems.
e. Any other fixture or similar hazard.
7. Refrigeration Unit Condensers And Cooling Jackets: Except where potable water provided for a refrigerator condenser or cooling jacket is entirely
outside the piping or tank containing a toxic refrigerant, the inlet connection shall be provided with an approved check valve. Also on the outlet side
of the check valve, an approved pressure relief valve set to relieve at five (5) psi above the maximum water pressure at the point of installation shall
be provided if the refrigeration units contain more than twenty (20) pounds of refrigerants.
8. Protection Against Backflow And Back Siphonage:
a. Water Outlets: A potable water system shall be protected against backflow and back siphonage by providing and maintaining at each outlet:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 273/618
(1) Airgap: An airgap, as specified in subsection C8b of this section, between the potable water outlet and the flood level rim of the fixture it
supplies or between the outlet and any other source of contamination; or
(2) Backflow Preventer: A device or means to prevent backflow.
b. Minimum Required Airgap:
(1) How Measured: The minimum required airgap shall be measured vertically from the lowest end of a potable water outlet to the flood rim or line
of the fixture or receptacle into which it discharges.
(2) Size: The minimum required airgap shall be twice the effective opening of a potable water outlet unless the outlet is a distance less than three
(3) times the effective opening away from a wall or similar vertical surface, in which case, the minimum required airgap shall be three (3) times
the effective opening of the outlet. In no case shall the minimum required airgap be less than shown in the following table: (1978 Code § 9-5-11-
7)
MINIMUM AIRGAPS FOR GENERALLY USED PLUMBING FIXTURES
Minimum Airgap
(Inches)
When Not Affected
By Near Wall1
When Affected By
Near Wall2
Lavatories and other fixtures with effective openings not greater than 1/2" diameter 1 11/2
Drinking water fountains, single orifice not greater than 7/16" (0.437") diameter or multiple orifices
having total area of 0.150 square inch (area of circle 7/16" diameter)
1 11/2
Sink, laundry trays, gooseneck bath faucets and other fixtures with effective openings not greater
than 1" diameter
11/2 21/4
Stills, sterilizers and other appliances, fixtures, devices and water and waste connections used for
preparation of sterile material
2 3
Over rim bath fillers and other fixtures with effective openings not greater than 1" diameter 2 3
Effective openings greater than 1" 2 x diameter of
effective opening
3 x diameter of
effective opening
Notes:
1. Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions do not affect airgaps when spaced from inside edge of spout opening a distance greater than 3 times the
diameter of the effective opening for a single wall, or a distance greater than 4 times the diameter of the effective opening for 2 intersecting walls.
2. Vertical walls, ribs, or similar obstructions extending from the water surface to or above the horizontal plane of the spout opening require a
greater airgap when spaced closer to the nearest inside edge of spout opening than specified in note 1 above. The effect of 3 or more such vertical
walls or ribs has not been determined. In such cases, the airgap shall be measured from the top of the wall.
(1978 Code § 9-5-11-7; amd. 2011 Code)
c. Approval Of Devices: Before any device for the prevention of backflow or back siphonage is installed, it shall have first been certified by a
recognized testing laboratory acceptable to the agency director. Devices installed in a building potable water supply distribution system for
protection against backflow shall be maintained in good working condition by the person or persons responsible for the maintenance of the system.
The agency director or his designee shall routinely inspect such devices and, if found to be defective or inoperative, shall require the replacement
thereof.
d. Installations Of Devices:
(1) Vacuum Breakers: Vacuum breakers shall be installed with the critical level at least six inches (6") above the flood level rim of the fixture they
serve and on the discharge side of the last control valve to the fixture. No shutoff valve or faucet shall be installed beyond the vacuum breaker.
For closed equipment or vessels such as pressure sterilizers, the top of the vessel shall be treated as the flood level rim, but a check valve shall
be installed on the discharge side of the vacuum breaker.
(2) Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventer: A reduced pressure principle type backflow preventer may be installed subject to full static
pressure.
(3) Devices Of All Types: Backflow and back siphonage preventing devices shall be accessible, located preferably in the same room with the
fixture they serve. Installation in utility or service spaces, provided they are readily accessible, is also permitted.
e. Tank And Vats; Below Rim Supply:
(1) Where a potable water outlet terminates below the rim of a tank or vat and the tank or vat has an overflow of diameter not less than given in
table below, the overflow pipe shall be provided with an airgap as close to the tank as possible. (1978 Code § 9-5-11-7)
Maximum Capacity Of Water Supply Line To Tank (gpm) Diameter Of Overflow Pipe (Inches)
0 to 50 2
50 to 150 21/2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 274/618
150 to 200 3
200 to 400 4
400 to 700 5
700 to 1,000 6
1,000 and over 8
(1978 Code § 9-5-11-7; amd. 2011 Code)
(2) The potable water outlet to the tank or vat shall terminate a distance not less than one and one-half (11/2) times the height to which water can
rise in the tank above the top of the overflow. This level shall be established at the maximum flow rate of the supply to the tank or vat and with all
outlets except the airgap overflow outlet closed.
(3) The distance from the outlet to the high water level shall be measured from the critical point of the potable water supply outlet.
f. Protective Devices Required:
(1) Approved Devices: Approved devices to protect against backflow or back siphonage shall be installed at all fixtures and equipment where
backflow and/or back siphonage may occur and where a minimum airgap cannot be provided between the water outlet to the fixture or
equipment and its flood level rim.
(2) Connections Not Subject To Backpressure:
(A) Where a water connection is not subject to back pressure, a vacuum breaker shall be installed on the discharge side of the last valve on the
line serving the fixture or equipment. A list of some conditions requiring protective devices of this kind is given in the following table:
CROSS CONNECTIONS WHERE PROTECTIVE DEVICES ARE REQUIRED
AND CRITICAL LEVEL (C-L) SETTINGS FOR VACUUM BREAKERS1
Fixture Or Equipment Method Of Installation
Aspirators and ejectors C-L at least 6" above flood level or receptacle served
Dental units On models without built in vacuum breakers, C-L at least 6" above flood level rim of bowl
Dishwashing machines C-L at least 6" above flood level of machine. Install on both hot and cold water supply lines
Flush tanks Equip with approved ball cock. Where ball cocks touch tank water, equip with vacuum breaker at least 1" above
overflow outlets. Where ball cock does not touch tank water, install ball cock outlet at least 1" above overflow outlet or
provide vacuum breaker as specified herein
Flushometers (closet and
urinals)
C-L at least 6" above top of fixture supplies
Garbage can cleaning
machine
C-L at least 6" above highest point on hose line
Hose bibs (where
aspirators or ejectors
could be connected)
C-L at least 6" above flood level of receptacle served
Laundry machines C-L at least 6" above flood level of machine. Install on both hot and cold water supply lines
Lawn sprinklers C-L at least 12" above highest sprinkler or discharge outlet
Steam tables C-L at least 6" above flood level
Tank and vats C-L at least 6" above flood level rim or line
Trough urinals C-L at least 30" above perforated flush pipes
Note:
1. "Critical level (C-L)" is defined as the level to which the vacuum breaker may be submerged before backflow will occur. Where the C-L is not
shown on the preventer, the bottom of the device shall be taken as the C-L.
(B) Where a potable water connection is made to a line, fixture, tank, vat pump, or other equipment with a hazard of backflow or back siphonage
where the water connection is subject to back pressure and an airgap cannot be installed, the director may require the use of an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. The following is a partial list of cross connections which may be subject to back pressure:
Chemical lines
Dock water outlets
Hose bibs
Individual water supplies
Industrial process water lines
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 275/618
Pressure tanks
Pumps
Steam lines
Swimming pools
Tank and vats, bottom inlets
g. Barometric Loop Water Connections: Barometric loop water connections where an actual or potential back siphonage hazard exists may, in lieu of
devices specified in subsection C8f of this section, be provided with a barometric loop. Barometric loops shall precede the point of connection.
h. Double Check Double Gate Valves: The director may authorize installation of approved double check double gate valve assemblies with test cocks
as protective devices against backflow in connections between a potable water system and other fluid systems which present no significant health
hazard in the judgment of the director.
i. Low Pressure Cutoff Required On Booster Pumps: When a booster pump is used on a water pressure booster system and the possibility exists
that a positive pressure of ten (10) psi or less may occur on the suction side of the pump, there shall be installed a low pressure cutoff on the
booster pump to prevent the creation of a vacuum or negative pressure on the suction side of the pump, thus cutting off water to other outlets.
(1978 Code § 9-5-11-7)
D. Maintenance Requirements:
1. General Requirements: It shall be the responsibility of building and premises owners to maintain all backflow preventers and vacuum breakers within
the building or on the premises in good working order and to make no piping or other arrangements for bypassing backflow devices.
2. Backflow Preventers: Periodic testing and inspection schedules shall be established by the director for all backflow preventers and the interval
between such testing and inspections and overhauls of each device. Testing and inspections shall be completed by an Illinois licensed cross
connection control device inspector (CCDI). Inspection intervals should not exceed one year, and overhaul intervals should not exceed five (5) years.
These devices should be inspected frequently after the initial installation to assure that they have been installed properly and that debris resulting
from the installation has not interfered with the functioning of the device. Testing procedures shall be in accordance with all applicable Illinois
environmental protection agency and Illinois department of public health rules and regulations, including Illinois administrative code title 35, subtitle F,
chapter II, subpart H, sections 653.801 through 803, and Illinois administrative code title 77, chapter I, subchapter r, part 890, subpart I, section
890.1130. Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the
expense of the consumer within fifteen (15) days, or as specified by the director.
3. Test Results: Copies of all test results shall be forwarded to the director's authorized representative, Backflow Solutions, Inc., through its online
backflow tracking system (BSI online) at the time of each inspection. (Contact Backflow Solutions, Inc., at www.backflowsolutions.com.)
a. Each backflow testing company performing backflow testing within the village shall set up an account in the BSI online system, supplying and
maintaining required information pertaining to the testing company, testers, test kits and licenses. Each testing company shall create a user name
and password to be used on the BSI online system. Each testing company shall adhere to all BSI online procedural policies and agree to all terms
specified in the BSI online system.
b. In order to access applicable water customer information within the BSI online system for the purposes of backflow test report submittal, the
backflow testing company shall obtain from their customer the customer confirmation number (CCN). This number is randomly generated and
supplied in writing to the water customer prior to the applicable annual backflow test due date.
For each backflow test report submitted by the testing company via the BSI online system, the testing company will be required to pay a filing fee
of fourteen dollars ninety five cents ($14.95), due at the time of submittal. All backflow test reports must be submitted electronically via the BSI
online system.
E. Violations And Penalties:
1. Notification Of Violation: The director shall notify the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premises in which there is found a
violation of this section of such violation. The director may deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to
any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in accordance
with the regulations set forth in this section.
2. Fines: The owner or authorized agent of the owner responsible for the maintenance of the plumbing systems in the building who permits a violation
of this section to remain uncorrected shall, upon conviction thereof by the court, be required to pay a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each violation. Each day of failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 2012-47,
8-2-2012)
ARTICLE B. USER SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES
9-2B-1: RENDITION OF BILLS; COLLECTION OF PAYMENTS:
A. It is hereby made the duty of the Finance Director to render bills for water service and for all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all
monies due thereon. Bills shall cover a service period of thirty (30) continuous days which, for convenience, shall be referred to in this chapter as
"monthly service period" or "monthly period", and the rates and charges for such service shall similarly, for convenience purposes, be referred to in this
chapter as "monthly charge".
B. All bills for water service shall be rendered within ten (10) days following the completion of the period for which the service is billed. (Ord. 2019-26, 4-18-
2019)
9-2B-2: BASIS OF RATES AND CHARGES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 276/618
Charges and rates established for the use of the waterworks system shall be reasonable and commensurate with the service performed by the system,
and shall be sufficient to maintain, operate, provide an adequate Depreciation Fund and pay the principal and interest on any revenue bonds which may
be issued which, by their terms, are made payable for the revenues of the system. (1978 Code § 9-5-2)
9-2B-3: RATES ESTABLISHED:
A. Within Village Limits: There shall be and there are hereby established water user service charges for the use of and for the service supplied by the
waterworks facilities of the Village which shall consist of: water purchases from DuPage Water Commission, local water delivery and any surcharges, if
applicable. The following rates or charges are hereby established for the use of and for the service supplied by the waterworks system of the Village,
based upon the amount of water consumed as shown by the water meters (except where a flat rate is otherwise indicated):
1. Residential: Effective May 1, 2010, the monthly charge for each residential user of the waterworks system within the corporate limits shall be as
follows:
a. Water: The Village cost to purchase water from the DuPage Water Commission is passed on to the consumer without profit and is set at the exact
rate charged to the Village by the DuPage Water Commission; and
b. Local Water Delivery: Those costs incurred by the Village to operate/maintain a local water delivery/storage infrastructure and to provide water
billing services to Village customers is set at a rate of two dollars twelve cents ($2.12) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed as of
May 1, 2010.
2. Commercial And Institutional: Effective May 1, 2010, the monthly charge for each commercial or nonprofit user of the waterworks system within the
corporate limits shall be as follows:
a. Water: The Village cost to purchase water from the DuPage Water Commission is passed on to the consumer without profit and is set at the exact
rate charged to the Village by the DuPage Water Commission; and
b. Local Water Delivery: Those costs incurred by the Village to operate/maintain a local water delivery/storage infrastructure and to provide water
billing services to Village customers is set at a rate of two dollars twelve cents ($2.12) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed as of
May 1, 2010.
3. Industrial: Effective May 1, 2010, the monthly charge for each industrial user of the waterworks system within the corporate limits shall be as follows:
a. Water: The Village cost to purchase water from the DuPage Water Commission is passed on to the consumer without profit and is set at the exact
rate charged to the Village by the DuPage Water Commission; and
b. Local Water Delivery: Those costs incurred by the Village to operate/maintain a local water delivery/storage infrastructure and to provide water
billing services to Village customers is set at a rate of two dollars twelve cents ($2.12) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of water consumed as of
May 1, 2010.
4. Increases: All increases in the charges for users of the waterworks system shall be clearly defined on the bill rendered by the Village when such
increases become effective.
5. Multiple Users:
a. A "multiple user" is defined as any additional number of family units located on the same premises and being served through a single water meter,
such as apartment buildings.
b. In all cases of multiple users, there shall be an additional debt service charge for each additional unit connected to the system for the type of
service as set out above, i.e., residential, commercial, institutional or industrial.
6. Flat Rate Fire Service: A flat rate service charge, based upon the size of the fire protection main, shall be made monthly as detailed in subsection 9-
2A-4B of this chapter.
B. Outside Village Limits: Each user of the waterworks system of the Village located outside the corporate limits shall have fifty five percent (55%) of the
sum of the industrial water rate and local water delivery charge established in subsection A3 of this section added to its rate as a surcharge.
C. Water Used During Construction Operations: The charge for water used during construction operations shall be as follows:
1. Single-family dwellings: Thirty five dollars ($35.00).
2. All other buildings (multiple-family, commercial and industrial): Seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 2017-42, 6-22-2017)
9-2B-4: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES; ANNUAL INCREASE:
The rates herein established shall be effective as indicated in section 9-2B-3 of this article. Effective May 1, 2011, the amount charged for local water
delivery to all users of the waterworks system shall increase annually at a three percent (3%) compounded rate. (Ord. 2009-33, 4-16-2009)
9-2B-5: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF RATES AND CHARGES:
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the water service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such
premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the Village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the
user of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the Village. (1978 Code § 9-5-5)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 277/618
9-2B-6: PAYMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Payment Required: Rates and charges for water service and/or private sewer roddings and private sewer/water repairs shall be payable on the date
when the bill is rendered by being placed in the U.S. mail and properly stamped and addressed to the customer or other person responsible for
payment of such water service.
B. Late Payment Penalties:
1. A monthly charge for water service and charges for private sewer roddings and private sewer/water repairs which are not paid by the close of
business on the twentieth day after the date of the bill, as rendered, will have a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the outstanding balance added
thereto.
2. If a monthly charge for water service and charges for private sewer roddings and private sewer/water repairs are not paid within thirty five (35) days
after rendition of the bill, an additional penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) will be added thereto.
3. After thirty five (35) days, all unpaid monthly charges shall incur a penalty of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month. (Ord. 2012-66, 11-1-2012)
C. Method Of Payment For Final Water Bill: When the Finance Director issues a final water bill to close a customer's account, the customer must pay said
final water bill and private sewer rodding and private sewer/water repair fees with cash, certified check, cashier's check, Illinois attorney's check, a title
company check, or credit card. (Ord. 2012-66, 11-1-2012; amd. Ord. 2019-26, 4-18-2019)
9-2B-7: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS; DISCONTINUANCE AND REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE:
A. Notices Of Delinquency And Discontinuance Of Service: After a monthly charge becomes delinquent for more than thirty five (35) days, a notice of
delinquency shall be mailed to the customer notifying him/her that the delinquency exists and that payment must be made within ten (10) days. In the
event full payment is not made by the date set forth in the notice of delinquency, the Finance Director or his/her designee shall cause a written notice of
discontinuance of water service to be served, either by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the owner, occupant or water
service user. This notice shall contain the following information:
1. The balance due including any late payment charges;
2. The number of days the account is in arrears;
3. The date by which payment or other action must be made to avoid discontinuance of water service, and that discontinuance of water service shall
not be less than seven (7) business days after service of the notice of discontinuance;
4. The name, address and phone number of the Finance Director to contact for a hearing on the discontinuance of water service;
5. That the customer has seven (7) business days from the date the notice of discontinuance was mailed or personally served to request a hearing to
contest water service discontinuance; and
6. That there will be a standard charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) for resumption of water service during normal working hours and one hundred twenty
five dollars ($125.00) out of hours or on Village observed holidays.
B. Discontinuance Of Service:
1. If no request for a hearing is made as herein provided, water service may thereafter be discontinued. No service shall be discontinued on a holiday
or the weekend. If a hearing is requested, water service shall be continued pending the outcome of the hearing. The hearing shall be convened
within seven (7) business days of the date the request for hearing is received by the Finance Director.
2. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent discontinuance of water service for reasons of safety, health, or cooperation with other civil
authorities.
C. Hearings: The Finance Director shall hear all matters relating to disputes or complaints regarding water billing and private sewer rodding and private
sewer/water repair fees. The Finance Director shall consider the complainant's allegations and shall explain the user's account and the contention of
the Village in connection therewith. The Finance Director shall be authorized to act on behalf of the Village in resolving the complaint and shall have
authority to order that water service be discontinued. The Finance Director shall be available during all business hours for hearing complaints. In the
event he or she is not available during business hours, the Finance Director may designate another person to conduct the hearing.
D. Reinstatement Of Service:
1. Once water service is disconnected, it shall not be reinstated until all arrearages, together with any late payment penalties, have been paid or unless
otherwise approved by the Finance Director. In addition, a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee shall be paid prior to the resumption of water service to cover the
cost of shutting off and turning on the water. If water service is reinstated during nonbusiness hours or on a weekend, an additional one hundred
twenty five dollars ($125.00) shall be paid.
2. If the Village is requested to voluntarily shut off or turn on water service by either a resident or the resident's contractor during nonbusiness hours or
on a weekend, a fee of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) shall be paid to the Village prior to the shutoff or turn on of the water service. There
shall not be a fee for voluntarily shutting off or turning on the water if the shutoff or resumption of water service can be accomplished during normal
Village working hours. (Ord. 2019-26, 4-18-2019)
9-2B-8: COLLECTION BY OUTSIDE AGENCIES; FEE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 278/618
A. Collection Agency: In addition to any other method of collection as herein provided or as provided by laws, the Village may turn delinquent users over to
collection agencies. Any residential or nonresidential user being turned over to such an agency for collection shall first be sent a notice of the Village's
intent to do so. Any outstanding water/sewer rodding and excavation invoices will also be added to the water user charges being turned over to the
collection agency.
B. Turnover Fee: The Village may impose a collection agent turnover fee on any customer so turned over to such an agency. If so, the notice must state to
the customer the amount of such fee, which will include the cost of the turnover plus processing expenses. (Ord. 2012-66, 11-1-2012)
9-2B-9: LIEN PROVISIONS:
A. Whenever a bill for a water service/sewer rodding and excavation fees totaling five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more remains unpaid for ninety (90)
calendar days after it has been issued, the Village Clerk shall file, with the County Recorder of Deeds, a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the Village claims a lien for this amount as well as
for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
B. If the residential or nonresidential user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the Village Clerk has notice of this condition, a notice
shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if known to the Clerk, whenever such bill remains unpaid for one hundred five (105) calendar days after it
has been issued.
C. The failure of the Village Clerk to record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills. (Ord. 2012-66, 11-1-2012)
9-2B-10: DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
A. All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the waterworks system shall be held by the Finance Director separate and apart from his private
funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the Village, and all of such sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the
Finance Director not more than five (5) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the
Village President and Board of Trustees.
B. The Finance Director shall receive all revenues from the waterworks system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as
the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the "Waterworks and Sewerage Fund" of the Village, and the
Finance Director shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by the provisions of division 139 of article 11 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, and all laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. (Ord. 2007-19, 2-15-2007)
9-2B-11: RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS; AUDIT:
The Finance Director shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the waterworks system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the waterworks system. In addition to the customary operating
statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the waterworks facilities, including a replacement cost, to
indicate that water service charges do in fact meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include
the following:
A. Flow data showing total gallons produced from the waterworks for the current fiscal year.
B. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
C. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
D. Number and classification of users connected to the system. (Ord. 2005-69, 12-1-2005)
9-2B-12: NOTICE OF RATES AND CHARGES:
A copy of this article, properly certified by the Finance Director, shall be filed in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds and shall be deemed notice to
all owners of real estate of the charges of the waterworks system of the Village on their properties. (Ord. 2005-69, 12-1-2005)
Chapter 3
SEWER USE AND SERVICE
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
9-3A-1: ENACTMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 279/618
Pursuant to the requirements of the federal clean water act and regulations promulgated thereunder, the Illinois environmental protection act of 1970, as
amended, and in accordance with Illinois municipal code, this chapter is enacted by the village board of trustees. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3A-2: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
A. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the village of Glendale Heights, hereafter referred to
interchangeably as "the village". This chapter provides for the use of public and private sewers and drains, private sewage disposal, and authorizes the
installation and continuing of connections into the sewage works of the village upon certain conditions, including permission thereof; providing for the
installation and maintenance of such connections and enforcement thereto; regulating the use of municipal and private sewers and drains, individual
wastewater disposal, the installation, connection and disconnection of building sewers, the discharge of water and waste in the public sewer system,
and providing for penalties for violation thereof; providing for penalties for violation thereof; and providing for termination of permits issued by the village
pursuant to the provisions hereof.
B. This chapter enables the village to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the clean water act (33 United States Code section 1251
et seq.). Additional objectives of this chapter are:
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) that will interfere with its operation;
2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through the POTW inadequately treated into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the POTW;
3. To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by air, wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
4. To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the POTW;
5. To enable the village to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and
any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject;
6. To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of the operation, maintenance, and improvements of the POTW; and
7. To regulate private wastewater disposal systems.
C. This chapter shall apply to all residential and nonresidential users of the POTW and provides for the enforcement of general requirements for users.
This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater connection and discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting
from the programs established herein. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3A-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the pretreatment coordinator and/or duly authorized agent(s) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions
of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the pretreatment coordinator and/or duly authorized agent(s) may be delegated by the
village or pretreatment coordinator to other village personnel or other duly authorized agent(s) of the village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3A-4: JURISDICTION:
This chapter shall apply to the village and to persons outside the village who are, by contract or agreement with the village, users of the village POTW.
(Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3A-5: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the designated meanings:
BMP Best management practices
BMR Baseline monitoring report
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of federal regulations
CIU Categorical industrial user
COD Chemical oxygen demand
DMWPCF Division manager of water pollution control facility
DPW Director of public works
FOG Fats, oils and grease, interchangeable with oil and grease
FSE Food service establishment
GI Grease interceptor
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 280/618
gpd Gallons per day
IAC Illinois administrative code
IEPA Illinois environmental protection agency
IU Industrial user
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NCPS National categorical pretreatment standard
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
NSCIU Nonsignificant categorical industrial user
NSRU Nonsignificant regulated user
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
ppm Parts per million
PSES Pretreatment standards for existing sources
PSNS Pretreatment standards for new sources
RCRA Resource conservation and recovery act
SDWA Safe drinking water act
SIU Significant industrial user
SNC Significant noncompliance
SPSC Spill prevention/slug control
SSO Sewer system overflows
SWDA Solid waste disposal act
TSS Total suspended solids
TTO Total toxic organics
USC United States Code
USEPA U.S. environmental protection agency
VE Village engineer
(Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
9-3A-6: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
ACT OR THE ACT OR CLEAN WATER ACT OR FEDERAL ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the clean water act, as amended
from time to time, 33 USC section 1251 et seq.
AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency or its successor.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER: A. If the user is a corporation:
1. By a responsible corporate officer - the president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business
function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or
2. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual
wastewater permit (or general permit) requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
B. If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
C. If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or his designee.
D. The individuals described in subsections A, B and C of this definition may designate a duly authorized representative, if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 281/618
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the village of Glendale Heights.
E. If an authorization under subsection D of this definition is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility, or overall environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of said subsection
D must be submitted to the village of Glendale Heights. If an authorization under subsection D of this definition is no longer accurate because the
individual described in subsections A, B and C of this definition has changed, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of subsection D of this
definition must be submitted to the village of Glendale Heights.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to implement the prohibitions listed in section 9-3E-2 of this chapter (40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)) and/or prevent or reduce the pollution conveyed to the
POTW works. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. (Note: BMPs also include alternative means [i.e., management plans] of complying with or in place of
certain established categorical pretreatment standards and effluent limits.)
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures approved in 40 CFR 136 for five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
BIOSOLIDS: Refers to the anaerobically digested and stabilized organic solids removed from the wastewater treatment plant and disposed of on
agricultural land or at a landfill.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls
of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge. All building drains must be within the building foundation.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment or pretreatment facility.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER (CIU): An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. A CIU is also
considered to be a significant industrial user.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
USEPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC section 1317), which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40
CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water,
under standard laboratory procedures as described in 40 CFR 136, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
COMBINED SEWER: A pipe or conduit that is designed and constructed to carry wastewater, stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
Combined sewers are not allowed in the village of Glendale Heights.
COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA: The formula set forth in 40 CFR section 403.6(e).
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: A sample of wastewater composed of two (2) or more discrete samples collected, based on a flow proportional or time
proportional method.
CONTROL AUTHORITY: USEPA.
COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DAILY MAXIMUM: The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT: The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. If daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. If
daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of a day.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The director of public works or his designee.
DISCHARGE PERMIT: An individual or general permit issued to a user which specifies the requirements for discharge of wastewater or the requirements
for zero discharge of wastewater, as appropriate.
DISCHARGER: Any person, firm, establishment or institution that discharges wastewater, excluding inflow and infiltration, into the POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the act and 35 Illinois administrative code (IAC) 307. "Discharger" is used
interchangeably with "user".
DULY AUTHORIZED AGENT: The president and board of trustees of Glendale Heights and employees and agents of the village.
DWELLING: A unit designed for occupancy by one family. It may be a house designed for the exclusive use of one family or it may be a portion of a
building designed and intended to be used by one family.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT CRITERIA: Those criteria defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
EXISTING SOURCE: Any source of discharge that is not a "new source".
FATS, OILS, AND GREASE (FOG): Is used interchangeably with "oils and grease".
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 282/618
FLOW: Volume of wastewater per unit of time.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE): Any user engaged in the activities of manufacturing, preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for
consumption foodstuffs that use one or more of the following preparation activities: blending, cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling,
sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching and infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any
other food preparation or servicing activity that produces a consumable food product in or on a receptacle requiring washing to be reused. A limited food
preparation establishment is not considered to be an FSE when only engaged in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food products, and as
a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing significant amount of FOG.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage, and
sale of produce or food.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time
not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
GREASE MITIGATION FEE: A fee charged to an owner/operator of a food service establishment when there are physical limitations to the property that
make the installation of the usual and customary grease interceptor or grease control device for the FSE under consideration impossible or impracticable.
The grease mitigation fee is intended to cover the costs of the increased maintenance of the sewer system for inspection and cleaning of FOG and other
viscous or solidifying agents that a properly employed grease control device would otherwise prevent from entering the sewer system.
HAULED WASTE: Sanitary or process wastewater transported as a commercial venture.
HOT SPOTS: Areas in public sewers that have experienced sanitary sewer overflows or that must be cleaned and maintained frequently to avoid
blockages of the sewer system.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nonresidential source.
INDUSTRIAL USER (IU) OR USER: A source of indirect discharge from a nonresidential source.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: A combination of liquid and water carried wastes discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any nonresidential source,
including the wastewater from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT: The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or
composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE OR INTERFERE: A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of wastewater or sludge use or disposal by
the POTW in accordance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations):
section 405 of the clean water act, the solid waste disposal act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the resource conservation and
recovery act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the
clean air act, the toxic substance control act, and the marine protection, research and sanctuaries act. Any user significantly contributes to such a permit
violation or prevention of sludge use or disposal in accordance with above cited authorities whenever such user discharges a daily pollutant loading in
excess of that allowed by permit with the POTW or by federal, state, or local law; discharges wastewater which substantially differs in nature or
constituents from the user's average discharge; or knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would result in a POTW permit violation or prevent the use of the POTW's selected method of sewage sludge management.
LOCAL LIMIT: Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the village upon nonresidential users or facilities to implement the general and specific
discharge prohibitions.
MEDICAL WASTES: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent representing 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand
milliliters (1,000 ml) of water.
MONTHLY AVERAGE: The sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that
month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT: The highest allowable average of daily discharges over a calendar month, calculated as a sum of all the daily discharges
measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, OR CATEGORICAL STANDARD: Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317) which apply
to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR NPDES: The national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing,
terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits from point sources to waters of the United States, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements,
under sections 307, 402, 318 and 405 of the federal act.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT (NPDES PERMIT): A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the CWA, or
section 12(f) of the act.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
NEW SOURCE: A. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided, that one of the following is true:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 283/618
1. The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site on which no other source is located; or
2. The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or
3. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installations are substantially independent of an existing
source at the site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with
the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
B. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a
new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection A2 or A3 of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
C. Construction of a new source as defined herein has commenced if the owner or operator has done one of the following:
1. Begun, or caused one of the following to begin, as part of a continuous on site construction program:
a. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
b. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for
the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
2. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection C2.
D. New sources shall install and have in operating condition and shall "start up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment
standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 calendar days), new sources shall meet all applicable
standards.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
NONRESIDENTIAL USER: All users not defined "residential users".
OILS AND GREASE: Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils and any other material that is extracted by a solvent in a method approved in
40 CFR 136.
OVERHEAD SEWER: A sewer that does not discharge to a public or private sewer main through the use of gravity. Overhead sewers utilize a pump to lift
the sewage to an elevation where gravity can then carry away the wastewater. Nonresidential wastes discharged from overhead sewers are subject to all
the same limits and requirements of sanitary sewers.
OWNER: The entity which holds fee simple title to the real property upon which a user's facility is located; provided, if a land trust holds fee simple title to
the real property, the owner(s) shall be the holder(s) of the beneficial interest(s) in said land trust.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT: The village facilities designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) to wastewater. See definition of
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW).
ppm: Parts per million.
PASS-THROUGH: The discharge of pollutants that exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or
any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, calculated by taking the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, wastewater sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or industrial, municipal, agricultural and industrial
wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is
one hundred (100) gallons (380 l) of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pound (77 g) of BOD5 (5 day biochemical oxygen demand) and 0.20 pound (91 g) of
total suspended solids. The impact on a treatment works is evaluated or defined as the highest population equivalent of the three (3) parameters set forth
above. (IEPA 301.345)
PRETREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 284/618
can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentrations of the
pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR: The director of public works of the village of Glendale Heights or his designee.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment
standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS OR STANDARDS: For any specified pollutant, village prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in section 9-3E-2 of this
chapter, village specific limitations on discharge as set forth in section 9-3E-5 of this chapter, state of Illinois pretreatment standards in Illinois
administrative code part 307, or the national categorical pretreatment standards, whichever standard is most stringent.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES: Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. These
prohibitions appear in section 9-3E-2 of this chapter.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the village. The term shall also include sewers within or outside the village
boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village sanitary sewers even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with village funds.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A "treatment works", as defined by section 212 of the act (33 USC section 1292), which is owned by
the village. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature that are connected to the village POTW regardless of ownership, but does not include sewers, pipes, and other conveyances not
connected to the village POTW treatment plant.
RESIDENTIAL SOURCE OR RESIDENTIAL USER: Any single-family or multi-family dwelling unit designed primarily as a place of human habitation which
discharges only domestic wastewater to the village system.
SANITARY SEWER: A pipe or conduit designed and/or intended to carry wastewater from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, and to which stormwater, surface water, groundwater and unpolluted noncontact cooling water are not intentionally admitted.
SANITARY WASTEWATER: See definitions of Sewage and Wastewater.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE: Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
SEWERAGE: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial wastes.
SHALL; MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: A user of the POTW (except as provided by subsections C and D of this definition) which:
A. A user subject to any national categorical pretreatment standards; or
B. A user that:
1. Has an average process wastewater discharge flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more per workday (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); or
2. Has a discharge flow of process wastewater that makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of
the POTW treatment plant; or
3. Is designated as such by the village on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating
any pretreatment standard or requirement.
C. The village may determine that a user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant categorical industrial user rather than a
significant industrial user on a finding that the user never discharges more than one hundred (100) gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical
wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard), and
the following conditions are met:
1. The user, prior to village findings, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;
2. The user annually submits the certification statement required in subsection 9-3I-4C of this chapter (see 40 CFR 403.12(q)), together with any
additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and
3. The user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 285/618
D. Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection B of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the village may, at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user, determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
SLUDGE: See definition of Biosolids.
SLUG OR SLUG LOAD: Any discharge of water or wastewater which is nonroutine and of episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill
or a noncustomary batch discharge that could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 9-3E-2 of this chapter. A slug discharge is
any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable
potential to cause interference of pass-through or in any other way violates the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
STATE ACT: The Illinois anti-pollution bond act of 1970.
STORM SEWER: A sewer that carries rainwater, snowmelt and surface drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling
water.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
T: As in cyanide-T, means total.
TAP: The connection to the sewer main through the use of a factory "wye" or "tee", a saddle connection, an Inserta tee, or other plumber connection (i.e.,
hammer tap).
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS): Total suspended matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in
water, wastewater or other liquids and is removable by laboratory filtration, under standard laboratory procedures approved in 40 CFR 136.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS: The summation of all quantifiable values greater than 0.01 milligram per liter for the toxic organics specified in the applicable
regulation.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality
standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
UPSET: An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USER: Any person or source, excluding residential users, that contributes, causes or permits the source of indirect discharge into the POTW. The term
may also include such persons or sources, excluding residential users, that are prohibited from discharging specific pollutants or waste streams to the
POTW.
VILLAGE: The village of Glendale Heights.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR: The village of Glendale Heights administrator and/or his designee.
WASTEWATER: The combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
Nonresidential Wastewater: Sanitary wastewater from a nonresidential user and may also include liquid and water carried wastes discharged from
any institutional, commercial or industrial user, including wastewater from pretreatment facilities, polluted cooling water or other sources.
Sanitary, Sewerage Or Residential Wastewater: The combination of liquid and water carried wastes discharged from toilets and other sanitary
plumbing facilities.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: The document or documents issued to a user by the village pursuant to article H of this chapter.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS: The "treatment works", as defined by section 212 of the federal act, owned by the village and any devices and
systems used in the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, recycling or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature that
are connected to the village POTW regardless of ownership, but does not include sewers, pipes, and other conveyances not connected to the village
POTW treatment plant. Synonymous with POTW and wastewater facilities and water pollution control facility.
WATER QUALITY STANDARDS: Those standards defined in the water pollution regulations of Illinois, title 35, subtitle C, chapter I.
WATERS OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state of Illinois or any portion thereof. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-
2014)
ARTICLE B. SEWER EXTENSION REQUIREMENTS
9-3B-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
A. The extension of a sanitary sewer by any entity that will serve or in the future may serve more than one building and that will connect either directly or
indirectly to the sewage works of the village shall be made only after an application for a village permit has been made in writing on forms prescribed
and furnished by the village and an extension permit is issued by the village administrator. Persons desiring such extension of the sewer system shall
file with the director of public works (DPW) four (4) copies of the following documents: (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 286/618
1. Detailed plans and specifications prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state of Illinois.
2. IEPA permit application with such supporting documents required by the IEPA, completely filled out and ready for village signature.
3. Detailed estimate of the cost of the extension. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
B. The person or persons extending the sewer shall pay all costs of plan review by the village engineer and/or his designee to the village prior to the DPW
signing the IEPA permit application. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
9-3B-2: CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The village will issue an extension permit in accordance with the following:
A. It has been demonstrated that the downstream treatment works, including village sewers and pump stations, have sufficient reserve capacity to
adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
B. A permit has been issued by the Illinois environmental protection agency. The village permit shall expire on the expiration date of the Illinois
environmental protection agency permit. Those portions of the work for which a village permit has been issued and the work has been approved by the
village shall be completed within the permit time. Future construction on the project for which the original permit was issued shall require a new permit
that will be issued in compliance with this chapter at the time of the application for the new permit. All fees and charges assessed under the conditions
of the village permit are forfeited by the applicant/owner upon the expiration of the permit.
C. The village has received an agreement executed by the permittee and a performance bond wherein the permittee agrees to make and install the
improvements in accordance with plans and specifications identifying a completion date not more than six (6) months after the date of the agreement
unless the village board determines, on the basis of the recommendation of the village engineer, that a longer time is necessary. The performance
bond guaranteeing completion of the improvements by the permittee shall be in the principal amount of one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the
estimated cost as approved by the village engineer, and shall be in one of the following forms:
1. A certificate of deposit with or an escrow account at a federally insured bank subject to draw by the village to complete the improvements if they are
not completed within the prescribed time limit;
2. An irrevocable letter of credit issued by a federally insured bank and in a form approved by the village administrator; or
3. A surety bond in a form and from an institution acceptable to the village administrator.
The performance bond shall remain in effect for a period of one year after written approval of the work by the village engineer as a guarantee of good
faith of the permittee to correct defects. At the discretion of the village board, the performance bond may be reduced during the maintenance period.
D. The village has received copies of all permits, insurance and bonds required for street openings or stream crossings and any other permits required by
an agency having jurisdiction.
E. The village has received certificates of insurance protecting the village from any liability or damage whatsoever from injury, including death, to any
person or property. The amount of the insurance shall be as established in article S of this chapter.
F. The village has received payment for the cost of the permit and the estimated cost of inspection. The cost of inspection shall include resident engineer
supervision if deemed necessary by the village engineer. The estimated cost of inspection, approved by the village engineer, shall be deposited with
the director of finance prior to the start of work and additional funds added during the work if required. The permittee, however, shall pay only the actual
costs of such services based on standard engineering fees. At the completion of the work, any unused portion of the amount deposited shall be
returned. No interest shall be paid on deposited funds. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3B-3: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Rules And Regulations:
1. The rules, regulations, resolutions and policies listed hereafter and issued by the authorities indicated are incorporated herein by reference and shall
govern the work so far as they apply to said work. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
2. The village rules, regulations, resolutions, policies, directives and instructions that may be adopted or issued from time to time by the village include:
a. "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", latest edition.
b. The Illinois environmental protection agency rules, regulations, technical releases and requirements.
c. "The Illinois Recommended Standards For Sewage Works", IEPA, latest edition.
d. "The State Of Illinois Plumbing Code" (latest edition).
e. "Federal Manual Of Practice No. 9", water pollution control, latest edition.
B. Inspections: The permittee agrees that he/she shall provide adequate inspection during the entire construction period which, at the option of the village,
may require a full time resident engineer. The village reserves the right to review the construction.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 287/618
C. Approval Of Changes: Any changes in the work to be done or materials to be used from those shown on the plans or set forth in the specifications, as
submitted to the village, shall be approved by the appropriate village department prior to the changed work being done or the changed materials being
installed.
D. Notice Of Commencement Or Continuance Of Construction: The contractor or the contractor's representative constructing the sewer extension shall
notify the village at least two (2) village workdays prior to commencing construction. When the construction of the sewer extension is interrupted for a
period of seven (7) calendar days or more, the village shall be notified at least two (2) village workdays prior to continuing construction of the sewer
extension. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
E. Connection Of Extension: At the time a sewer extension is connected to an existing sewer, the connection shall be made at an existing manhole or in a
manhole constructed over the existing sewer. If an existing manhole is the point of connection and a suitable stub is not provided for the extension, the
existing manhole shall be core drilled and a suitable connection stub installed. The sewer extension shall be plugged with a watertight concrete plug by
the contractor at the time the connection to the existing sewer is made. Such plug must be removable from the surface without entrance to the sewer.
The plug shall be maintained in place at all times until the sewer extension is approved in writing by the village administrator. If the plug is not
maintained in place, the village shall install a concrete plug and charge a fee to the contractor for each time a plug is installed by the village. The fee for
a plug is established annually by the department of public works in article S of this chapter. Mechanical plugs are also an acceptable means of plugging
the sewer to maintain it out of service, provided plugs are removable without entry into the sewer structure. The charge for installation of a plug in the
sewer is established in article S of this chapter and will also include the cost of materials. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
F. Final Review; Fee: Upon completion of construction, the contractor shall notify the appropriate village department requesting final review of the work.
The contractor shall televise the completed extension in the presence of village staff who will take immediate possession of the videotape prior to
leaving the site. The village shall review the work for conformance with village requirements and adherence to the approved plans and specifications
for which the village sewer extension permit was issued. If deficiencies are found in the work, the village shall furnish the contractor with a listing of
such deficiencies. When the contractor believes that the deficiencies have been corrected, the contractor shall request a re-review of the work. Should
the re-review of the work show that the deficiencies as set forth have not been corrected, the contractor shall make the necessary corrections, and
subsequent to that, shall notify the village and request another review. The village shall charge a fee for each additional review and/or inspection after
the first inspection following the issuance of the list of deficiencies. The fee for each additional review and/or inspection is published as part of article S
of this chapter.
G. Location: All sanitary sewers shall be constructed within public rights of way or within easements dedicated for public utilities. No sanitary sewer mains
shall be installed in the rear or side yard of any property unless first approved by the village administrator.
H. Size Of Mains: Minimum sanitary sewer main size shall be eight inch (8") diameter for public sewer mains of sewer mains serving more than one
building.
I. Manholes:
1. Manholes shall be precast reinforced concrete sections meeting ASTM C-478 and ASTM C-443 standards. Manholes for sanitary sewers twenty four
inches (24") or less in diameter shall have a minimum inside diameter of forty eight inches (48"). Manholes for sanitary sewers greater than twenty
four inches (24") in diameter shall have a minimum inside diameter of sixty inches (60") and be spaced at a maximum of four hundred feet (400').
Additionally, manholes shall be installed under the following conditions: termination of existing and future lines, changes in direction (horizontal or
vertical), changes in pipe shape or pipe size, or junctions with other sewers.
2. Drop manholes shall be provided for manholes with any pipe having a difference in invert elevation more than twenty four inches (24") above the
invert of the sewer leaving the manhole. All drop manholes shall be of the external type. No internal drop manhole connections will be allowed. (Ord.
2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3B-4: COMPLETION OF PROJECT:
No connection permits shall be issued or building permits released until such time that final approval of the improvement has been made in writing by the
village. Final approval is contingent upon the following:
A. All punch list work has been completed.
B. As built plans prepared by a registered Illinois professional engineer are furnished to the village.
C. The sewer has been televised by the contractor or by the permittee in the presence of village personnel.
D. A video record of the television inspection has been provided to the village. In addition to a video record, air exfiltration testing as outlined in division III,
section 31-1.11 of the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer" shall be completed prior to acceptance. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3B-5: CONNECTION TO EXTENSION:
No connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer until sewer connection permits have been issued by the village under article C of this chapter. (Ord.
2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3B-6: PERFORMANCE BOND RELEASE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 288/618
The performance bond will not be released until the guarantee period has expired and the following documents are filed with the village engineer and
approved by the village board:
A. As built drawings: one reproducible electronic format on disk and two (2) sets of prints;
B. Release of all permits;
C. Copies of all tests required by the village engineer;
D. Bill of sale for all constructed public improvements; and
E. Such other documents as may be reasonably requested by the village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE C. SEWER CONNECTION PROCEDURES
9-3C-1: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. Discharges Of Human And Animal Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or allow to be deposited any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the village or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
B. Discharges Into Natural Outlets: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
village, any wastewaters without the express approval from the director of public works (DPW) that all state and federal effluent limitations have been
met and there are no reasonable alternative methods of disposal. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
C. Private Systems: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
D. Connection To Public Sewer Required: The owners of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or
other purpose situated within the village and abutting on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located
any public sanitary sewer of the village is hereby required at their expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within ninety (90) calendar days after date of official notice to do so;
provided that said public sewer is within one hundred feet (100') of the property line. All public sewer extensions shall be made in accordance with
article B of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3C-2: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
No person shall construct a private wastewater treatment facility within the corporate limits of the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village
for the purpose of treating wastewater and discharging same to a watercourse unless the following provisions are met:
A. Nonresidential Source Wastes:
1. For the purpose of treating nonresidential source wastes, the division manager of water pollution control facilities (DMWPCF) determines that the
wastewater treatment facilities have inadequate capacity and issues a permit for the construction and operation of a wastewater treatment facility. No
village permit shall become effective until:
a. The DMWPCF has approved the plans and specifications in writing;
b. Approval has been obtained from the county department of health;
c. An IEPA permit issued to construct the facility has been received;
d. An IEPA NPDES permit to operate the facility has been issued and received;
e. The installation is completed to the satisfaction of the DMWPCF; and
f. The final inspection has been completed.
2. Persons operating a private wastewater treatment facility shall file copies of all operating reports sent to the USEPA and IEPA with the DMWPCF
and such other reports as the DMWPCF deems necessary.
B. Subsurface Absorption Facilities:
1. If a public sewer is not available under the provisions of section 9-3C-1 of this article and the wastewater source to be treated is domestic in nature,
the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system employing subsurface absorption facilities.
2. No person shall construct a private wastewater treatment facility with subsurface disposal without previous approval from the DMWPCF. If approval
is given, the person must adhere to the following limitations:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 289/618
a. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by a DMWPCF.
The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the village which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications
and other information as deemed necessary by the village. A permit and inspection fee as set out in article S of this chapter or reimbursement of
costs shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed. The permit shall not be issued until applicable state and county permits are on
file with the village.
b. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all regulations and provisions of the state of Illinois
private sewage disposal licensing act and code, with the state of Illinois environmental protection agency and the county health department, as
appropriate, latest revision. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where
the area of the lot is less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
c. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the village. The
village shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the village when
the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within two (2) village
workdays of the receipt of written notice by the village; except, that no inspections will be made at any time other than regular village working
hours. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
C. Grinder Pump Systems:
1. General Requirements: If gravity sewers and conventional sewer systems are not practical, the village administrator may approve grinder pump
systems on a discretionary case by case basis. In order to implement a grinder pump system, a developer or individual homeowner must prove to
the village that a grinder pump system is the only viable option as determined by the village administrator. A permit and inspection fee as set forth in
article S of this chapter shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed. A permit for a private wastewater treatment facility employing a
grinder pump system shall not be issued until the design and installation is completed to the satisfaction of the village administrator. (Ord. 2009-57,
10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Inspections: The village shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify
the village administrator when the grinder pump system is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered.
3. Operation And Maintenance: The DMWPCF or his designee shall be entitled to inspect the grinder pump system if said DMWPCF has any reason to
believe that the grinder pump system is not operating properly or pursuant to a routine inspection protocol developed by the DMWPCF. Should the
grinder pump system fall into disrepair or otherwise need maintenance as determined by the village, and the owner refuses to repair, replace or
otherwise fix the grinder pump system to the specifications of the village, the village may do so at its own expense and obtain reimbursement from
the individual owner. In that regard, and as a condition of obtaining a village permit for a grinder pump system, the individual owner shall enter into a
contractual agreement indemnifying the village for any costs the village may incur with regard to maintaining the grinder pump system and further,
allow the village reasonable access to the grinder pump system for inspection purposes.
D. Operation Of Private System: The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no
expense to the village.
E. Connection To Public Sewer When Available: As provided in subsection 9-3C-1D of this article, at such time as a public sewer becomes available to a
property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within ninety (90) calendar days in
compliance with this chapter. Any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with
suitable material such as clean bank run gravel or dirt.
F. Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
the county department of health or any other governmental body having jurisdiction, as appropriate. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3C-3: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Permit Requirements:
1. Permit To Connect:
a. Permit Required:
(1) No person shall construct a new wastewater source or alter, repair or reconstruct an existing source and connect same to the wastewater
treatment works of the village without first obtaining a written permit from the village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
(2) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the village department of community development, with sign off by the director of public works
(DPW) and receipt of an IEPA permit when required under 35 Illinois administrative code 309. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code; Ord.
2014-15, 3-20-2014)
(3) No connection to, addition to or alteration of any building sewer shall be made or caused to be made by any person without a permit from the
DPW. Such connections, additions or alterations shall only be made through a licensed sewer contractor. No permit shall authorize anything not
explicitly stated in the application. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
b. Classes Of Permits; Application And Fee:
(1) There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits:
(A) Residential user; and
(B) Nonresidential user which includes commercial, institutional, and industrial facilities or other nonresidential sources. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-
2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 290/618
(2) Application shall be made on a form furnished by the village. The permit application shall be supplemented by plans, specifications, and other
information considered necessary in the judgment of the director of community development and/or the DPW. A permit and inspection fee as set
forth in article S of this chapter shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code; Ord.
2014-15, 3-20-2014)
c. Information Required: Persons desiring to construct a new waste source and connect it to the wastewater treatment works of the village shall state
the quantity, quality and rate of discharge into the public sewer. A nonresidential user, as a condition of permit authorization, shall also provide
information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity per section 9-3D-1 of this chapter.
d. Conditions Of Permit: A building sewer permit shall only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the
downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to
adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load based on the population equivalent.
e. Term Of Permit: The building sewer connection permit shall be issued for a period of twenty four (24) months consistent with the IEPA permits.
2. Building Permit: The user shall secure a building permit if the waste source is new equipment to be installed in an existing building with an existing
sewer.
3. Excavation Permit: Each excavation for any of the purposes set out in this subsection shall require a separate connection permit.
4. Revocation Of Permit: Any permit issued in this section may be revoked as per article M of this chapter and other appropriate articles of this chapter.
(Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
B. Building Sewer Connections:
1. Separate Building Sewers Required: A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley,
court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer and may be done only with the written authorization of the DPW.
2. Use Of Existing Sewers: An existing building sewer may be used in connection with a new building only when it is found, on examination and test by
the village engineer or DPW or his designee, to meet all requirements of this article. All costs and expenses for this examination shall be paid by the
applicant as set forth in article S of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
3. Specifications:
a. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations
of the village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of
the American Society Of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard Specifications For Water
And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" shall apply. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
b. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet (3') of any bearing wall. No building sewer shall be installed in any place where it may
be subject to freezing temperatures unless adequate provisions are made to protect it from frost. Changes in direction shall be made only with
properly curbed pipe and fittings, or a manhole, as determined by the DPW. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
c. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewers, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall
be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. Where possible, all building sanitary services shall be "overhead"
installations. Buildings having basements shall have a pump or ejector provided to pump the wastewater to the building sewer for gravity transport
to the public sewer. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
d. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the branch fitting, if such is available at the suitable location. If the
public sewer is twelve inches (12") in diameter or less and no properly located branch fitting is available, the applicant shall, at its expense, install
a branch fitting in the public sewer at the location specified and an installation approved by the DPW. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-
15, 3-20-2014)
C. Conditions Of Construction: Construction of a building sewer connection shall not be started until fees are paid consistent with section 9-3C-4 of this
article and a written building sewer connection permit is issued by the village after issuance and receipt of an IEPA permit for the project when
applicable. The following conditions are also required: (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
1. Street Opening Permit Required: The applicant shall secure a street opening permit from the community development department in conformance
with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Excavations To Be Guarded And Restored: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so
as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a
manner satisfactory to the village administrator. Failure to properly barricade shall be cause for the construction site to be shut down, and a fee as
provided in article S of this chapter shall be paid before any further work can commence. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
3. Notice Of Inspection; Supervised Connection: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the community development department two (2)
village workdays prior to the start of any underground piping installation and when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of a qualified duly authorized agent of the village during regular village working
hours. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
4. Size And Materials: Minimum building sewer size shall be six inch (6") diameter. All cleanouts shall be installed on the owner's property and not in
village rights of way. The maximum distance between cleanouts shall be one hundred twenty feet (120'). The building sewer shall be constructed
using any of the following listed materials:
a. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe and fittings with solvent welded joints or compression type rubber ring gasket joints, conforming to the latest
revision of ASTM specification D3034-SDR 35, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations;
b. Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) sewer pipe and fittings with solvent welded joints or compression type rubber ring gasket joints, conforming
to the latest revision of ASTM specification D2751, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 291/618
c. Type 1 asbestos-cement nonpressure small diameter sewer pipe and fittings class 3300 with compression type rubber ring gaskets and coupling
joints, conforming to the latest revision of ASTM specification C644, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations; or
d. Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe and fittings conforming to the latest revision of CISPI specifications HS-67 with compression type rubber ring gasket
joints, conforming to the latest revision of ASTM specification C564, installed in accordance with the latest revision of the Illinois state plumbing
code. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
5. Connection Restrictions: Building sewers shall not be connected to manholes. All building sewers serving single-family residences shall have "blind"
connections to the public sewer. The only exception to this requirement is when homes are located in a cul-de-sac and the blind connection to the
public sewer would be impractical. This exception must be approved by the community development department prior to construction. (Ord. 2009-57,
10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
6. Sewer Beds: All building sewers shall be bedded on a layer of gravel or crushed stone, size no. 67, conforming to the latest revision of STM
specification D448, to provide a minimum thickness of four inches (4") under and extending to the top of the pipe.
D. Uses Outside Corporate Limits: No new permit shall be issued for the tapping into or use of wastewater treatment works under the jurisdiction of the
village for any location outside of the corporate limits of the village but within one hundred feet (100') of the public sewer unless an agreement written
by the village board and the party seeking connection to the sewer system is executed.
E. Building Sewer Connection Acceptance:
1. A one year warranty shall be submitted to the village by the contractor doing the building sewer installation against all defects including poor
workmanship, improper installation, or material failure. The warranty shall require the contractor to correct any problems with the installation
occurring during the one year period.
2. A video recording shall be required of the entire length of the building sewer from the building to the public sewer including the connection into the
public sewer. The video shall be in a format readily viewable by the village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
F. Costs And Expenses Of Installation And Connection; Licensed Contractor Requirements: All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be paid by the applicant. The person installing the building sewer for the owner shall be a licensed plumber or
sewer contractor and shall indemnify the village from loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by said installation. Before a building
sewer permit is issued, the plumber or sewer contractor shall file with the village clerk an indemnity bond in the amount as provided in section 4-4-2 of
this code, with corporate surety licensed to do business in the state of Illinois, on a bond approved by the village administrator. In addition, the plumber
or sewer contractor shall file with the village clerk a certificate of insurance covering public liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) covering property
damage. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
9-3C-4: FEES:
The following types of fees shall be charged when permitting and constructing a new source of wastewater and connecting it to the wastewater treatment
works of the village. All review, inspection and connection fees shall be based upon the current fees as set forth in article S of this chapter and shall be
reviewed and updated annually.
A. Review And Connection Fee: A review and connection fee for the building sewer connection permit shall be paid to the village at the time the residential
application is filed. Nonresidential user fees shall be on an individual case basis, measured by the impact on the current facility and current capacity,
coupled with the water meter size as defined in article S of this chapter. A minimum sewer connection fee shall be established for any nonresidential
users at four (4) population equivalents (PE). The review and connection fee includes the first inspection required for a service. A separate review fee
may be charged based on the cost and expense to review equalization and/or pretreatment facilities required at a nonresidential user site.
B. Additional Inspection Fees: Additional inspection fees shall be paid for any additional inspections. Additional inspections include, but are not limited to,
inspections of sampling manholes, flow metering or sampling equipment, garbage grinders, grease, oil and sand interceptors, and grease traps. Fees
for inspections of equalization and pretreatment facilities shall be paid for based on the cost and expense to conduct the inspection. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-
1-2009)
C. Connection Fees Involving Extra Strength Wastewater; PE Determination:
1. The DPW may require nonresidential users to provide to the DPW concentrations and flow rates of wastewater discharged to the wastewater
treatment works. Flow rate averages shall be calculated based on the number of actual days discharged. For wastewater, the strength of which
exceeds residential wastewater in any constituent, the fees shall be based as follows: (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
a. A PE connection fee shall be calculated on the basis of the impact on a treatment works as the equivalent of the highest PE of the three (3)
parameters: flow, BOD5 or TSS. Any increase in PE will be added to the baseline PE of the property.
b. In the event that the wastewater exhibits a ratio of COD to BOD5 that is greater than 3, the BOD5 PE will be calculated on the basis of 0.33 of the
COD value.
c. The difference between the PE connection fee and the wastewater connection fee based on water meter size in article S of this chapter shall be
identified as the strength connection fee. In the event that the PE connection fee is larger than the water meter size based connection fee, the
strength connection fee will be added to the water meter size connection fee.
2. When the volume and strength of the wastewater to be discharged to the public sewer is not known at the time of the connection, the fee shall be
estimated and adjusted to reflect actual conditions during the billing period after a full year of operation.
3. The volume and strength of the wastewater for fee purposes shall be based on the maximum workday discharge of constituents. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-
1-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 292/618
4. When a connection is made based on the applicant's statement that the strength of the wastewater does not exceed residential wastewater in any
constituent, and at the end of the billing period, after a full year of operation, it is determined that the wastewater does exceed residential wastewater
in strength, the DPW may accept or reject the wastewater and back charge the user for fees plus penalties for the extra strength wastewater or have
the service disconnected.
5. The DPW may review nonresidential user flows and loadings on an intermittent frequency to identify increases to the baseline PE. The DPW shall
bill the nonresidential user, for increases to the baseline PE, a connection fee as set forth in article S of this chapter. Upon payment of the fee, the
current site baseline PE shall be adjusted to the newly established site baseline PE. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
D. Properties Outside Corporate Limits: The connection fee for any use not located within the corporate limits of the village that has been previously
grandfathered but has not yet connected shall be two (2) times the applicable connection fee as set forth in article S of this chapter combined with the
strength determination.
E. Review Of And Updating Fees: All review, inspection and connection fees are set forth in article S of this chapter and may be reviewed and updated
from time to time. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3C-5: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
A. It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged to the wastewater treatment works of the village, any substance, without having first
complied with the terms of this chapter. At minimum, all users are subject to the prohibited discharge standards in section 9-3E-2 of this chapter,
change notification in section 9-3I-7 of this chapter, and hazardous waste notification in section 9-3I-10 of this chapter, if applicable. Spill/slug control
planning may also be necessary for some nonresidential users as identified in section 9-3F-4 of this chapter.
B. No user shall connect roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building drain
or building sewer which in turn connects directly or indirectly to a public sewer. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3C-6: MONITORING FACILITIES:
The inspection fee(s) provided in section 9-3C-4 of this article shall be paid to the village prior to issuance of the building sewer connection permit if the
village determines that the user is required to install any of the following structures: (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
A. Sampling Manhole:
1. Required; Exemptions:
a. All users located in areas zoned industrial and such other users as required by the DPW, except residential users, are required to install a
monitoring manhole for each separate discharge in the building sewer in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the DPW.
b. The DPW may determine subclasses of businesses that do not require the installation of a sampling manhole; provided, however, sampling
manholes shall be required in zoned business or industrial parks. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
2. Location:
a. Each manhole shall be situated on the user's premises in an easement dedicated to the village.
b. The sampling manhole shall be located on the sewer connection pipe at a point where there are no changes in grade or alignment for at least
fifteen (15) pipe diameters upstream and downstream from the manhole. The grade (slope) of the pipe shall not exceed one percent (1%) (1 foot
per 100 feet) through the manhole and for a distance of fifteen (15) pipe diameters upstream and downstream from the manhole. (Ord. 2009-57,
10-1-2009)
c. Where such a sampling manhole location would be impractical or cause extreme hardship on the user, the DPW may permit the sampling manhole
to be constructed in the public right of way, provided the sampling manhole is located so that it shall not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles. If a sampling manhole is located in a parking lot, a permanent barricade, such as a vertical pipe, shall be placed around the sampling
manhole to prevent vehicles from driving or parking over the sampling manhole cover. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
3. Ample Room For Sampling: There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis.
4. Responsibilities Of Owner/User: The manhole shall be installed and maintained by the owner and/or user at its sole cost and expense and shall be
safe and accessible to the authorized agents of the village at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are not representative of its discharge. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
5. Postponement Of Installation:
a. The DPW may postpone the installation of the sampling manhole when specific circumstances (e.g., weather) prevent the installation of a
manhole.
b. A postponement for a sampling manhole shall be handled on a case by case basis by the DPW when it is determined that the discharge is solely
from a residential source and the site is not in a zoned business park/industrial area.
c. When a postponement for a sampling manhole installation is granted by the DPW, an affidavit shall be signed by the property owner indicating that
the sampling manhole shall be installed at a later date should business practices change at the location. The affidavit for sampling manhole
installation postponement may be recorded by the village against the property.
B. Liquid Quantity Measurements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 293/618
1. All significant industrial users may be required to install an open channel flow measuring device in said sampling manhole. When required, the
sampling chamber shall contain a Palmer-Bowlus or Parshall flume or equivalent, unless a weir or similar device is approved by the DPW. (Ord.
2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
2. The village may, at its option, based on the water usage and/or waste loadings, require the user to install a device with a recording and totalizing
register for measurement of the liquid quantity. The device shall include a recorder suitable to display seven (7) calendar days of flow at a time. The
equipment required to indicate, record and totalize the flow shall be located in a warm, dry location and be accessible to the village for reading. This
equipment shall be installed and maintained by the user at its sole cost and expense. The user shall complete installation of the flume and secondary
flow measuring device based on the installation schedule approved for such device by the village.
3. The user shall be required to calibrate and maintain the flow metering equipment in accordance with the manufacturer's recommended procedures
and frequencies. Users who operate flow measuring devices shall submit the procedure for operation and maintenance (O&M) to the pretreatment
coordinator. The user shall further document O&M in a log which shall be available for inspection by authorized agents of the village. At a minimum,
the user shall submit a semiannual calibration report performed by an outside representative by the deadline defined in the user's discharge permit.
The user may be required to submit flow records to the pretreatment coordinator monthly.
C. Sampling Equipment:
1. The village may, at its option, based on water usage and/or waste loadings or when the waste loads cannot be accurately evaluated by time
composite samples, require the user to install sampling equipment. This equipment shall be installed and maintained by the user at its sole cost and
expense.
2. Users shall submit the procedure for operation and maintenance to the pretreatment coordinator. The user shall further document O&M in a log
which shall be available for inspection by duly authorized agents of the village. At minimum, the user shall submit an annual report confirming the
accurate operation of the equipment performed by an outside representative by the deadline defined in the discharge permit. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-
2009)
9-3C-7: ADDITIONAL STRUCTURES REQUIRED:
A. Garbage Grinders; Interceptors; Neutralizing Basins: Inspection fee(s) as provided in section 9-3C-4 of this article and set forth in article S of this
chapter shall be paid to the village prior to issuance of the building sewer connection permit should it be determined that the user is required to install
any of the following structures: (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
1. Garbage Grinders: Garbage shall be properly shredded prior to discharge to the public sewer. Wastes classified as properly shredded garbage
contain all particles being carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch
(1/2") (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to review and approval by the community development department. Garbage grinders are
prohibited to be connected to a grease interceptor. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Grease, Oil, And Sand Interceptors: Interceptors shall be provided in facilities connected to the public sewer where it is determined by the DPW that
they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater that contains excessive amounts of grease, oil, and sand; except, that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the community
development department and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Oil and sand interceptors used for petroleum
grease and oils may be located inside the building. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at its
sole cost and expense. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
3. Neutralizing Basins:
a. Laboratory and facilities commonly using acid or alkaline chemicals or compounds shall install a neutralizing basin to treat process wastewater
prior to the discharge to the public sewer. All basins shall be of type and capacity approved by the community development department and shall
be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
b. Equipment and devices installed under this section are not defined as pretreatment facilities for wastewater. Any user operating devices installed
pursuant to this section shall submit operating data as may be required by the DPW.
B. Equalization And Pretreatment Of Equipment Or Facilities:
1. Review fee(s) as provided in section 9-3C-4 of this article and set forth in article S of this chapter shall be paid to the village prior to issuance of the
building sewer connection permit if it is determined that the user is required to install equipment or facilities for equalization or pretreatment of
wastewater. The design and installation of such equalization and pretreatment equipment or facilities shall be subject to the review and approval of
the DPW and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, chapters and laws. The DPW shall require the user to submit the equalization and
pretreatment equipment to IEPA for its approval consistent with IEPA regulations or issuance of a written determination that a permit is not needed.
(Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
2. Inspection fee(s) as provided in section 9-3C-4 of this article and set forth in article S of this chapter shall be paid to the village after the inspection is
completed based on cost and expenses.
3. All equalization and pretreatment equipment or facilities shall be properly maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the user
at its sole cost and expense. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3C-8: SEWER LINE MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT:
A. Responsibilities Of Owner: The owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of all building sewer lines, including the tap into the public sewer,
located on its property which connect directly or indirectly to the public sewer.
B. Excavations In Public Ways:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 294/618
1. In those instances when an owner has to excavate the building sewer for maintenance and replacement, and as a result, the sidewalk, curb and
street have been removed or damaged, the property owner shall be responsible for the restoration of the sidewalk, curb and street (surface and
subsurface).
2. In those instances where subsection B1 of this section is involved, tunneling under the curb and sidewalk whenever practical is recommended.
Sidewalk and curb must be cut when removal is required.
C. Compliance Required; Inspections: All work, as it is related to the replacement and/or repair of the building sewer, shall be in conformance with all
village codes and shall be inspected by a duly authorized agent of the village during the repair and replacement. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3C-9: FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS:
Food service establishments (FSE) shall comply with the following requirements: (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
A. Grease Traps And Interceptors:
1. General Requirements: Grease traps and interceptors (collectively referred to as grease interceptors or GI) shall be installed in all new FSE. All GI
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the DPW based on an evaluation of the volume and characteristics of the discharge in conjunction with
the operating plan of the FSE. The DPW may require GI to be installed or modified in an existing FSE where said FSE has caused or contributed to
overflows and/or blockages in a public sewer, or at an existing FSE that significantly remodels its site, or when streetscapes or street/sewer
replacements are installed. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
2. Location: All GI shall be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All GI shall be located on the exterior to the building for all new construction
and, when feasible, at an existing FSE. The GI shall not be located in drive-through lanes. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
3. Sizing: Each FSE GI shall be sized using a formula provided by the DPW so that it shall continuously produce an effluent containing less than the
guideline limit of fats, oils and grease (FOG) as provided by section 9-3E-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
4. Inspection Fee: An inspection fee as provided by section 9-3C-4 of this article and set forth in article S of this chapter shall be paid to the village prior
to issuance of the permit. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
5. Maintenance: Such grease traps shall be inspected, the grease cap and solids blanket cleaned every three (3) months, and the entire contents of the
trap cleaned annually and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner and/or user at its sole cost and expense. It shall be the responsibility of the
FSE to inspect its GI during the pumping procedure to ensure the trap is properly cleaned out and that all fittings and fixtures inside the trap are in
working condition and functioning properly. In the event that actual operations of the GI fail to produce results that consistently prevent prohibitive
discharges as defined in section 9-3E-2 of this chapter, the owner and/or user of the FSE shall have the GI cleaned at a more frequent rate, as
determined by the DPW, or install additional pretreatment as necessary.
6. Modifications: The DPW may make determinations of GI adequacy, need, design, appropriateness, application, location, modification(s), and
conditional usage based on review of all relevant information regarding GI performance, facility site and building plan review by all regulatory
reviewing agencies and may require repairs to or modification or replacement of the GI. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
7. Permit Required: All FSE are required to be issued a general permit as provided by articles G and H of this chapter.
B. Grease Interceptor Criteria: GI installed at new and existing FSE must meet the following criteria: (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
1. Size: The size shall be determined by a formula that is approved by the DPW. The minimum capacity of any one unit shall be five hundred (500)
gallons, and the maximum capacity shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons. Where sufficient capacity cannot be achieved with a single
unit, installation of GI in series shall be required. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
2. Twenty Five Percent Requirement: The GI shall provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of twenty four (24) minutes at actual peak flow
between the influent and effluent baffles, with twenty five percent (25%) of the total volume of the GI being allowed for any food derived solids to
settle or accumulate and floatable grease derived materials to rise and accumulate, identified as a solids blanket and grease cap, respectively.
3. Access Manholes: Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of twenty four inches (24"), shall be provided over each exterior GI chamber and
each sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration.
The manholes shall have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities.
4. Prohibitions: Dishwashers and food waste disposal units shall not be connected to or discharged into any GI. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
C. Waivers: Waivers available to FSE are set forth below. A request for a waiver is required to be filed with the DPW on a form provided by the village, and
a waiver review fee as set forth in article S of this chapter shall be paid to the village at the time of the filing. Waiver requests are not considered to be
filed until the request has been reviewed and determined complete. If the DPW fails to act on a completed waiver request within forty five (45) calendar
days, a request for waiver shall be deemed to be denied. The issuance of a waiver does not eliminate the requirement to prevent prohibitive discharges
through alternate technologies and best management plan practices.
1. Existing External FSE GI Installation Waiver: The requirement to install and to properly operate and maintain a GI is conditionally stayed by the
DPW. Terms and conditions for the waiver issued for a GI installation shall be set forth in a permit. The terms may include the requirement to install
grease trap(s) inside the FSE, alternate technology and/or the use of best management practices. The waiver shall not apply to any existing FSE that
has not operated as an FSE for the last twelve (12) consecutive months prior to November 1, 2009. Such FSE shall be required to install a GI in
order to operate an FSE in the village.
2. Common GI Waiver: "Common GI" means one or more interceptors receiving FOG laden wastewater from more than one FSE. Common
interceptors may be used in lieu of an individual GI at each FSE, provided a waiver has been issued by the DPW. A common GI may be located at
shopping centers, malls, entertainment complexes, sporting arenas, hotels, multitenant "flex" spaces, mixed use spaces, and other sites where
multiple establishments are connected to a single GI. The owner of the property on which the common GI is located shall be responsible for
operation and maintenance of the common GI including program documentation, upkeep, and repair. In such cases, a permit will be issued to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 295/618
owner of the property for the GI, and general permits will also be issued to each FSE connected to the common GI that contains best management
practices requirements.
3. Limited Food Preparation Establishments GI Installation Waiver: Waivers for installations at FSE with only a snack bar with no food preparation other
than food warming will be handled on a case by case basis by the DPW and are deemed to be limited food preparation establishments.
4. Constraint Waivers At Existing FSE:
a. Where the installation of a GI is not feasible and no equivalent alternative pretreatment can be installed, a waiver from the installation of the GI
requirement may be granted. The DPW determination to grant the waiver shall be based upon, but not limited to, evaluation of the following
conditions: (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
(1) There is no adequate space for installation and/or maintenance of a GI;
(2) There is no adequate slope for gravity flow between the kitchen plumbing fixtures and the GI and/or between the GI and the private collection
lines or public sewer; and
(3) The use of alternative pretreatment technology is not possible that is equally effective in controlling the FOG discharge.
b. If a constraint waiver is granted, a grease disposal mitigation fee as set forth in the FSE fees in article S of this chapter shall be imposed. (Ord.
2009-57, 10-1-2009)
5. Alternate Technology Waiver: The use of an automatic grease removal system is permissible only upon the written approval of the DPW, the
plumbing inspector of the village, and the county health department. Approval of the technology shall be based on empirical data acceptable to the
DPW demonstrating removal efficiencies and reliability of operation. The DPW may approve these types of technologies dependent on
manufacturer's specifications on a case by case basis. The DPW shall require in a permit that any user of an alternate technology shall attain a
grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the unit's outlet. Any user utilizing an alternative technology may be subject to additional
operational requirements imposed by the DPW.
6. Cleaning Cycle Waiver: The FSE may petition the DPW to reduce the cleaning and servicing of the GI from every three (3) months to a maximum of
every six (6) months upon demonstration that the amount removed every three (3) months is significantly less than the twenty five percent (25%) rule
for the basin capacity and the discharge does not exceed the oil and grease local limit. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
9-3C-10: AUTOMOBILE SERVICE, REPAIR AND FUEL DISPENSING PROPERTIES:
A. Sampling Manhole: Any user involved with automotive repair or the handling, sale and dispensing of petroleum products and/or automotive fluids shall
install a sampling manhole consistent with the requirements of section 9-3C-6 of this article. All such sampling manholes of this type shall be monitored
throughout the year in a manner prescribed by the pretreatment coordinator. Additionally, any user involved in the repair or servicing of automobiles,
trucks, or engine powered equipment shall install a triple basin oil separator in the sanitary line (per state of Illinois plumbing codes) servicing the repair
area(s) of its building. The system shall be cleaned, serviced and inspected at least four (4) times per year at the owner's sole cost and expense. The
user may petition the pretreatment coordinator to reduce the cleaning and servicing of the triple basin oil separator to two (2) times per year upon
demonstration that the amount removed quarterly is significantly less than the twenty five percent (25%) rule for the basin capacity and the discharge
does not exceed the oil and grease local limit. The pretreatment coordinator may require the system to be cleaned at a more frequent rate if the
discharge requirements cannot be met.
B. Separate Drainage System: When property use involves automotive repair or the handling, sale and dispensing of petroleum products and/or
automotive fluids, there shall be a separate drainage system constructed to collect all fluids from all areas associated with pump islands and under
pump canopies. The separate drainage system shall collect these fluids and hold them in a separate sealed tank for testing and removal by approved
special waste handling methods. All fuel dispensing equipment, piping and venting shall be installed in accordance with the standards listed below and
be in accordance and in compliance with all village codes and the following provisions:
1. "Guidance Manual For LUST Cleanups In Illinois", September 1989; and "Leaking Underground Storage Tank Manual", September 1991; both
published by IEPA, 2200 Churchill Road, P.O. Box 19276, Springfield, IL 62794-9276.
2. "Recommended Practices For Installation Of Underground Liquid Storage Systems", PEI/RP 100, 1994; published by Petroleum Equipment Institute,
P.O. Box 2380, Tulsa, OK 74101.
3. "Flammable And Combustible Liquid Code", NFPA/30, 1993; "Automotive And Marine Services Station Code", NFPA/30A, 1993; "National Electric
Code", NFPA/70, 1993; and "Underground Leakage Of Flammable And Combustible Liquids", NFPA/329, 1992; all published by National Fire
Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, P.O. Box 9101, Quincy, MA 02269-9904.
4. "Underground Storage Tanks; Technical Requirements And State Program Approval; Final Rules", 40 CFR parts 280 and 281, part II, Federal
Register, Friday, September 23, 1988; and "Musts For USTs: A Summary Of The New Regulations For Underground Storage Tank Systems, And
Hazardous Waste Management Standards", Federal Register, July 14, 1986, both published by USEPA, Office Of Underground Storage Tanks, 401
M Street S.W., Washington, DC 20460.
5. "Rules Of The Illinois State Fire Marshall", parts 170 and 180, title 41, chapter 1, state of Illinois, office of the fire marshal, 1035 Stevenson Parkway,
Springfield, IL 62703.
C. Application Of Provisions:
1. The requirements of this section shall be met by any property use involving automotive repair or the handling, sale or dispensing of petroleum
products and/or automotive fluids where any water main, wastewater or stormwater facility is under the jurisdiction of the village, regardless of
whether or not such property lies within the corporate limits of the village.
2. The requirements of this section shall not apply to property uses involving automotive repair or the handling, sale or dispensing of petroleum
products and/or automotive fluids existing on November 1, 2009; except, when a permit is required for new construction or reconstruction of a
property use associated with or a discharge has occurred that does not meet the local limits or a blockage has been caused or contributed to,
compliance with the provisions of this section shall be required. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 296/618
ARTICLE D. NONRESIDENTIAL USER INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
9-3D-1: INITIAL SURVEY (QUESTIONNAIRE):
A survey ("initial survey") shall be completed by all nonresidential users and submitted to the village in order to ensure that said nonresidential users of the
wastewater treatment works of the village adhere to and comply with the restrictions and prohibitions pertaining to pretreatment standards of wastes
discharged into the wastewater treatment works of the village set forth in article E of this chapter, spill prevention and slug control of raw materials,
intermediates and waste as set forth in section 9-3F-4 of this chapter, and to facilitate the village investigation of apparent or suspected violations thereof.
The requirements of the initial survey are as follows: (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
A. All existing or new nonresidential users required by the DPW, including nonresidential users not in the village that receive sewer service from the
village, shall complete and submit an initial survey on a form provided by the village when requested by the village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd.
Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
B. All nonresidential users defined in subsection A of this section seeking to establish a new account with the village for water and/or sanitary sewer
service in an existing location or to establish a new connection to the wastewater treatment works of the village shall file a completed initial survey with
the village as a condition to the establishment of such new water/sanitary sewer service account or connection to the wastewater treatment works of
the village.
C. All nonresidential users defined above that fail to complete and submit to the village an initial survey shall be in violation of the provisions of this section
and shall be subject to all of the applicable penalties thereof, including, but not limited to, the revocation of all permits and approvals previously granted
to the nonresidential user in question for the discharge of sewage or wastewater into the wastewater treatment works of the village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-
1-2009)
9-3D-2: AFFIRMATION OF INITIAL SURVEY:
A. Determination Of Survey Requirement: The DPW shall determine, based on building, zoning and occupant usage, whether a nonresidential user shall
be required to file an affirmation of survey with the annual business license renewal. The nonresidential user's status will be defined by the DPW after
review of the initial survey submitted as required in section 9-3D-1 of this article. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
B. Statement Of Information:
1. Any nonresidential user, defined in section 9-3D-1 of this article, which previously filed an initial survey and the information remains true, complete
and correct in all respects, may be required to submit a statement that the information remains current. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
2. The statement shall be filed with the DPW not later than January 31 of the year in which it is required. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15,
3-20-2014)
C. Failure To File Survey: All nonresidential users defined above that fail to file an affirmation of survey with the village shall be in violation of the provisions
of section 9-3D-1 of this article and shall be subject to all of the applicable penalties thereof, including, but not limited to, the revocation of all permits
and approvals previously granted to the nonresidential user in question for the discharge of sewage or wastewater into the wastewater treatment works
of the village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3D-3: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
Any nonresidential user that makes any changes determined to be substantial as defined in section 9-3I-7 of this chapter shall report said changes as
required in said section 9-3I-7 of this chapter prior to making any of the changes. The nonresidential user may be required to file an updated survey as a
result of changed conditions. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3D-4: ADDITIONAL SURVEY INFORMATION:
A. Wastewater Survey:
1. Required: After review of the initial survey completed per section 9-3D-1 of this article, all nonresidential users that the pretreatment coordinator has
defined to have the potential to be defined as either a significant industrial user (SIU) or a nonsignificant regulated user (NSRU) shall be required to
complete and file a more detailed wastewater survey on a form provided by the village.
2. Contents: At a minimum, a description of processes, water usage and wastewater characteristics for the facility will be required to be submitted. The
wastewater survey shall contain a statement affirming the truth, completeness and correctness of information submitted, signed by an "authorized
representative of the user" as defined in section 9-3A-6 of this chapter.
3. Evaluation: This information will be evaluated by the pretreatment coordinator to determine if an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general
wastewater discharge permit per articles G and H of this chapter is required.
4. Periodic Updates Of Information: The information provided in the wastewater survey may be required to be revised and/or updated for the following
conditions:
a. A report of changed conditions is filed as required in section 9-3I-7 of this chapter;
b. An application for a wastewater discharge permit is required to be filed per articles G and H of this chapter;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 297/618
c. A reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit is required to be filed as a result of an upcoming expiration date and reissuance of a wastewater
discharge permit per section 9-3H-7 of this chapter; or
d. At such other time the pretreatment coordinator may require; provided, a nonresidential user shall not be required to update wastewater survey
information more than once per a twelve (12) month period unless one of the conditions set forth in subsections A4a, A4b and A4c of this section
apply.
B. Category Specific Survey: In addition to the wastewater survey defined in this section, categorical industrial users may be required by the pretreatment
coordinator to complete a category specific survey that identifies subprocesses and processes performed at the site in order to define which
subprocesses and processes are regulated by a USEPA effluent guideline category. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE E. GENERAL DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS
9-3E-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged to the wastewater treatment works of the village without having first complied with the terms
of this chapter.
B. A user shall meet the most stringent applicable requirements and limitations at all times, either as set forth in this chapter or in an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, federal pretreatment standards as established by 40 CFR 403, or state of Illinois standards as codified in 35 Illinois
Administrative Code 307. A user shall provide the necessary wastewater treatment to achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations and with any other pretreatment standards
and requirements, including local limits, by applicable deadlines. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3E-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
The following general prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not they are subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or any other
national, state or local pretreatment standard:
A. Prohibited Wastes:
1. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, to the wastewater treatment works any pollutant or wastewater contaminant
which will pass through or cause interference with, inhibition of, or upset to the operation of the POTW;
2. No user shall increase the use of potable or process water in any other way or attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment in order to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement except where expressly authorized to do so by an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard and in a wastewater discharge permit; and
3. No user shall introduce, or cause to be introduced, either directly or indirectly, any of the following described pollutants, substances or wastewater
into the POTW:
a. Unpolluted water including, but not limited to, uncontaminated noncontact cooling water, stormwater, surface water, groundwater, subsurface
drainage, roof runoff, spill contaminant area runoff, footing drainage or construction drainage except as specifically permitted by the pretreatment
coordinator;
b. Solids, solid wastes, liquids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction, to cause
safety hazards, fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the wastewater treatment works or a duly authorized agent, or to the operation
of village POTW. Materials considered in this regard are those with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit
(140°F) or sixty degrees centigrade (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
c. Any solid, solid waste or viscous substance in amounts which shall or may cause obstruction to the flow in a public sewer, or other interference to
the operation of the wastewater treatment works. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, waste cooking oil, grease, grease interceptor
wastes, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or
fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings,
rags, spent grains or hops, paper, wood, plastics, residues from gas, tar or asphalt, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oils,
mud, glass grinding or polishing waste, fatty acids or esters of fatty acids, or any material which can be disposed of as trash;
d. Wastewater containing noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or gases which, either singly or by their interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or to interfere with, inhibit or upset any operation of the wastewater treatment works, including, but not
limited to, prevention of entry into the public sewer for their maintenance and repair;
e. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the wastewater treatment works in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems for a duly authorized agent of the village or which necessitates the village taking special measures to
counteract and/or alleviate the impact of the pollutant(s);
f. Wastewater containing substances in sufficient quantity to interfere with the wastewater treatment works;
g. Wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure, interfere with or upset the wastewater
treatment works, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or exceed limitations as set forth in the act;
h. Wastewater having a temperature which could inhibit biological activity in the wastewater treatment works treatment plant, but in no case
wastewater which causes the temperature at the wastewater treatment works treatment plant to exceed forty degrees centigrade (40°C) (104°F);
i. Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or higher than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing structural damage or hazard to
the wastewater treatment works or a duly authorized agent of the village. The pH limits are instantaneous limits that shall be met at all times and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 298/618
are not subject to averaging;
j. Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration (including any slug
load), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, which may interfere with, inhibit, or upset the wastewater treatment works;
k. Ammonia nitrogen in amounts that would cause a violation of the water quality standards of the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
works;
l. Wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, aqueous firefighting foam or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
collection system or the treatment process that results in wastewater treatment works interferences or upset or is shown to inhibit the nitrification
process or pass through to the receiving waters. Such prohibited wastes shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that may result in
discharge to the wastewater treatment works;
m. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference, pass through or upset the
wastewater treatment works;
n. Wastewater containing any organism, including viruses, considered pathogenic and/or detrimental to treatment plant process organisms other
than those discharged by direct excrement and any other medical wastes including, but not limited to, isolation wastes, infectious agents, human
blood and blood products, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes;
o. Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, except in accordance with village, state and federal statutes, laws, regulations and
rules governing such discharges;
p. Wastewater or wastes containing iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
q. Leachate or remediation wastewater, except at discharge points designated by the pretreatment coordinator (40 CFR 403.5b8);
r. All trucked or hauled wastes;
s. Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of nonresidential wastewaters;
t. Solids, solid wastes or viscous substances that cause an obstruction to the flow in a building drain or sewer or public sewer that is eliminated by a
professional service or contractor;
u. Unusual concentrations or solutions of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
v. Substances with objectionable color which is not removed in the treatment processes, such as, but not limited to, dye waste, ink waste and
vegetable tanning solutions;
w. Substances that inhibit the use of ultraviolet light for disinfection purposes;
x. Wastewater or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment works effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters;
y. Substances, alone or in combination with other substances, which could cause the village wastewater treatment works to violate its NPDES
permit(s), and/or receiving stream water quality, and/or general effluent discharge standards;
z. Any wastewater causing the wastewater treatment works effluent to fail a toxicity test; or
aa. Any substance which may cause the village wastewater treatment works effluent or sludge to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or interfere
with the reclamation processes. In no case shall a substance discharged to the village wastewater treatment works cause the village to be in
noncompliance with any sludge use or disposal regulations developed under section 405 of the act; or any regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal developed pursuant to the resource conservation and recovery act, solid waste disposal act, toxic substance control act, or any state or
local standards applicable to any sludge management methods either being used or considered by the village.
Wastes prohibited in this subsection shall not be processed or stored in such manner that could result in their discharge or introduction to the
wastewater treatment works. All users with prohibited wastes described in this subsection or those that have hazardous wastes as defined in
section 9-3I-10 of this chapter shall develop and implement a spill prevention/slug control plan (SPSC plan) consistent with the requirements in
section 9-3F-4 of this chapter. The pretreatment coordinator may also determine that an SPSC plan is required for liquids and solids not previously
described in previous plans based on an evaluation of a site potential to cause spills or slug loads to be introduced to the POTW.
B. Discharge Into Natural Outlets: It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village
any wastewaters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with USEPA or IEPA requirements.
C. Use Of Storm Sewers And Stormwater Drainage Systems; Discharge Of Surface And Unpolluted Waters:
1. For the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the village, it is the policy of the village to prohibit wastewaters from entering
into any stormwater drainage system, and any such discharge to the stormwater drainage system is determined to be injurious to the public health
and welfare and is hereby declared a public nuisance.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be connected any drain carrying, or designed to carry, any toilet, sink, basement, septic
tank, cesspool, industrial waste, or any fixture or device discharging polluting substances to any storm sewer or stormwater drainage system within
the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
3. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the DPW. Industrial cooling waters or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the EPA, to a storm sewer
or natural outlet. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 299/618
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, in such manner as to cause such waters to overflow onto adjacent property or to be discharged upon
any public street or public way, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage, including the use of a sump pump
for such purpose. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3E-3: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
A. Compliance Required; Standards Adopted; Application Of Provisions:
1. All nonresidential users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and
(c) of the act, currently discharging or scheduled to discharge to the wastewater treatment works shall comply with all pretreatment standards and
requirements. The national categorical pretreatment standards set forth in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405 through 471 are hereby
incorporated by reference into this chapter.
2. Limits in categorical pretreatment standards shall apply to the discharge from the process regulated by the standard or as otherwise specified by the
standard. Compliance with national categorical pretreatment standards is mandatory. The national categorical standards may be contained in the
IEPA operating permit.
B. Additional Requirements:
1. Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
pretreatment coordinator may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c) unless specifically restricted by
the categorical pretreatment standard. These equivalent limitations calculated in accordance with the following requirements are deemed
pretreatment standards. Users shall be required to comply with the equivalent limitations instead of the promulgated categorical standards from
which the equivalent limitations were derived. An alternative pretreatment limit shall not be used if the alternative limit is below the analytical
detection limit for any of the regulated pollutants.
2. When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit production, the pretreatment
coordinator may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for
purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual users.
The pretreatment coordinator calculating equivalent mass per day limitations shall calculate such limitations by multiplying the limits in the standard
by the user's average rate of production. This average rate of production shall be based on a reasonable measure of the user's actual long term daily
production during a representative year and not based on design production capacity. For new sources, actual production shall be estimated using
projected production.
The pretreatment coordinator shall calculate such limitations by dividing the mass limitations by the average daily flow rate of the user's regulated
process wastewater. The average daily flow rate shall be based upon a reasonable measure of the user's actual long term average flow rate, such as
the average daily flow rate during the representative year.
3. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the pretreatment
coordinator shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(e); provided, that said regulation
allows the wastewaters to be mixed and the user can supply the information necessary to allow issuance of an alternative limit.
4. A user may request a variance from the USEPA based on fundamentally different factors. The request must comply with the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
5. A user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
6. When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, a user may request that the village convert the
limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the pretreatment
coordinator. The village may establish equivalent mass limits only if the user meets all the conditions set forth in subsection B6a of this section.
a. To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the user must:
(1) Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water during the term of its
individual wastewater discharge permit;
(2) Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and
not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
(3) Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's actual average daily flow rate for all waste streams, based on data from a continuous
effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long term average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long
term average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions;
(4) Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to control
the discharge; and
(5) Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the user's request for equivalent
mass limits.
b. A user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
(1) Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;
(2) Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
(3) Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify the pretreatment coordinator whenever production rates are expected to vary by
more than twenty percent (20%) from its baseline production rates determined in subsection B6a(3) of this section. Upon notification of a revised
production rate, the pretreatment coordinator will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed
conditions at the facility; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 300/618
(4) Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to subsection
B6a(1) of this section so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
c. When developing equivalent mass limits, the pretreatment coordinator:
(1) Shall calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the user by the
concentration based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit
conversion factor;
(2) Shall reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility upon notification of a
revised production rate from the user; and
(3) May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit terms if the user's actual average daily flow
rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow
rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to
subsection 9-3E-2A2 of this article.
7. The pretreatment coordinator may convert the mass limits of the categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR parts 414, 419 and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual users. The conversion is at the discretion of the pretreatment
coordinator.
8. Once included in its wastewater discharge permit, the user must comply with the equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the
promulgated categorical pretreatment standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived.
9. If categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for calculating
maximum monthly average, or four (4) day average, limitations, the same production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average and
the maximum equivalent limitations.
10. Any user operating under a wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production based
standard shall notify the pretreatment coordinator within two (2) workdays after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will
significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user which fails to timely notify the pretreatment coordinator of such anticipated change
shall be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its wastewater discharge permit that were based on the original estimate of the long
term average production rate.
C. Reports Required: All users that are subject to national categorical pretreatment standards are required to file reports as required by sections 9-3I-3 and
9-3I-4 of this chapter, signed by an authorized representative. Such reports shall include all information that the pretreatment coordinator deems
necessary to make compliance determinations. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3E-4: STATE LIMITS:
All users are subject to state standards and requirements as set forth in 35 Illinois administrative code 307. Specifically, the standards for discharge of
mercury and cyanide are as follows:
A. Mercury (35 Illinois adm. code 307.1102):
1. Except as provided below, no person shall cause or allow the concentration of mercury in any discharge to either the POTW or wastewater treatment
works to exceed the following level, subject to the averaging rule contained in 35 Illinois administrative code 304.104(a):
Constituent STORET Number Concentration (mg/l)
Mercury 71900 0.0005
2. Notwithstanding the concentration limitation set forth in subsection A1 of this section, if the discharge is to the wastewater treatment works and such
wastewater treatment works is required to meet a limitation less stringent than the 0.0005 milligram per liter mercury concentration, the discharge
limitation shall be the same as that applicable to the wastewater treatment works to which it discharges.
3. The concentration limits set forth in subsection A1 of this section shall not apply if all the following conditions are satisfied:
a. The user does not use mercury; or the user uses mercury and this use cannot be eliminated; or the user uses mercury only in chemical analysis or
in laboratory or other equipment and takes reasonable care to avoid contamination of wastewater; and
b. The user mercury concentration is less than 0.003 milligram per liter, as determined by application of the averaging rules of 35 Illinois
administrative code 304.104(a); and
c. The user is providing the best degree of treatment consistent with technological feasibility, economic reasonableness and sound engineering
judgment. This may include no treatment for mercury; and
d. The discharger has an inspection and maintenance program likely to reduce or to prevent an increase in the level of mercury discharges.
4. The discharge of wastes from medicinal or therapeutic use of mercury, exclusive of laboratory use, shall be exempt from the limitations of subsection
A1 of this section if all the following conditions are satisfied:
a. The total discharge is less than two hundred twenty seven grams (227 g) (1/2 pound) as mercury (Hg) in any year;
b. The discharge is to a public sewer; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 301/618
c. The discharge does not, alone or in conjunction with other sources, cause the effluent from the public sewer or POTW to exceed 0.0005 milligram
per liter of mercury.
5. No person shall cause or allow any discharge of mercury to a publicly owned or publicly regulated sewer system which, alone or in combination with
other sources, causes a violation by the sewer treatment plant discharge of the water quality standard of 35 Illinois administrative code 302 for
mercury applicable in the receiving stream.
6. For purposes of permit issuance, the agency may consider application of the exception of subsection A2 or A3 of this section to determine
compliance with this section. The agency may impose permit conditions necessary or required to assure continued application of the exception.
When subsection A2 or A3 of this section applies, the agency may impose an effluent limitation in the permit which allows the discharge of a
concentration of mercury greater than 0.0005 milligram per liter but not more than 0.003 milligram per liter.
B. Cyanide (35 Ill. adm. code 307.1103):
1. No waste to any public sewer shall contain more than ten milligrams per liter (10 mg/l) total cyanide (STORET number 00720), and any sample
tested shall not release more than two milligrams per liter (2 mg/l) of cyanide when tested at a pH of 4.5 and at a temperature of sixty six degrees
Celsius (66°C) (150°F) for a period of thirty (30) minutes, except as permitted by subsection B2 of this section. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
2. Upon application by the village and approval by the agency, based upon determination by the agency that no violation of the effluent standards of 35
Illinois administrative code 304 shall result and that no hazard to workers in such sewage works will result, limited additional amounts of cyanide
exceeding the standards in subsection B1 of this section may be discharged to the sewage works of the village.
3. Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the authority of the village to impose any more stringent standards or limitations on cyanide
discharges to its sewage works. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
4. Any actions undertaken pursuant to subsection B2 of this section shall be subject to the limitations of 35 Illinois administrative code 307.2400(b)(7).
(Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3E-5: LOCAL LIMITS:
A. The following pollutant limits are established by the village to protect against pass-through and interference: (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
1. Conventional Pollutants; Guidelines For Discharge:
a. No user shall discharge any wastewater containing concentrations greater than the daily maximum or instantaneous local limits as set forth below
into any public sewer that connects either directly or indirectly to the POTW:
Pollutant
Concentration (mg/l)
Daily Maximum Instantaneous
Ammonia nitrogen 25.0
BOD 235
Boron Reserved
COD 900
Fluoride Reserved
Iron Reserved
Nitrogen Reserved
Oil and grease (FSE sources) 200
Oil and grease (non-FSE sources) 100
Phosphorus 5.0
TDS Reserved
TSS 260
(Ord. 2016-12, 3-3-2016)
b. The village reserves the right to establish specific limits for all applicable pollutants set forth above in a wastewater discharge permit, on a case by
case basis, per articles G and H of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
2. Toxic Pollutants: No user shall discharge any wastewater containing concentrations greater than the daily maximum local limits as set forth below
into any public sewer that connects either directly or indirectly to the POTW:
Toxic Pollutant (Total Unless Otherwise Listed)
Concentration (mg/l)
Daily Maximum Instantaneous
Arsenic 0.1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 302/618
Cadmium 0.07
Chromium (vi) 1.1
Copper 1.3
Cyanide 0.025
Lead 5.0
Manganese Reserved
Mercury (see section 9-3E-4 of this article) 0.0005
Molybdenum 6.0
Nickel 0.3
pH 5.0 - 9.5
Phenols 0.5
Selenium 1.0
Silver 0.4
Zinc 1.1
(Ord. 2015-69, 11-5-2015)
B. The village shall apply the local limits set forth in subsection A of this section at the end of pipe point where the wastewater is discharged to the public
sewer. The village reserves the right to apply said local limits at an end of process discharge location that connects to the POTW in the event that a
unique sampling manhole at the end of pipe is not available.
C. The village reserves the right to establish, in an individual or general wastewater discharge permit, requirements to control of the quantities and rates of
discharge.
D. The village reserves the right to establish, in a wastewater discharge permit, mass limitations rather than concentration limitations on discharges if a
user is using dilution to comply with applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate as determined by the pretreatment coordinator.
E. The village reserves the right to establish site specific standards for any applicable pollutants on a case by case basis. These standards shall be set
forth in a wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to section 9-3H-2 of this chapter.
F. The village may require the development and implementation of best management practices (BMPs) in individual or general wastewater discharge
permits to implement local limits and the requirements of section 9-3E-2 of this article.
G. Any user discharging pollutants such as, but not limited to, oils and grease, BOD or TSS to the POTW that cause the village to alter its method of
wastewater treatment or sludge disposal to a more costly method shall be assessed the differential cost between the more costly method of treatment
and the less costly method of treatment. Such costs shall be as set forth in article S of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3E-6: RIGHT OF REVISION:
A. The village reserves the right to establish, in individual or general wastewater discharge permits, more stringent limitations or requirements on
discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter. The specific limitations on discharge listed in subsection 9-3E-5A2 of this article
are derived from the maximum allowable industrial loading (MAIL) calculation. The MAILs are allocated only to those users, at the village's discretion,
that contribute the regulated pollutant, and all remaining users are held to either the background concentration or slightly higher than background but
lower than the specific discharge limit. In no case shall all allocations exceed the MAIL.
B. The village will maintain a reserve of the maximum allowable headworks pollutant loading for each pollutant for new industries or increase with existing
industries. The village will recalculate the maximum concentrations from time to time using site specific data taking into consideration revisions to state
and federal regulations that may impact the calculations. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3E-7: MONITORING FACILITIES:
A. Sampling Manhole Applicability:
1. All nonresidential users are required to install a sampling manhole for each separate discharge of a building sewer into the public sewer in
accordance with section 9-3C-6 of this chapter and the plans and specifications approved by the village.
When required by the village, an SIU or NSRU, that does not have a unique sampling chamber at end of pipe, shall install a monitoring manhole or
sampling chamber for use as the regulation location of local limits in the building sewer in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
village. A sampling chamber may be required to be installed within the building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 303/618
2. When required by the pretreatment coordinator, a categorical industrial user shall install a monitoring manhole or sampling chamber for use as the
regulation location of the categorically regulated discharge in the building sewer in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village.
This sampling chamber may be required to be installed within the building and may be in addition to an end of pipe manhole.
3. In the event that a suitable sampling facility does not exist, the "sampling manhole" shall be considered to be either the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected or the point of process wastewater discharge if accessible by the
village.
B. Wastewater Monitoring And/Or Flow Measurement Facility Operation And Maintenance:
1. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained at all times at the user's sole cost and expense. The failure of a user to maintain its monitoring
facility in good working order shall not be grounds for a user to assert that the sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. Installation of
such facilities shall be consistent with the requirements of section 9-3C-6 of this chapter.
2. The manhole or chamber located on a building sewer discharge located in dedicated easements shall be easily accessible to duly authorized agents
twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
3. The manhole or chamber located in a building shall be easily accessible to duly authorized agents during normal operating hours. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-
1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
4. Metered water supply may be used to determine wastewater flow if it is substantiated to the village that the metered water supply and wastewater
quantities are approximately the same, or where an adjustment agreed to by the pretreatment coordinator is made in the metered water supply to
determine wastewater flow which is documented through the use of submeters and/or production records. In the event that the wastewater flow
cannot be substantiated at any regulated location, the user shall be required to install flow monitoring consistent with section 9-3C-6 of this chapter.
5. The sampling chamber, flow metering device, sampling equipment and documentation of the frequency of sampling, sampling methods and analyses
of samples shall be subject, at all reasonable times, to inspection by a duly authorized agent. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3E-8: MONITORING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Applicability: All significant industrial users including categorical industrial users and nonsignificant regulated users are required to sample based on the
village monitoring frequency as stated in the applicable wastewater discharge permit. Other users are required to sample upon the request of the
village. A user shall pay the cost of sampling of its discharge and the cost of analyses of its samples, whether or not the sampling and analyses are
performed by the user or by the POTW.
B. Frequency:
1. All significant industrial users including categorical industrial users shall sample their effluent(s) for the parameters specified in its wastewater
discharge permit and report the results to the pretreatment coordinator at least twice per year or more frequently as designated in the permit. The
village shall have the right to perform its own sampling at any time.
2. Any nonsignificant regulated user with an individual or general wastewater discharge permit shall sample its effluent and report the results to the
pretreatment coordinator consistent with the requirements of the wastewater discharge permit and the village monitoring frequency.
3. The pretreatment coordinator shall institute special sampling and analyses (e.g., 15 consecutive days or more) in the event that test results are not
provided by the user or the data is questionable or irregular.
C. Sample Collection:
1. To satisfy reporting requirements, samples collected shall be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during
the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period as defined in the wastewater
discharge permit.
2. Except as indicated in subsection C3 of this section, the user shall collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques.
3. In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the pretreatment coordinator may authorize the use of time proportional sampling, at
minimum, collecting samples every fifteen (15) minutes during a twenty four (24) hour workday; or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the
user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. A proportional number of samples shall be
collected for wastewater discharges less than twenty four (24) hours.
4. Single grab samples may be required by the pretreatment coordinator in the event of an infrequent batch discharge or to show compliance with
instantaneous discharge limits.
5. Samples for fats, oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, hexavalent chromium, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds shall be
obtained using the number of grab samples determined by the pretreatment coordinator to assess and assure compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. Multiple grab samples that are individually preserved as specified in 40 CFR 136 and appropriate USEPA
guidance that are collected during a twenty four (24) hour period may be composited prior to the analysis, as follows:
a. For cyanide, hexavalent chromium, phenols, and sulfides, multiple grab samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field.
b. For volatile organics and oil and grease, multiple grab samples may only be composited in the laboratory.
6. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved USEPA methodologies may be
authorized by the pretreatment coordinator, as appropriate. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3E-9: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 304/618
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR
part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the USEPA determines that the part 136 sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any
other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the pretreatment coordinator or other parties approved by the
USEPA. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3E-10: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH SAMPLING AND FLOW METERING EQUIPMENT:
No person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is owned or
contracted by the village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE F. GENERAL DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE
9-3F-1: SCOPE; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Each user that discharges wastewater to the wastewater treatment works shall provide wastewater treatment and best management practices as
necessary to comply with this chapter and shall comply with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set forth in article E of
this chapter within the time limitations specified by the USEPA, the state, or the pretreatment coordinator, whichever is more stringent. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-
1-2009)
9-3F-2: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
A. Any pretreatment facility(ies) necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's sole cost and expense. Detailed plans
and specifications describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the pretreatment coordinator for review and approval prior
to the construction and operation of such facility(ies). The review of such plans and specifications shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of modifying such facilities as necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. All users are required to comply with the IEPA permitting requirements. A user shall file an IEPA application for a construction operating permit that has
been signed off by the village and obtain either a permit from the IEPA or a letter indicating no permit is needed prior to the village connection and/or
wastewater discharge permit(s) being issued. No sources of nonresidential wastewater shall be discharged to the wastewater treatment works until all
permitting requirements have been satisfied. All pretreatment facilities designated by the pretreatment coordinator shall be under the control and
direction of an IEPA certified wastewater operator even if the user is not issued an IEPA operating permit.
C. Any subsequent proposed modification, alteration, or change to the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be submitted to the village and
the IEPA for review and approval prior to the user's initiation of the changes. Users shall obtain all necessary additional construction operating permits
from the IEPA and the village for the changes prior to making said modification, alteration or change. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3F-3: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
The village may require the additional pretreatment measures set forth in this section. The village reserves the right to make unannounced inspections of
any additional pretreatment measures during normal business hours, whether or not the user has been issued an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit.
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the pretreatment coordinator may require a user to restrict its discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific public sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from
industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the wastewater treatment works and determine the user's
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. The pretreatment coordinator may require any user discharging into the wastewater treatment works to install and maintain, on its property and at its
sole cost and expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow approved by the pretreatment coordinator. The village
may issue an individual or general wastewater discharge permit solely for flow equalization.
C. The pretreatment coordinator may require a user with the potential to discharge flammable substances into any public sewer to install and maintain on
its property, at its own cost and expense, a combustible gas detection meter approved by the pretreatment coordinator. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3F-4: SPILL PREVENTION/SLUG CONTROL PLAN:
A. Required:
1. All users shall develop, implement and maintain a spill prevention/slug control plan (hereafter referred to as an "SPSC plan") if the user has:
a. Chemicals (raw materials, chemical intermediates, wastes to be recycled, final products, or utility chemicals) that total or exceed two hundred fifty
(250) gallons or five (5) 55-gallon drums at or on its site;
b. Prohibited discharge materials as defined in section 9-3E-2 of this chapter at or on its site; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 305/618
c. Hazardous waste as defined in section 9-3I-10 of this chapter at or on its site; or
d. Been defined by the pretreatment coordinator to have a need to control slug discharges.
2. Any user that meets the above criteria shall develop and implement an SPSC plan regardless of whether or not that user is regulated by an
individual or general wastewater discharge permit.
B. Minimum Requirements: The SPSC plan, which is required to be submitted to the village if the user's discharge is regulated, shall address, at a
minimum, the following:
1. Specifics Of SPSC Plan:
a. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
b. Description of stored chemicals, including quantity of chemicals and type and number of storage containers;
c. Site diagram showing location of all tanks holding greater than or equal to two hundred fifty (250) gallons or areas containing five (5) 55-gallon
drums or more of raw materials, prohibited wastes, hazardous wastes, wastes to be recycled, or final product;
d. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures shall include, but are not limited to, routine
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
measures specific to slug discharge control, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic
organic pollutants, including solvents, and measures and equipment for emergency response. Building containment structures or production
equipment changes are considered procedures to prevent adverse spills. If containment structures are connected to the public sewer, a shutoff
valve is required and shall be left in a closed position;
e. Location of notices/signs posted in conspicuous places advising employees in English and the language of common use whom to call in the event
of a spill, accidental discharge of prohibited materials, slug discharge or a bypass of any part of a pretreatment system; and
f. Emergency telephone number(s) (24 hour), off site and backup telephone number(s) and other contact information (e.g., address, e-mail address,
etc.). Once an SPSC plan has been filed with the village, any change in such information should be submitted within five (5) workdays after
revision.
2. Notification Procedure: The SPSC plan shall contain procedures for immediately notifying the pretreatment coordinator of any accidental or slug
discharge, as required by section 9-3I-8 of this chapter.
3. Documentation: The SPSC plan shall contain a sample of the documentation maintained at the site that:
a. Ensures that all employees who are in a position to cause, discover, or observe such discharge are advised of the emergency notification
procedures, and the training is documented with the date and time of training and the employee's signature; and
b. Such logs to verify inspection and maintenance procedures to prevent adverse impacts and confirm that said procedures are being performed on
a regular basis. At minimum, logs are required to verify valves in containment structures, if present, are closed.
C. Submission Of Plan: The SPSC plan shall be submitted to the pretreatment coordinator, when required, in an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit. The SPSC plan shall be filed with the pretreatment coordinator prior to the issuance of an individual or general wastewater discharge
permit. Review of an SPSC plan by the village shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility or SPSC plan as necessary
to meet all requirements of this chapter. Review by the village does not constitute an approval of the SPSC plan, and the village and its duly authorized
agent(s) are not responsible for the actions of the user and any impacts the user may cause as a result of a spill or slug load.
D. Evaluation And Revisions To Plan:
1. At least once every two (2) years, the pretreatment coordinator shall require each significant industrial user to evaluate its need to revise its SPSC
plan. The pretreatment coordinator may require any user to submit, at a frequency less than two (2) years, such SPSC plan or require modification of
an existing SPSC plan based on changes that have occurred at the site or in response to an incident that had the potential to impact the POTW.
2. In alternate years, the pretreatment coordinator shall evaluate whether each nonsignificant regulated user is required to file a revision to its SPSC
plan based on changes that have occurred at the site or in response to an incident that had the potential to impact the POTW.
E. Implementation Of Plan: All SPSC plans shall be implemented by the user, whether or not they have been reviewed by the village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-
2009)
9-3F-5: CLOSURE PLAN:
Any user meeting the requirements of subsection 9-3F-4A of this article including, but not limited to, those with wastewater discharge permits, that
determines it will cease operations permanently or cease operations for more than ninety (90) consecutive days, or if some of the processes that classify
the user as an SIU are terminated, the user shall file a written closure plan with the pretreatment coordinator. The closure plan shall be submitted ten (10)
workdays prior to the initiation of the plan and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
A. A description of each wastewater generating process that will permanently cease operations or cease operations for more than ninety (90) consecutive
days;
B. A description of how the facility will be closed, and the extent of operations during the closure period;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 306/618
C. An inventory and estimate of the volume of all process wastewater, chemicals, and hazardous waste on site. A description of the methods for disposal,
including procedures for removing, transporting, treating, storing, or disposing of all waste and identifying all off site waste management facilities to be
used;
D. A schedule of the closure activities, indicating the time required to complete each closure step; and
E. A schedule of additional monitoring to identify compliance with pretreatment standards during the closure operations. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE G. WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
9-3G-1: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
A user shall submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within thirty (30) calendar days of a written request by the pretreatment
coordinator. Information shall be submitted on a form provided by the village. The pretreatment coordinator may periodically require users to update
information on file with the village. Information that may be required will be consistent with that identified in article D of this chapter and section 9-3G-5 of
this article. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3G-2: PERMITS REQUIRED:
The pretreatment coordinator may issue a user a wastewater discharge permit as follows:
A. Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit: No significant industrial user (SIU), including any categorical industrial user (CIU), shall discharge wastewater
into the wastewater treatment works without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit issued by the village; except, that an existing SIU,
including any CIU, that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 9-3G-3 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified
herein. Alternately, the village may issue general wastewater discharge permits to an SIU or CIU if the conditions in subsection B of this section are
met.
B. General Wastewater Discharge Permit: At the discretion of the pretreatment coordinator, the village may issue a general wastewater discharge permit to
control discharges from an SIU or CIU to the wastewater treatment works if the following conditions are true of all facilities controlled by a general
wastewater discharge permit:
1. Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations;
2. Discharge the same types of waste;
3. Require the same effluent limitations or best management practices;
4. Require the same or similar monitoring and/or reporting requirements; and
5. In the opinion of the pretreatment coordinator, those SIUs or CIUs are more appropriately controlled under a general wastewater discharge permit
than under an individual wastewater discharge permit.
C. Other Wastewater Discharge Permits: The pretreatment coordinator may require other nonresidential users to obtain either individual or general
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Such a wastewater discharge permit shall state that the holder of
such a permit issued under this section is not classified as an SIU or CIU. A user with a wastewater discharge permit in this class may include, but is
not limited to: (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
1. Any user that has been determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user as defined in subsection C of the definition of "significiant
industrial user", in section 9-3A-6 of this chapter; (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Any user that has been determined not to be a "significant industrial user", as defined in section 9-3A-6 of this chapter, that requires regulation by a
wastewater discharge permit;
3. Any user subject to national categorical pretreatment standards that opts not to discharge said regulated waste shall be issued a zero process
wastewater discharge permit; (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
4. Any user that the pretreatment coordinator determines is a noncategorical zero process wastewater discharge shall be permitted; (Ord. 2009-57, 10-
1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
5. Any nonsignificant regulated users (NSRU), as follows:
a. An NSRU that discharges a process wastewater flow greater than or equal to five thousand (5,000) gallons per day;
b. An NSRU that discharges more than or equal to zero pounds of the organic treatment capacity of the POTW;
c. An NSRU that discharges 0.005 percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by a local limit set forth in
section 9-3E-2 of this chapter; or
d. An NSRU that intermittently discharges any individual batch or batches that would meet the criteria in subsection C5a, C5b or C5c of this section
when discharged, or otherwise have the potential to discharge a slug load to the POTW;
6. Any user that has a device(s) installed to remove oils, grease and sand;
7. Any food service establishments (FSE); and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 307/618
8. Any user required to eliminate or control specified pollutants from its wastewater through the development and implementation of a best
management practices (BMPs) plan.
D. Sanctions; Compliance Required: Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual or general wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter and subject the user to the sanctions set out in articles M, N and O of this chapter. Obtaining an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a user of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with
any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3G-3: PERMITS FOR EXISTING CONNECTIONS:
A. Any existing SIU, including a CIU, required to obtain an individual or general wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the
POTW prior to November 1, 2009, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within sixty (60) calendar days after said date, apply
to the pretreatment coordinator for the appropriate wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 9-3G-5 of this article, and shall not cause or
allow discharges to the POTW to continue after one hundred twenty (120) calendar days of November 1, 2009, except in accordance with a
wastewater discharge permit issued by the pretreatment coordinator.
B. Any existing non-SIU required to obtain an individual or general wastewater discharge permit shall file an application within the number of workdays
required in the notification provided by the pretreatment coordinator.
C. No user shall discharge, or cause to discharge, any wastewater from a food service establishment (FSE) directly or indirectly into the wastewater
treatment works without first obtaining an FSE wastewater discharge permit. The village will implement the FSE permit process by issuing a survey as
provided by article D of this chapter specific to an FSE. Any FSE that completes and submits a survey in the time frame required by the village will be
deemed to have complied with the permit requirements during the implementation of this program. The completed survey shall serve as the wastewater
discharge permit application for the FSE. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3G-4: PERMITS FOR NEW CONNECTIONS:
A. Any CIU proposing to begin or recommence discharging into the wastewater treatment works must obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to the
beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this individual or general wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 9-
3G-5 of this article, must be filed at least ninety (90) calendar days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
B. Any non-CIU proposing to begin or recommence discharging into the wastewater treatment works that is required to obtain an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge, or operations in the case of a zero
process discharger, in accordance with section 9-3G-5 of this article. An application for this individual or general wastewater discharge permit must be
filed at least sixty (60) calendar days prior to the date upon which any discharge or operations will begin or recommence. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3G-5: APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS:
A. Individual Wastewater Permit Applications:
1. All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit or zero process wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit
application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for completion and/or revision.
2. The pretreatment coordinator may require all users to submit, as part of an application, all or some of the following information:
a. All information required by sections 9-3D-1, 9-3D-3 and 9-3D-4 of this chapter;
b. Identifying information for the site including the names of the operator and owner and the authorized representative and additional contact
information if appropriate;
c. (1) A brief description of the nature of the activities, services, production, and plant processes carried out by the user including information
concerning each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and a general rate of production;
(2) Number and type of employees and hours of operation;
(3) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day) including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored
at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the wastewater treatment works;
d. Time and duration of discharges, with an estimate of the average daily and maximum flow;
e. Information showing the nature and concentration of the discharge in relation to applicable pretreatment standards and local limits;
f. Requests for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant regulated as a categorical pretreatment neither present nor expected to be present in the
discharge based on 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2). Representative sampling and analysis shall be required to substantiate the request;
g. (1) Site plans/floor plans that show the footprint of the building with an outline of major equipment similar to an emergency exit plan;
(2) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all building sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation, and all points of discharge;
(3) A diagram showing the location for monitoring the discharge of all wastewaters covered by the permit; and
h. Any other information and/or documentation as may be deemed necessary by the pretreatment coordinator to evaluate and process the
wastewater discharge permit application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 308/618
B. General Wastewater Permit Applications:
1. The pretreatment coordinator may require all users that are required to obtain a general wastewater discharge permit to submit an application on a
form provided by the village which is specific to the category regulated by the general wastewater discharge permit. The form may require, but is not
limited to, contact information, production processes, the types of wastes generated, and the location for monitoring all wastewaters if regulated by
the general wastewater discharge permit. If a pretreatment standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user
shall submit documentation as required by the pretreatment coordinator.
2. The pretreatment coordinator may require all food service establishments (FSE) that are required to obtain a general wastewater discharge permit to
submit an application on a form provided by the village which is specific to the FSE. The form may require, but is not limited to, contact information;
general business information; facility operation; kitchen fixtures; fats, oils and grease handling; kitchen cleanup and water usage; grease interceptor
or alternatives used; and sampling locations. The village requires the FSE to comply with a BMP, and the FSE shall submit documentation as
required by the pretreatment coordinator.
C. Categorical Monitoring Waivers:
1. Authority: The village may authorize a user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a
categorical pretreatment standard if the user has demonstrated, through sampling and other technical factors, that the pollutant is neither present nor
expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to
activities of the user. This waiver is not available to users whose concentration standards are derived from mass standards or production based
standards. This waiver is subject to the following conditions:
a. The monitoring waiver may only be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to wastewater discharged from the facility;
provided, that the wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical pretreatment standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.
b. The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer than
five (5) years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequently issued individual
wastewater discharge permit.
c. This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
2. Application Requirements:
a. In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process
wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes.
b. The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with section 9-3G-6 of this article, and include the certification statement in said
section 9-3G-6.
c. Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the USEPA approved method from 40 CFR
part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.
d. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
3. Documentation And Record Retention For CIU Monitoring Waivers: Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the pretreatment coordinator shall be
included as a condition in the user's wastewater discharge permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in
its request for the waiver shall be maintained by the pretreatment coordinator for three (3) years after expiration of the waiver. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-
2009)
9-3G-6: APPLICATION SIGNATURES AND CERTIFICATION:
A. All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and certification statements shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user and
contain the following certification statement: (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine for
knowing violations.
(Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
B. If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall
operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the user, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this
section must be submitted to the pretreatment coordinator prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. (Ord.
2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3G-7: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMITS:
The pretreatment coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information and/or documentation. Within thirty (30)
calendar days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the pretreatment coordinator will determine whether or not to issue a
wastewater discharge permit. The pretreatment coordinator may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. If the pretreatment coordinator
fails to act within ninety (90) calendar days, an application for a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed to be denied. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 309/618
ARTICLE H. WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONDITIONS
9-3H-1: DURATION OF PERMITS:
A. Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit: An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5)
years from the effective date of the permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years at the
discretion of the pretreatment coordinator. Each individual wastewater discharge permit shall indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
B. General Wastewater Discharge Permit: A general wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specific time period and may contain a specific
date upon which it will expire.
C. Significant Industrial User Identified: The village will identify in the individual or general wastewater discharge permit whether or not the user is defined
as a significant industrial user (SIU). (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3H-2: CONTENTS OF PERMITS:
A. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the pretreatment coordinator to prevent passthrough,
interference or upset, protect the quality of the water body receiving effluent from the POTW, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the wastewater treatment works.
B. Individual and general wastewater discharge permits shall contain:
1. A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit duration (for individual wastewater discharge permit only);
2. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the village in accordance with section 9-3H-5 of this
article, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
3. Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards;
4. Requirements for the development and implementation of an SPSC plan or other special conditions including best management practices necessary
to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
5. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to
be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and
6. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
C. An individual wastewater discharge permit may contain the process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to
be present in the discharge in accordance with subsection 9-3G-5C of this chapter. Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the pretreatment coordinator
shall be included as a condition of the user's permit.
D. Individual and general wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
1. A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit duration (for a general wastewater discharge permit only);
2. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
3. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to
equalize, reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater treatment works;
4. Requirements that govern, regulate and/or restrict the use of bypass of the pretreatment system conditions consistent with 40 CFR 403.17 and
section 9-3P-2 of this chapter;
5. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
6. Development and implementation of best management practices plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
7. The unit charge and/or schedule of strength fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
8. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;
9. Requirements for the zero discharge of process waste regulated by a national categorical pretreatment standard or local standard;
10. Documentation of any monitoring waiver approved by the pretreatment coordinator for categorically regulated pollutants found not to be present
and requirements to reinstitute monitoring in the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present because of changes
that occur in the user's operation;
11. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the user of responsibility for compliance with all applicable
federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
12. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the pretreatment coordinator to ensure compliance with this chapter and state and federal laws, rules,
and regulations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 310/618
E. The general permit for food service establishments (FSE) will include grease interceptor requirements with operation and maintenance requirements. All
FSE shall implement a best management practices (BMP) plan in its operation to minimize the discharge of FOG to the wastewater treatment works.
Detailed requirements for BMP plans shall be specified in the permit. This may include, but is not limited to:
1. Installation of drain screens;
2. Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil;
3. Disposal of food waste into the trash or garbage;
4. Employee training;
5. Recordkeeping requirements;
6. Notifications required; and
7. Kitchen signage.
If the FSE has a waiver for some aspect of the program, that waiver will be documented in an attachment to the permit. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3H-3: APPEALS:
The pretreatment coordinator shall provide public notice of the issuance of an individual or general wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the
user, may petition the pretreatment coordinator to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) calendar days of notice of its
issuance. The following conditions apply to wastewater discharge permit appeals:
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.
B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions to which objected, the reasons for such objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.
D. If the pretreatment coordinator fails to act within thirty (30) calendar days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be
considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
E. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
county circuit court within sixty (60) calendar days. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3H-4: MODIFICATIONS TO PERMITS:
A. Individual Wastewater Discharge Permit: The pretreatment coordinator may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for cause, including, but
not limited to, the following reasons:
1. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
2. To address substantial alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of issuance of
the individual wastewater discharge permit;
3. To address introduction of a pollutant for which a monitoring waiver had been obtained;
4. A change in the user or POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
5. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, duly authorized agents or the receiving waters;
6. Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater discharge permit;
7. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
8. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
9. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
10. To reflect a transfer of either the facility ownership or operation to either a new owner or operator as provided by section 9-3H-5 of this article.
B. General Wastewater Discharge Permit: The pretreatment coordinator may modify a general wastewater discharge permit for cause, including, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
1. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
2. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
3. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 311/618
4. To reflect a transfer of either the facility ownership or operation to either a new owner or operator as provided by section 9-3H-5 of this article. (Ord.
2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3H-5: TRANSFER OF PERMITS:
A. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be transferred, assigned, or sold to a new owner or new user in a different premises or to a new or different
operation in the same or different premises without the expressed written approval of the pretreatment coordinator. If the premises is sold or otherwise
transferred by the current permitted user to a new owner or user who will maintain the operation in the same premises, whether or not the current
permitted user will continue to operate the equipment or the equipment is leased to another user for its operation at the site of the current permitted
user, the permit held by the current permitted user and/or owner shall be reissued by the village to the new owner and/or user as a temporary
wastewater discharge permit; provided:
1. The new owner and/or user notified the village thirty (30) calendar days in advance of the transaction; and
2. The new owner and/or user confirmed to the village, within five (5) workdays of the transaction, the completion of the date of the sale or transfer or
execution of an operating contract; and
3. The new owner and/or user shall apply for a new wastewater discharge permit in accordance with this chapter within sixty (60) calendar days of the
transaction date.
B. Failure to provide the sale/transfer notification defined in subsections A1 and A2 of this section renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of said
sale and/or transfer date. It is further provided, that the temporary wastewater discharge permit shall only be effective for one hundred twenty (120)
calendar days after the date of sale or transfer. The village shall have the same remedies for violation of temporary wastewater discharge permits as it
has for violation of other wastewater discharge permits. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3H-6: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
A. The pretreatment coordinator may revoke an individual or general wastewater discharge permit for cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
1. Failure to timely notify the pretreatment coordinator of substantial changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
2. Failure to provide prior notification to the pretreatment coordinator of changed conditions pursuant to sections 9-3I-6 and 9-3I-7 of this chapter;
3. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
4. Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
5. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
6. Refusing to allow the pretreatment coordinator and/or duly authorized agents timely access to the facility premises and records;
7. Failure to meet effluent limitations;
8. Failure to pay fines;
9. Failure to pay sewer charges;
10. Failure to meet compliance schedules;
11. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
12. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business or operation ownership of a permitted facility; or
13. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
B. Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable by the pretreatment coordinator upon cessation of operations or transfer of business or operation
ownership. Any existing wastewater discharge permit issued to a particular user is void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that
user. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3H-7: REISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, in accordance with sections 9-3G-5 and 9-3G-6 of this chapter, a minimum of ninety (90) calendar days prior to the expiration
of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3H-8: REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
A. If, after January 1, 2009, another municipality, or user(s) located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the village shall enter
into an intergovernmental agreement with the contributing municipality or user(s) regarding the discharge of wastewater to the POTW.
B. The village shall request the following information from the contributing municipality or user(s) at a frequency determined by the village:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 312/618
1. A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality or user(s);
2. An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging wastewater to the POTW; and
3. Such other information and/or documentation as the pretreatment coordinator may deem necessary.
C. An intergovernmental agreement required by subsection A of this section shall contain the following conditions:
1. A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use chapter which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits which are at
least as stringent as those set forth in sections 9-3E-2 and 9-3E-5 of this chapter for the area to be served by the village. The requirement shall
specify that such chapter and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the village chapter or local limits. A requirement for a
user agreement shall include a statement to abide by the chapter of the village;
2. A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit an updated nonresidential user inventory at a frequency determined by the village;
3. A provision specifying that pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and
enforcement will be under the jurisdiction of the pretreatment coordinator;
4. A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the pretreatment coordinator with access to all information and documentation that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
5. Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
6. Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's wastewater discharge to the POTW;
7. A provision requiring that all users located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the contributing municipality shall abide by the terms and provisions
of this chapter;
8. A provision ensuring the pretreatment coordinator access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional
boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the pretreatment coordinator; and
9. A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intergovernmental agreement. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE I. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
9-3I-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
Each user of the wastewater treatment works of the village shall comply with the reporting requirements of this article and such user's wastewater
discharge permit. Some reporting requirements may apply to users that are not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-
2009)
9-3I-2: PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR NONCATEGORICAL USERS:
Should the village find that a user, not subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, does not meet pretreatment standards and/or requirements
applicable to its discharge, causes or contributes to a wastewater treatment plant interference or upset, or when analysis of wastes or observation of the
effect of such wastes on the POTW indicate that said wastes cannot be treated satisfactorily at such works and causes pass-through, or that said wastes
are injurious to the POTW, or to the treatment processes, or pollute the natural waters within the village, its service areas or the waters of the state of
Illinois, additional pretreatment and/or O&M shall be required by the village to meet pretreatment standards and requirements. Such facilities as the village
may deem necessary for pretreatment of the wastewaters shall be furnished by and at the expense of the user as a condition of the discharge of said
wastewaters into the POTW or to any natural water within the village service area.
A. Pretreatment Review: The pretreatment coordinator will require the user to initiate a pretreatment review through a telephone call, letter or certified
letter to the authorized representative of the user.
B. Pretreatment Initiation Meeting: A pretreatment initiation meeting shall be held between the pretreatment coordinator and the user to discuss the
problem and the solution to said problem. If it is determined that changes in operation and maintenance, plant modifications, and/or the installation of
pretreatment equipment shall occur to resolve noncompliance, a schedule shall be established with events and completion deadlines agreeable to both
parties to resolve the noncompliance. If appropriate, a compliance agreement defining the agreed upon schedule shall be sent from the village to the
user. The user shall sign the compliance agreement and return it to the pretreatment coordinator. If a schedule for compliance acceptable to the
pretreatment coordinator and the user cannot be established, the matter will be referred for further enforcement action consistent with the provisions of
article M of this chapter as appropriate.
C. Progress Reports: Progress reports shall be filed by the user on a schedule agreed to by the pretreatment coordinator and the user concerning the
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation). In the progress report(s), the user
shall identify whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user
to return to the established compliance schedule.
D. Final Report: A final report shall be filed with the pretreatment coordinator by the user within ninety (90) calendar days from the end of the compliance
schedule deadline to verify the success or failure of the entire schedule. The final report will, if appropriate, identify the steps being taken by the user to
resolve noncompliance. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 313/618
9-3I-3: PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USERS:
In the event that either the village, a user or the USEPA determines that the user is regulated as a categorical industrial user by standards and
requirements promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act, the following reports are required to be filed by the user
with both the village and the USEPA:
A. Baseline Monitoring Reports: Within either one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the
final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently
discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report which contains the information listed below.
At least ninety (90) calendar days prior to commencement of its discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report which contains the
information listed below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source
also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. Users described herein shall submit the information set forth
below to the pretreatment coordinator:
1. Identifying Information: The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner;
2. Environmental Permits: A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility;
3. Description Of Operation: A brief description of the nature, average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes,
and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes;
4. Flow Measurement: Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e);
5. Measurements Of Pollutants:
a. The user shall identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process;
b. The user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
categorical pretreatment standard or by the pretreatment coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both
daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. In
cases where the categorical pretreatment standard requires a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit
documentation as required by the pretreatment coordinator or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the categorical pretreatment
standard;
c. The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to complete that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
A maximum of four (4) grab samples may be required to be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic
compounds;
d. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated
process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the
flows and concentrations necessary to allow the use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance
with all pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this
adjusted limit, along with supporting data, may be submitted to the USEPA or IEPA;
e. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 9-3E-8 of this chapter and shall be analyzed in accordance with
procedures set out in section 9-3E-9 of this chapter;
f. The pretreatment coordinator may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures;
g. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis
is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the village;
6. Compliance Certification: A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative of the "categorical industrial user (CIU)" (as defined in
section 9-3A-6 of this chapter), and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the CIU to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements;
7. Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which
the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in
subsection B of this section; and
8. Signature And Report Certification: All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 9-3G-6 of this chapter.
B. Compliance Schedule Progress Reports: The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection A7 of this section:
1. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but
are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);
2. No increment referred to in subsection B1 of this section shall exceed nine (9) calendar months;
3. The user shall submit a progress report to the pretreatment coordinator no later than fourteen (14) calendar days following each date in the schedule
and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 314/618
4. In no event shall more than nine (9) calendar months elapse between such progress reports to the pretreatment coordinator; and
5. All compliance schedule progress reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 9-3G-6 of this chapter.
C. Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline: Within ninety (90) calendar days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the pretreatment coordinator a report containing the
information described in subsection A of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the
procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this
report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with section 9-3G-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3I-4: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS/SELF-MONITORING REPORTS:
A. Significant Industrial Users:
1. Significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the pretreatment coordinator but in no case less than twice per year (normally in July
and January on dates specified by the village in the wastewater discharge permit), submit a report to the village with a description of the nature,
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and daily flows for
the reporting period.
2. These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the
techniques described in 40 CFR part 136, and amendments thereto. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge and
comply with the requirements of sections 9-3E-8 and 9-3E-9 of this chapter.
3. All sampling and analysis may be performed by the village in lieu of the significant industrial user. In such cases, the village will issue an attachment
to the wastewater discharge permit that specifies the village will perform sampling and analysis semiannually at minimum. The significant industrial
user shall reimburse the village for all costs and expenses incurred for such sampling and analysis.
4. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user
must submit documentation required by the pretreatment coordinator or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of
the user.
5. Where the village itself collects all the information required for the report, the significant industrial user will not be required to submit the report.
B. Categorical Industrial Users (CIU):
1. All CIUs shall, at a frequency determined by the pretreatment coordinator but in no case less than twice per year (normally in July and January or on
other dates specified by the village in a wastewater discharge permit), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All
periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 9-3G-6 of this chapter.
2. These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the
techniques described in 40 CFR part 136, and amendments thereto. All wastewater samples must be representative of the CIU discharge and
comply with the requirements of sections 9-3E-8 and 9-3E-9 of this chapter.
3. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the village in lieu of the CIU. In such cases, the village will issue an attachment to the wastewater
discharge permit that specifies the village will perform sampling and analysis semiannually at minimum. The CIU shall reimburse the village for all
costs and expenses incurred for such sampling and analysis.
4. If a CIU subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the pretreatment coordinator,
using the procedures prescribed in sections 9-3E-8 and 9-3E-9 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
5. Where the village has imposed mass limitations on a CIU as provided by 40 CFR 403.6(c), the report required by subsection B1 of this section shall
indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by the pretreatment standards in the discharge from the CIU.
6. For a CIU subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the village in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), the
report required by subsection B1 of this section shall contain a reasonable measure of the CIU's long term production rate. For all other CIUs subject
to categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation),
the report required by subsection B1 of this section shall include the CIU's actual average production rate for the reporting period.
7. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the CIU
must submit documentation required by the pretreatment coordinator or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of
the user.
8. Upon approval of a monitoring waiver for pollutants found not to be present and revision of the CIU's permit by the pretreatment coordinator, the CIU
must certify on each periodic report with the statement in section 9-3G-6 of this chapter that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its
wastewater due to activities of the CIU with the following statement:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR
(specify applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard part(s)), I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no
increase in the level of the (list the categorically regulated pollutant(s)) in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last
periodic report.
9. In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's operations, the
CIU must immediately comply with the monitoring requirements of subsection B1 of this section or other more frequent monitoring requirements
imposed by the pretreatment coordinator, and notify the pretreatment coordinator. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 315/618
C. Nonsignificant Categorical Users:
1. Report And Certification Required: Nonsignificant categorical industrial users, as defined in subsection C of the definition of "significiant industrial
user", in section 9-3A-6 of this chapter, shall, at a frequency determined by the pretreatment coordinator but no less frequently than annually (on
dates specified by the village in a wastewater discharge permit), submit a report which contains the certification statement contained in subsection
C2 of this section. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Certification Statement:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40
CFR , I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from , to , (month, day, year):
a) The facility described as (facility name) at (address) met the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as described by
section 9-3A-6;
b) The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements during this reporting period; and
c) The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.
This compliance certification is based on the following information:
The report is required to be signed by an authorized representative of the user.
D. Other Nonsignificant Regulated Users:
1. Categorical zero process dischargers, noncategorical zero process dischargers, batch dischargers, food service establishments and any firms
regulated by individual or general wastewater discharge permit requirements including, but not limited to, best management practices shall, at a
frequency determined by the pretreatment coordinator, submit a periodic report at a frequency defined in the applicable wastewater discharge permit.
2. The reports may require sampling and analyses or some other measure to determine compliance with permit pretreatment standards and
requirements. The user must submit documentation necessary to determine the compliance status of the user as defined by the pretreatment
coordinator and identified in the wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3I-5: NONPERMITTED USER REPORTS:
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the pretreatment coordinator as required. These reports
may include, but are not limited to, surveys of business activities, water usage, wastes discharged, spill and slug loading potential, pretreatment
equipment, waste hauling and facility layout. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3I-6: CHANGES IN AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE:
Any significant industrial user that changes the authorized representative of its company shall file a change notice with the village within thirty (30)
calendar days of the effective date of the change. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3I-7: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
A. Each user must notify the pretreatment coordinator of any planned substantial changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) calendar days before the change that results in an increase or addition or planned shutdown or
deletion of products. Immediate shutdowns or deletions of products are required to be noticed within five (5) workdays of determination.
B. The pretreatment coordinator may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 9-3G-5 of this chapter.
C. The pretreatment coordinator may issue or modify an existing individual or general wastewater discharge permit under sections 9-3H-2 and 9-3H-4 of
this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
D. For purposes of this requirement, substantial changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, the addition or
deletion of a shift, the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants including changes to the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the
user has submitted initial notification under section 9-3I-10 of this article, introduction of a pollutant for which a monitoring waiver had been obtained,
the addition of a new process regardless of waste discharge or lack of discharge, shutdown of a process, or addition or deletion of a product.
E. Significant industrial users and categorical industrial users are required to notify the pretreatment coordinator of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a slug discharge. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3I-8: REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 316/618
A. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch
discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the wastewater treatment works, any user shall immediately telephone (within 15
minutes) and notify the pretreatment coordinator of the incident. If this notification cannot be made to the POTW staff during routine business hours, the
user shall notify the village police department. This notification shall include the name of the caller, location of the discharge, physical state of the
discharge, chemical composition, concentration and volume, if known, and date and time of discharge as well as duration of the discharge, and
corrective actions taken by the user. The notification shall include what federal, state and local entities have also been notified by the user.
B. The user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon reduction, loss or
failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement includes the situation
where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
C. Within five (5) workdays following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived in writing by the pretreatment coordinator, submit a detailed written
report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
D. Such notifications shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
wastewater treatment works, natural resources, or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines,
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
E. A notice/sign shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees in English and the language of
common use whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection A of this section. Employers shall ensure through documentation that all
employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3I-9: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING:
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the pretreatment coordinator within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the pretreatment coordinator within thirty
(30) calendar days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the pretreatment coordinator monitors the user's facility at
least once a month, or if the pretreatment coordinator samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.
If the village performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the user, the village will perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of
the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling and analysis. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3I-10: NOTIFICATION OF DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE:
A. Pursuant to 40 CFR 3.12(P), any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the pretreatment coordinator, the USEPA regional
waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set
forth in 40 CFR part 261, the USEPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more
than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the
extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later
than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for
each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 9-3I-7 of this article. The notification
requirement in this subsection does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the selfmonitoring
requirements of subsections 9-3I-3A and C and 9-3I-4B of this article.
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15)
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more
than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a onetime notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any
hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
C. In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the pretreatment coordinator, the USEPA regional waste management waste division director,
and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) calendar days of the effective date of such regulations.
D. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
E. This section does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit issued hereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3I-11: DUE DATES OF REPORTS:
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility
serviced by the United States postal service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. In order to meet deadlines, reports may be faxed or e-mailed on
the due date to the village. The original of the fax or e-mail is required to be mailed to the village, postmarked within one workday of the transmission.
(Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 317/618
ARTICLE J. COMPLIANCE MONITORING
9-3J-1: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
A. The pretreatment coordinator and his designee(s), duly authorized agents of the village, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the United
States environmental protection agency, hereafter referred to as "the above named entities", shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to
determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any individual or general wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder. Users shall allow the above named entities ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, analyses, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
B. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the above named entities will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
C. The above named entities shall have the right to set up on the user's property or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
D. The pretreatment coordinator may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own cost and expense. All devices used to measure wastewater
flow and quality shall be calibrated twice yearly (at 6 month intervals) to ensure their accuracy. The user shall submit these calibration reports
semiannually to the pretreatment coordinator with the periodic compliance reports required in section 9-3I-4 of this chapter.
E. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the pretreatment coordinator and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
F. Unreasonable delays in allowing the above named entities access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
G. In the event that a suitable sampling facility does not exist, pursuant to section 9-3C-6 of this chapter, the sampling facility shall be considered to be
either the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected or the point of process wastewater
discharge within the building. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3J-2: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If any of the above named entities have been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, of the user, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the above named entities may seek issuance of a search warrant from the
county circuit court. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3J-3: RECORDKEEPING:
A. Users: Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements and documentation associated with best management practices established under
section 9-3H-2 of this chapter. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the
samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such
analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of
any litigation concerning the user or the village, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the pretreatment
coordinator.
B. Village: The village will maintain documentation of any monitoring waiver issued pursuant to subsection 9-3G-5C of this chapter for a period of three (3)
years after the expiration of the waiver. The documentation will include the reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in
its request for the waiver. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE K. ACCESSIBILITY OF INFORMATION
9-3K-1: PUBLIC INFORMATION; REQUEST FOR CONFIDENTIALITY:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, individual or general wastewater discharge
permits, and monitoring programs, and the pretreatment coordinator inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the pretreatment coordinator and village attorney, that such
information is exempt from the Illinois freedom of information act, as amended. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information is exempt from the Illinois freedom of
information act, as amended, the portions of a report which are exempt from the Illinois freedom of information act shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 318/618
"effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 2009-57,
10-1-2009)
ARTICLE L. PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
9-3L-1: ANNUAL PUBLICATION:
The pretreatment coordinator may publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction
served by the POTW, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all significant industrial users and categorical industrial users (or
any other user) that violate subsection C, D or H of this section and shall mean:
A. "Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits", defined herein as those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement as defined in
article E of this chapter;
B. "Technical review criteria (TRC) violations", defined herein as those in which thirty three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by article E of this chapter multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all
other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by article E of this chapter (daily maximum, long term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the pretreatment coordinator has determined caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference, pass-through or upset including endangering the health of duly authorized agents or the general public;
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the pretreatment coordinator
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide, within forty five (45) calendar days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, that the pretreatment coordinator determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE M. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
9-3M-1: NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION (NOV):
A. Issuance And Response: When the pretreatment coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the pretreatment coordinator may serve
upon that user a written notice of violation (NOV). The user shall respond to the NOV within ten (10) workdays of the receipt of this notice or by the
deadline defined (usually within 20 workdays of issuance). The user's response shall provide an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention of future violations and shall include specific required actions. The response in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the NOV.
B. Pretreatment Review: The pretreatment coordinator may initiate a pretreatment review under section 9-3I-2 of this chapter for any violation issued under
subsection A of this section. Once the need for a pretreatment review has been identified, the pretreatment coordinator shall send the authorized
representative of the user the date that the pretreatment review meeting is scheduled, normally within thirty (30) calendar days of the determination that
a pretreatment review is required.
C. Compliance Directive: After such pretreatment review meeting, the village may issue a compliance directive stating that the user is in a "corrective
action" status. A plan for correction and compliance schedule illustrating milestones may be issued by the village to the user. The plan for correction
and compliance schedule may become part of the user's wastewater discharge permit. The user shall meet the wastewater discharge permit
pretreatment standards and requirements at all times. The plan for correction, compliance schedule and revised wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve the user of meeting the wastewater discharge permit limits or requirements of this chapter. The user shall take whatever actions are necessary
to meet the wastewater discharge permit limits and conditions.
D. Continued Sampling: The village may continue to sample the wastewater of the user and determine the user's progress towards meeting milestones as
needed to determine if the user is complying with the conditions of the plan of action, compliance schedule and/or wastewater discharge permit. In the
event the village detects and documents any violation, an NOV shall be issued to the user.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 319/618
E. Three NOVs; Notice Of Local Order Violation: An NOV shall be issued for each identified violation of the plan of action, compliance schedule, and
wastewater discharge permit conditions. When a total of three (3) NOVs has been issued for any parameter, or a report on the progress of the plan of
action or compliance schedule or a report required to be submitted by the wastewater discharge permit is more than thirty (30) days late, a notice of a
local ordinance violation shall be issued to the user. The village may prosecute the local ordinance violation in the county circuit court or the local
administrative adjudication provisions set forth in this code.
F. Conditions Satisfied: When the user has met the conditions of the plan of action, compliance schedule, and permit, the village may notify the user in
writing that the conditions have been satisfied and they are no longer under a "corrective action" status.
G. Provisions Nonlimiting: Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the pretreatment coordinator to take any action, including emergency actions or
any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3M-2: COMPLIANCE AGREEMENTS:
The pretreatment coordinator may enter into compliance agreements (i.e., "consent orders", assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance). Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user
to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative
orders issued pursuant to sections 9-3M-4 and 9-3M-5 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3M-3: SHOW CAUSE ORDER:
The pretreatment coordinator may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear for a hearing before representatives of the village and show cause
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken against the user. Notice of such hearing shall be served on the user specifying the time and
place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action to be taken, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken against the user. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten (10) workdays prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing
shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3M-4: COMPLIANCE ORDER:
When the pretreatment coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the pretreatment coordinator may issue an order to the user directing that the
user comply with this chapter, the wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement within a
specified time. If the user does not comply within the time provided, sanitary sewer service may be discontinued by the village unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address
the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
wastewater treatment works. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor
does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3M-5: CEASE AND DESIST ORDER:
A. When the pretreatment coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the pretreatment
coordinator may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
1. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge of wastewater.
B. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3M-6: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
A. The pretreatment coordinator may immediately suspend a user's discharge of wastewater, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge of wastewater which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The pretreatment coordinator may also immediately suspend a user's discharge of wastewater, after
notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to
the environment.
B. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the pretreatment coordinator may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance,
disconnection or blocking of the building sewer connection to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any
individuals. The pretreatment coordinator may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
pretreatment coordinator that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 9-3M-7 of this article are initiated
against the user.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 320/618
C. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge of wastewater presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, signed by the authorized representative of the user, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent
any future occurrence, to the pretreatment coordinator prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under section 9-3M-3 or 9-3M-7 of
this article.
D. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3M-7: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
A. In addition to the provisions in section 9-3M-6 of this article, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to termination of its wastewater
discharge:
1. Violation of one or more wastewater discharge permit conditions;
2. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
3. Failure to report substantial changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
4. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
5. Violation of one or more of the pretreatment standards in article E of this chapter.
B. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge of wastewater and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 9-3M-3
of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the pretreatment coordinator shall not be a bar to, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE N. PENALTIES AND JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
9-3N-1: FAILURE TO REPORT OR NOTIFY:
A. Sewer Extension And Connection Permits: Any user who fails to file for and obtain a sewer extension or connection permit prior to commencing
construction of said extension or connection required by this chapter shall be subject to the following late filing fees in addition to extension and/or
connection or annexation fees:
1. First notice Issuance of warning/citation
2. Second notice $250.00
3. Cost per day per PE for each additional day past the second notice deadline 100.00
B. Village Reports Or Notifications: Any user who fails to file any report or notification so required by this chapter shall be subject to the following late filing
fees:
1. First offense - less than 30 calendar days past due Issuance of warning
2. Recurring reporting violations or 30 or more calendar days past due $100.00
NOV response noncompliance 250.00
Cost per additional day past final request deadline 50.00
3. Substantial change notification:
No written notification of substantial changes whether discharged or not:
At startup or shutdown 500.00
Per each additional 15 days in excess of 30 calendar days 100.00
C. Reports Or Notifications Required By Significant Industrial User (SIU) Or Categorical Industrial User (CIU): Any SIU or CIU who fails to file any periodic
pretreatment report (semiannual), baseline monitoring report, or ninety (90) day final compliance report required by this chapter shall be subject to the
following late filing fees:
1. First offense - less than 30 calendar days past due Issuance of warning
2. Recurring reporting violations or 30 or more calendar days past due $ 250.00
NOV response noncompliance 500.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 321/618
Cost per additional day past final request deadline 100.00
3. Substantial changes:
No written notification of substantial changes whether discharged or not:
At startup or shutdown 1,000.00
Per each additional 15 days in excess of 30 calendar days 200.00
D. Ownership Notification Specific To Entities With Wastewater Discharge Permits:
1.
No written notification of change in ownership and/or operation of facility, or any portion thereof, with an individual wastewater
discharge permit
$1,000.00
2.
No written notification of change in ownership and/or operation of facility, or any portion thereof, with a general wastewater
discharge permit
500.00
(Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3N-2: RECOVERY OF COSTS INCURRED:
A. Generally: Any person or user violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who causes damage to or impairs the POTW is liable to the village for all
expenses, costs, losses and damages caused directly or indirectly by such violation. The village shall invoice the costs and expenses, including, but
not limited to, sampling and analyses associated with the investigation, costs and expenses of mitigating impact to the POTW, costs and expenses of
preparing the administrative enforcement actions such as notices and orders, investigative and/or correction actions, and review of response(s) from
the user. The village shall invoice the user for the costs and expenses incurred by the village for any and all cleaning, repair, replacement or other
investigative and/or corrective action(s) as a response to the violation. Any user that does not pay to the village all such assessed costs and expenses
shall be in violation of this chapter, enforceable under the provisions of article M of this chapter.
B. Food Service Establishments (FSE): Recovery of costs and expenses of the village also includes, but is not limited to, the following provisions specific
to FSE:
1. An FSE that operates without a grease interceptor may be required to pay an annual grease disposal mitigation fee to equitably cover the costs of
increased maintenance of the wastewater treatment works as a result of the FSE's inability to adequately remove FOG from its wastewater
discharge. This subsection shall not be interpreted to allow the new construction of, or existing FSE undergoing remodeling, to operate without an
approved grease interceptor.
2. The grease disposal mitigation fee is set forth in article S of this chapter and is based on the estimated annual increased cost of maintaining the
sewer system for inspection and removal of FOG and other viscous or solidifying agents attributable to the FSE resulting from the lack of a grease
interceptor or in the case a grease interceptor or alternate grease control device exists but has been determined to be inadequate.
3. Notwithstanding the waiver of grease interceptor installation for existing FSE established in section 9-3C-9 of this chapter, an FSE found to have
contributed to a sewer blockage, sewer system overflows (SSO) or any public sewer interferences resulting from the discharge of wastewater or
waste containing FOG shall be subject to costs and expenses incurred by the village as established in article S of this chapter. SSO cause threats
and injuries to public health, safety, and welfare and of life and property and are hereby declared public nuisances. Building sewer failures and SSO
caused by FSE alone or collectively are the responsibility of the private property owner or FSE and individual(s) as a responsible officer or owner of
the FSE. If the village must act immediately to contain and clean up an SSO caused by blockage of a building sewer or public sewer, or at the
request of the property owner or operator of the FSE, or because of the failure of the property owner or FSE to abate the condition causing
immediate threat of injury to the health, safety, welfare, or property of the public, the village costs and expenses of such abatement shall be entirely
borne by the property owner or operator of the FSE and the individual(s) as a responsible officer or owner of the FSE(s) and shall constitute a debt to
the village and become due and payable upon the village's request for reimbursement of such costs and expenses. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3N-3: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the pretreatment coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the village attorney may petition the county circuit court for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The pretreatment coordinator may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal
and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3N-4: CIVIL PENALTIES:
A. A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to the village for a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long term average discharge limit, penalties
shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
B. The pretreatment coordinator may recover costs, including, but not limited to, filing fees, witness fees, attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses
associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 322/618
C. In determining the amount of fines and/or civil liability, the court or judicial administrator shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but
not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's
violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
D. Issuing a notice of local chapter violation or the filing of a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a user. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3N-5: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided in this chapter are not exclusive. The pretreatment coordinator may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the village enforcement response plan. However, the
pretreatment coordinator may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the pretreatment coordinator is empowered to
take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE O. SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
9-3O-1: PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIRED:
The pretreatment coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual or general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply
with any provision of this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the village, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the
pretreatment coordinator to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3O-2: LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED:
The pretreatment coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual or general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply
with any provision of this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the
wastewater treatment works caused by the user's discharge of wastewater. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3O-3: FAILURE TO PAY OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES:
The pretreatment coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual or general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to pay any
outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3O-4: WATER SUPPLY DISCONTINUANCE:
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Water service will recommence, at the user's expense,
only after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to correct the violation(s) giving rise to the termination of the service and the ability to comply
with the terms and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3O-5: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
A violation of any provision of this chapter, an individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the pretreatment coordinator. Any person(s)
creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the village for any costs incurred in
removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE P. UPSETS AND BYPASSES
9-3P-1: UPSETS:
A. Definition: For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless
or improper operation.
B. Affirmative Defense: An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
the requirements of subsection C of this section are met.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 323/618
C. Evidence: A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence, that:
1. An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
2. The facility was, at the time being operated, in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
3. The user has submitted the following information to the pretreatment coordinator within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written report must be provided within 5 workdays):
a. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue;
and
c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. Burden Of Proof: In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Judicial Determination: Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
F. Production Control Required: Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or
fails. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3P-2: BYPASSES:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of wastewater from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. Bypasses Permitted: A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance of the user's pretreatment facility to assure efficient operation. Such bypass is not subject to the provisions of
subsections C and D of this section.
C. Notice Of Bypass:
1. Anticipated: If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the pretreatment coordinator at least ten (10)
workdays before the date of the bypass.
2. Unanticipated: A user shall submit oral notice to the pretreatment coordinator of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within twenty four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5)
workdays of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and
steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The pretreatment coordinator may waive the written report on a
case by case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty four (24) hours.
D. Village Actions:
1. Bypass is prohibited, and the pretreatment coordinator may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
a. The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance
during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive
maintenance; and
c. The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this section.
2. The pretreatment coordinator may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the pretreatment coordinator determines
that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection D1 of this section. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE Q. MISCELLANEOUS FEES
9-3Q-1: PRETREATMENT PROGRAM FUNDING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 324/618
A. Fees Established: It is the intent of the Village to pass all general costs of the Pretreatment Program to users. The fees, which shall apply to those users
subject to the Pretreatment Program, are based on water usage.
1. The charges that shall apply to those users subject to the Pretreatment Program are based on classification and are established in article S of this
chapter; or
2. The following charges shall apply to those users that are subject to the Pretreatment Program with discharge permits and that discharge to the
Village's wastewater system:
Monthly Water Usage
(Gallons) Monthly Charge
0.1 to 1,000 $200.00
1,001 to infinity Additional $2.01/1,000 gallons reserved
3. In lieu of the water surcharge set forth in subsection A2 of this section, any user subject to the Pretreatment Program with a discharge permit and
which has zero (0) discharge shall pay an annual charge of two hundred dollars ($200.00).
4. In addition to the charges set forth in subsection A2 of this section, a permit fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) shall be assessed
to any user subject to the Pretreatment Program and subsection A2 of this section.
5. In addition to the charge set forth in subsection A3 of this section, a permit fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be assessed to any user
subject to the Pretreatment Program with a discharge permit and which has zero (0) discharge. (Ord. 2017-38, 6-22-2017)
B. Billing And Payment: Billing shall be based on the billing cycle for water and sewer usage and shall be added to the water and sewer bill. The rates or
charges for pretreatment service shall be payable monthly. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, and the user of the service shall be jointly
and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the Village only upon the condition that the
owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the Village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011
Code)
9-3Q-2: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
The Village may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the Village Pretreatment Program unique to a specific user
set forth in article S of this chapter which may include:
A. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring
reports submitted by users.
B. Fees for reviewing plans or construction relating to spill prevention/slug load plans as defined in section 9-3F-4 of this chapter.
C. Fees for responding to a report of potential problems as defined in section 9-3I-8 of this chapter.
D. Fees for filing appeals.
E. Fees to recover administrative and legal costs (not included in article O of this chapter) associated with the enforcement activity taken by the
pretreatment coordinator to address user noncompliance.
F. Other fees as the Village may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the Village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3Q-3: OTHER COSTS:
A. In addition to remedies available to the Village set forth elsewhere in this chapter, if the Village is fined by the State or the USEPA for violation of its
NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as the result of discharge of pollutants by a user or group of users, then the fine, including all
legal, sampling, and analytical testing costs and any other related costs incurred by the Village shall be charged to the responsible user or group of
users. Such charges shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies the Village may have under this chapter, statutes, regulations at law
or in equity.
B. If the discharge from any user causes a deposit, obstruction or damage to any portion of the POTW, the pretreatment coordinator shall cause the
deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including materials, labor and
supervision, shall be borne by the person or nonresidential user causing such deposit, obstruction, or damage. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE R. USER AND SURCHARGE INDUSTRIAL WASTE COST RECOVERY
9-3R-1: USER AND SURCHARGE RATES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 325/618
There has heretofore been and continues to be a minimum charge and basic user rate for the use and service supplied by the wastewater works of the
village. Such rate shall apply as established and scheduled from time to time by the corporate authorities of the village. The user rate is set forth in article
S of this chapter. The village may issue default rates for defined classes of users. For users that cannot be defined in a default class, the strength rate is
based on the following three (3) components: flow discharged, billable BOD, and total suspended solids. The billable BOD will be calculated in the same
manner as defined in subsection 9-3C-4C1a of this chapter. The strength rate is set forth in article S of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3R-2: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to the village
system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance
with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state grant or loan. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3R-3: RESPONSIBILITIES OF VILLAGE CLERK AND VILLAGE TREASURER:
A. Clerk: The village clerk shall maintain the necessary records for determination of the user share of the cost and shall provide the billing and collection
services as required by section 9-3R-1 of this article and article S of this chapter.
B. Treasurer: The village treasurer shall be responsible for the investment and expenditure of all monies collected for industrial cost recovery in
accordance with article S of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
ARTICLE S. CONNECTION FEES, SERVICE CHARGES AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE
COST RECOVERY
9-3S-1: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions provided in section 9-3A-6 of this chapter are incorporated into this article by reference. Additional defined terms to this article are as follows:
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
Administrator: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Federal Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of Amendments
of 1972 (Pub.L. 92-500 and Pub.L. 93-243).
Federal Grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided by title II, "Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works", of the Act and implementing regulations.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
Approving Authority: The Director of Public Works.
Article: This article.
Director Of Finance: The Village of Glendale Heights Director of Finance and designee.
Village: The Village of Glendale Heights.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
Director: The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
State Act: The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
State Grant: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act
and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.
TYPES OF CHARGES:
Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all residential and nonresidential users of the public sewer system.
Capital Infrastructure Fee: The amount to be assessed each billing period for water and sewer capital infrastructure improvements required in the
Village.
Replacement: Expenditures of obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
wastewater treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation
and maintenance" includes replacement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 326/618
Sewer Debt Service Charge: The amount to be assessed each billing period for payment of interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.)
outstanding and shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of residential and nonresidential users connected to the
wastewater treatment works.
Surcharge: An amount charged in addition to the basic user charge and sewer debt service charge which is levied on a residential or nonresidential
user whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established in subsection 9-3S-7-2B of this article.
Useful Life: The estimated period during which the wastewater treatment works will be operated and shall be thirty (30) years from the date of startup
of any wastewater treatment works constructed with a State grant.
User Charge: A charge assessed on all residential and nonresidential users of wastewater treatment works for the cost of operation and
maintenance.
Wastewater Service Charge: The charge assessed every month on all residential users and nonresidential users of the wastewater treatment works.
The service charge shall be computed as outlined in section 9-3S-7 of this article and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge, the sewer
debt service charge, the capital infrastructure fee, and a surcharge, if applicable.
Waterworks And Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of the wastewater treatment works.
(Ord. 2019-27, 4-18-2019)
9-3S-2: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL:
It is hereby made the duty of the Finance Director to invoice all charges connected with sewer extensions, building connections, Pretreatment Program
fees, Food Service Establishment Program, wastewater connection, and sewer user service charges and for all rates and charges in connection therewith
and to collect all monies due thereon. (Ord. 2019-27, 4-18-2019)
9-3S-3: SEWER EXTENSION AND CONNECTION CONSTRUCTION FEES:
A. Extensions Of Sewers: Pursuant to article B of this chapter, the following fees shall be assessed for sewer extension installation:
1. Concrete plug and installation: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
2. Mechanical plug and installation: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
3. Additional project review: Time and materials plus processing expense.
4. Additional inspection: Two hundred dollars ($200.00).
B. Sewer Connections: Pursuant to article C of this chapter, the following fees are provided for sewer connections:
1. Additional inspection fee: Two hundred dollars ($200.00).
2. Shutdown fee: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
3. Properties outside the corporate limits: Two (2) times the applicable connection fee in section 9-3S-6 of this article.
4. Inspection fee for garbage grinders: Two hundred dollars ($200.00).
5. Inspection fee for grease, oil and sand interceptors: Two hundred dollars ($200.00).
6. Inspection fee for neutralization basins: Two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3S-4: PRETREATMENT PROGRAM FEES:
Pursuant to article Q of this chapter, the following fees are provided for the operation and maintenance of the pretreatment program:
A. Program fees: Time and material plus processing costs and expenses.
B. Lab fees: Cost plus processing costs and expenses.
C. Cost recovery, per hour: Time and material plus processing costs and expenses. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3S-5: FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT FEES:
Pursuant to section 9-3C-9 of this chapter, the following fees are provided for the operation and maintenance of the food service establishment program.
Time and material, plus processing costs and expenses, shall be assessed for the following program elements:
A. Inspection fee for grease interceptors at a food service establishment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 327/618
B. Food service establishment waiver review fee.
C. Grease disposal mitigation fee. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3S-6: WASTEWATER CONNECTION FEES:
A. Established: The charges for the privilege of connecting to the public sewer system of the village, which system is designed and located as to receive
any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution, shall be as follows:
1. Residential:
Single-family (includes townhome units) $1,500.00 each
Multiple-family:
First 2 units 3,000.00
Next 8 units 1,450.00 each
Over 10 1,350.00 each
(Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Nonresidential (Commercial; Industrial; Institutional): Based on the water meter size required to serve the total number of plumbing fixtures installed
in the entire building, as calculated according to table A.4.1b, BOCA basic plumbing code, whether the entire building is served by one meter or
tenant spaces are metered separately:
1" or less meter size $ 2,000.00
11/2" meter size 3,000.00
2" meter size 4,400.00
3" meter size 7,200.00
4" meter size 12,400.00
6" meter size 26,000.00
8" meter size 37,750.00
10" meter size 44,000.00
12" meter size 63,000.00
Plus, for each fixture:
Up to 5 135.00
6 through 10 110.00
11 and over 85.00
3. Additional Fixtures: Any additional number of plumbing fixtures installed after completion of the approved structure shall be subject to connection
charges at the following rates:
a. Residential:
In excess of a total of 10, per dwelling unit: $67.50
b. Nonresidential (commercial; industrial; institutional):
In excess of the total approved at construction: $100.00
B. Strength Connection Fee: A strength connection fee shall be calculated and charged when positive based on the difference between the charge
calculated in subsection A of this section and a PE connection fee as provided by subsection 9-3C-4C of this chapter. The PE connection fee cost will
be calculated at a rate of three hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00) per PE. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
C. Review Of And Increase To Nonresidential Users: Nonresidential user flows and loadings will be reviewed on an intermittent frequency to identify
increases to the baseline PE. The Director of Public Works may bill the nonresidential user for increases to the baseline PE. The cost per PE shall be
three hundred seventy five dollars ($375.00) per PE. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
9-3S-7: SEWER USER SERVICE CHARGES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 328/618
9-3S-7-1: BASIS FOR SEWER USER SERVICE CHARGE:
There shall be and there are hereby established sewer charges for the use of and for the service supplied by the wastewater treatment works of the
Village. These charges shall consist of a sewer volume service charge, a sewer debt service charge and a capital infrastructure fee. These charges and
fee are established for operations and maintenance and infrastructure improvements. A portion of the debt service is attributable to and includes a
customer service charge for costs associated with billing central administration and other non-volume related costs. Debt service is also attributable to
infiltration/inflow (excess flow) and future plant capacity. A capital infrastructure fee is established and attributable to a 10 Capital Improvement Plan.
Applicable surcharges are established as well for sewer use.
A. Sewer Volume Service Charge:
1. The sewer volume service charge shall be based on the water usage as recorded by approved water meters and/or sewage meters for wastewater
having normal concentrations of two hundred four milligrams per liter (204 mg/l) of BOD and two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/l) of
suspended solids.
2. Metered usage shall be read to the lowest even increment of one thousand (1,000) gallons.
3. Any residential or nonresidential users who obtain any portion of their water service from other than public water supply sources shall install and
maintain, at no expense to the Village, water meters of a type approved by the Director of Public Works for the purpose of metering the water usage
obtained from such other sources.
4. Wherever required by the Director of Public Works, sanitary sewage metering devices shall be installed and maintained, at no expense to the
Village, when the volume of wastewater discharged to the public sewer cannot be otherwise determined by use of water meters.
5. Metering devices shall not be removed without the consent of the Director of Public Works unless sanitary sewer use service is terminated.
6. The sewer volume service charge shall be determined by the amount of revenue funds required to operate and maintain the Village wastewater
treatment works, to provide funds for the replacement of component parts of said wastewater treatment works, and to provide for a portion of the
debt service for each fiscal year.
B. Sewer Debt Service Charge: The sewer debt service charge shall be determined as a part of the total amount of revenue funds required for the principal
and interest payments due for all outstanding debt authorized and issued by the Village for financing improvements to the wastewater treatment works
including any required debt reserve funds.
C. Customer Service Charge: The customer service charge shall be determined by the amount of revenue funds required for administration, billing and
other fund needs that would not be allocated to a volume related parameter. The customer service charge shall be included as a portion of the sewer
debt service charge billed to the customer.
D. Capital Infrastructure Fee: The capital infrastructure fee shall be determined as a part of the total amount of revenue funds required for water and sewer
capital infrastructure improvements required in the Village. (Ord. 2017-42, 6-22-2017)
9-3S-7-2: CHARGES ESTABLISHED:
A. Users Within Corporate Limits:
1. Metered Users: The sewer user charges to be paid monthly by all metered sewer residential and nonresidential users within the Village corporate
limits shall be:
a. Residential, effective May 1, 2010:
Sewer volume service charge $3.75 per 1,000 gallons of water usage
Sewer debt service charge $7.50 per month for each separate dwelling unit
b. Nonresidential (commercial and institutional), effective January 1, 2010:
Sewer volume service charge $3.75 per 1,000 gallons of water usage
Sewer debt service charge $11.25 per month for each separate dwelling unit
c. Nonresidential (industrial users), effective January 1, 2010:
Sewer volume service charge $3.75 per 1,000 gallons of water usage
Sewer debt service charge $22.00 per month for each separate dwelling unit
2. Nonmetered Users:
a. Effective May 1, 2010, the sewer user service charges to be paid monthly by all nonmetered residential and nonresidential sewer users with a
maximum wastewater discharge of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) gallons monthly within the Village corporate limits shall be:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 329/618
Sewer volume service charge $5.63 per 1,000 gallons of water usage
$42.23 per 7,500 gallons flat fee
Sewer debt service charge $7.50 per month for each separate unit
(Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 6-22-2017)
b. Whenever the Director of Public Works determines that a nonmetered residential or nonresidential sewer user is discharging more than fifteen
thousand (15,000) gallons monthly, the Director may require such nonmetered sewer user to install metering devices on the building water supply
or building sewer to measure the volume of wastewater discharged to the public sewer. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15,
3-20-2014)
B. Treatment Service Surcharge: A treatment service surcharge shall be assessed to all nonresidential users whose wastewater exceeds the normal
concentrations of two hundred four milligrams per liter (204 mg/l) of BOD and two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/l) of suspended solids as
determined by waste sampling which shall be performed as often as deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works and shall be binding as the
basis for computing the surcharge. The Director of Public Works may determine subclasses of users for which group monitoring shall be performed to
establish a group default in lieu of individual site monitoring. The surcharge rate shall be two dollars one cent ($2.01) per one thousand (1,000) gallons
of flow treated. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2012-60, 9-6-2012; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
C. Users Outside Corporate Limits: The sewer user service charges for all users outside the corporate limits of the Village shall have a fifty percent (50%)
surcharge added to the sewer debt service charge established in subsection A1 of this section, except for intergovernmental sewer service
agreements. Additionally, the sewer user service charges for all users outside the corporate limits of the Village shall have a fifty percent (50%)
surcharge added to the capital infrastructure fee established in subsection D of this section. The sewer user charges to be paid monthly by all sewer
residential and nonresidential users outside the corporate limits of the Village shall be: (Ord. 2016-03, 1-28-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 6-22-2017)
1. Residential and nonresidential (commercial, institutional and industrial) metered public sewer users, effective January 1, 2010:
Sewer volume service charge $ 5.62 per 1,000 gallons of water usage
Sewer debt service charge:
Residential 11.25 per month for each separate unit
Commercial 16.88 per month for each separate unit
Institutional 16.88 per month for each separate unit
Industrial 33.00 per month for each separate unit
2. Residential and nonresidential (commercial, institutional and industrial) unmetered public sewer users:
a. Unmetered residential and nonresidential public sewer users shall be billed a flat fee amount based upon the following average gallons of water
used per month:
Residential 7,500 gallons
Commercial 27,000 gallons
Institutional 26,000 gallons
Industrial 37,000 gallons
b. Effective January 1, 2010:
Sewer volume service charge:
Residential $ 42.15 flat fee
Commercial 151.74 flat fee
Institutional 146.12 flat fee
Industrial 207.94 flat fee
Sewer debt service charge:
Residential 11.25 per month for each separate unit
Commercial 16.88 per month for each separate unit
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 330/618
Institutional 16.88 per month for each separate unit
Industrial 33.00 per month for each separate unit
(Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2017-42, 6-22-2017)
D. Capital Infrastructure Fee: A monthly capital infrastructure fee shall be imposed on all residential and nonresidential users, whether metered or
unmetered, as follows: (Ord. 2016-03, 1-28-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 6-22-2017)
Residential and institutional: One dollar fifty cents ($1.50) per month beginning February 1, 2016.
Industrial and commercial: Three dollars ($3.00) per month beginning February 1, 2016. (Ord. 2016-03, 1-28-2016)
9-3S-7-3: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES; ANNUAL INCREASE:
The rates and service charges established for user charges in subsections 9-3S-7-2A1, A2a, C and D of this article shall be effective as indicated in each
respective subsection. Effective May 1, 2011, the amount charged for the sewer volume service charge to all users of and for the service supplied by the
wastewater treatment works of the Village shall increase annually at a three percent (3%) compounded rate. (Ord. 2016-03, 1-28-2016; amd. Ord. 2017-
42, 6-22-2017)
9-3S-7-4: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENTS:
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the residential or nonresidential user of sewer service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for
the service on such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the Village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant
and residential or nonresidential user of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the Village. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3S-7-5: RENDITION OF BILLS; PAYMENT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Bills Rendered: All bills for sewer service shall be rendered within ten (10) calendar days following the completion of the period for which the service is
billed.
B. Payment Required: Rates or charges for sewer service shall be payable upon the date when the bill therefor is rendered by being placed in the U.S.
mail and properly stamped and addressed to the customer or other person responsible for payment for such sewer service.
C. Late Payment Penalties:
1. A monthly charge for sewer service which is not paid by the close of business on the twentieth day after the date of the bill, as rendered, will have a
penalty of ten percent (10%) of the outstanding balance added thereto.
2. If a monthly charge for sewer service is not paid within thirty five (35) calendar days after the rendition of the bill, an additional penalty of ten dollars
($10.00) will be added thereto.
3. After thirty five (35) calendar days, all unpaid monthly charges shall incur a penalty of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month.
D. Method Of Payment For Final Sewer Bill: When the Finance Director issues a final sewer bill to close a customer's account, the customer must pay said
final sewer bill with cash, certified check, cashier's check, Illinois attorney's check or a title company check, or a credit card. (Ord. 2019-27, 4-18-2019)
9-3S-7-6: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS; DISCONTINUANCE AND REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE:
A. Determination Of Delinquency; Lien: In the event a monthly charge for sewer service is not paid within thirty five (35) calendar days after rendition of the
bill for monthly service, such charge shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquency shall constitute a lien
upon the real estate for which such service is supplied, and the Village Clerk is hereby authorized to file a sworn statement showing such delinquency
in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds, and the filing of such a statement in such office shall be deemed notice for the payment of such monthly
charge for such monthly period.
B. Notices Of Delinquency And Discontinuance Of Service: After a monthly charge becomes delinquent for more than thirty five (35) calendar days, a
notice of delinquency shall be mailed to the customer notifying him/her that the delinquency exists and that payment must be made within ten (10)
calendar days. In the event full payment is not made by the date set forth in the notice of delinquency, the Finance Director or his/her designee shall
cause a written notice of discontinuance of sewer service to be served, either by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the
owner, occupant or sewer service user. This notice shall contain the following:
1. The balance due including any late payment charges;
2. The number of days the account is in arrears;
3. The date by which payment or other action must be made to avoid discontinuance and that discontinuance shall not be less than seven (7) business
days after service of the notice of discontinuance;
4. The name, address and phone number of the Finance Director to contact for a hearing on the discontinuance of sewer service;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 331/618
5. That the customer has seven (7) business days from the date the notice of discontinuance was mailed or personally served to request a hearing to
contest sewer service discontinuance; and
6. That there will be a standard charge of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for resumption of sewer service.
C. Discontinuance Of Service:
1. If no request for a hearing is made as herein provided, sewer service may thereafter be discontinued. No service shall be discontinued on a holiday
or weekend. If a hearing is requested, sewer service shall be continued pending the outcome of the hearing. The hearing shall be convened within
seven (7) business days of the date the request for hearing is received by the Finance Director.
2. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent discontinuance of sewer service for reasons of safety, health, or cooperation with other civil
authorities.
D. Hearings: The Finance Director shall hear all matters relating to disputes or complaints regarding sewer billing. The Finance Director shall consider the
complainant's allegations and shall explain the user's account and the contention of the Village in connection therewith. The Finance Director shall be
authorized to act on behalf of the Village in resolving the complaint and shall have authority to order that sewer service be discontinued. The Finance
Director shall be available during all business hours for hearing complaints. In the event he or she is not available during business hours, the Finance
Director may designate another person to conduct the hearing.
E. Reinstatement Of Service: Once sewer service is disconnected, it shall not be reinstated until all arrearages, together with any late payment penalties,
have been paid or unless otherwise approved by the Finance Director. In addition, a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fee shall be paid prior to the
resumption of sewer service to cover the cost of plugging and unplugging the sewer. If sewer service is reinstated during nonbusiness hours or on a
weekend, an additional five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be paid. (Ord. 2019-27, 4-18-2019)
9-3S-7-7: DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
A. All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the wastewater treatment works shall be held by the Village separate and apart from private
funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the Village and all of such sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the Director
of Finance not more than five (5) business days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by
the Village President and Board of Trustees. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
B. The Director of Finance shall receive all revenues from the sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as
the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the "Waterworks and Sewerage Fund of the Village" and the
Finance Director shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by the provisions of division 139 of article 11 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, and all laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
9-3S-7-8: RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS; AUDIT:
A. The Director of Finance shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals, he shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system. In addition to the customary operating
statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to
indicate that sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be recovered under the industrial cost
recovery system do in fact meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following:
1. Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal year.
2. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
3. Sewer debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. Ord. 2017-42, 6-22-2017)
4. Number of users connected to the system.
5. Number of nonmetered users.
6. A list of permitted users discharging nonresidential wastes and volume of waste discharged. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
B. An audit of the Sewer and Water Division's financial standing shall be made annually. This audit will be used to review the adequacy of the then existing
rates, and said rates shall be adjusted if necessary to provide sufficient revenues to adequately finance the operation in accordance with the original
intent of the rate structure. The annual audit and review shall also be used to ensure that each recipient of sewage service (or user class) is charged in
proportion to the cost of providing said recipient (or user class) with sewage service. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
9-3S-7-9: NOTICE OF CHARGES:
Each residential and nonresidential user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges
which are attributable to wastewater treatment works. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3S-8: INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY:
Reserved. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 332/618
9-3S-9: COLLECTION BY OUTSIDE AGENCIES; FEE:
A. Collection Agency: In addition to any other method of collection as herein provided or as provided by law, the Village may turn delinquent users over to
collection agencies. Any residential or nonresidential user being turned over to such an agency for collection shall first be sent a notice of the Village's
intent to do so. Any outstanding water invoices will also be added to the sewer user charges being turned over to the collection agency.
B. Turnover Fee: The Village may impose a collection agent turnover fee on any customer so turned over to such an agency. If so, the notice must state to
the customer the amount of such fee, which will include the cost of the turnover plus processing expenses. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3S-10: LIEN PROVISIONS:
A. Whenever a bill for a sewer service totaling five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more remains unpaid for ninety (90) calendar days for monthly service
after it has been issued, the Village Clerk shall file, with the County Recorder of Deeds, a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the Village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges
subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
B. If the residential or nonresidential user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the Village Clerk has notice of this condition, a notice
shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if known to the Clerk, whenever such bill remains unpaid for one hundred five (105) calendar days after it
has been issued. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
C. The failure of the Village Clerk to record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
9-3S-11: NOTICE OF CHARGES:
A copy of this article, properly certified by the Finance Director, shall be published in pamphlet form by authority of the Corporate Authorities of the Village
and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the wastewater treatment works of the Village on their properties. (Ord. 2009-57,
10-1-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
9-3S-12: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representatives shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the
Village which are applicable to the Village system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and
transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions of any State grant. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-1-2009)
9-3S-13: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; PERMIT REVOCATION:
Any person found to be violating any provisions of this article shall be served by the Village with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations. The Village may revoke any permit for sewage treatment as a result of any violation of any provision of this article. (Ord. 2009-57, 10-
1-2009)
Title 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES
10-1-1: INELIGIBILITY FOR PERMITS:
Notwithstanding any provisions contained herein and in the international building code in effect to the contrary, no permit required by the provisions of this
chapter shall be issued to any individual, partnership, corporation, land trustee or other business entity if the individual, partnership, corporation, land
trustee or other business or any partner, shareholder, beneficiary or member is financially indebted to the village. (Ord. 2002-19, 4-4-2002)
10-1-2: GENERAL PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCEDURES:
The general procedures for the issuance of building, framing, occupancy and temporary occupancy permits shall be as provided in this chapter. (1978
Code § 4-1-11)
10-1-3: BUILDING PERMITS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 333/618
A. Required Information: No building permit shall be issued and no construction work, including the pouring of foundations, shall take place unless each of
the following items has been submitted to the director of community development along with a completed application:
1. A copy of the recorded plat of subdivision and a plat of survey of the individual lot, prepared by a registered land surveyor of the state of Illinois,
showing to scale the size and approximate location of all existing structures and of the proposed structure, including top of foundation and
overhanging eaves, and distance to property lines; established street grades; and proposed top of foundation elevations. For other than one- and
two-family dwellings, the location and dimension of off street parking facilities shall be shown unless a previously approved site plan is on file with the
director of community development. For multiple permit applications in the same subdivision, this document need only be submitted once. (1978
Code § 4-1-11; amd. 2011 Code)
2. a. A copy of the proposed lot grading plan, shown on the above plat of survey or on a separate plan, indicating the finished lot elevations at all lot
corners and at the building line as a minimum, and at other critical points as may be necessary to detail the proper means of lot drainage. The
proposed lot grading plan shall be referenced to a suitable USGS datum bench mark located at a distance no greater than three hundred feet (300')
from the proposed building.
b. When a lot is part of a larger subdivision for which an overall grading plan has previously been submitted and approved, the individual lot grading
plan shall be shown in conformance with said plan unless modifications to the plan are or have been approved. The proposed lot grading plan or
modifications thereto shall be subject to review and approval by the village engineer.
c. When a lot on which a building permit is being requested is not part of a subdivision with an approved overall grading plan, the lot grading plan
submitted shall show, in addition to the aforementioned details: 1) the existing topographical data on a one foot (1') contour interval extending at
least fifty feet (50') beyond the property lines; 2) all top of foundation elevations on adjacent structures; and 3) existing sewer and water main
facilities and existing or proposed service lines to the property. The proposed lot grading shall first be subject to review and approval by the village
engineer.
3. A statement from a reputable soils testing firm indicating the bearing strength of the soil strata at foundation or footing grade. (1978 Code § 4-1-11)
4. a. For one- or two-family dwellings, a total of four (4) copies; and for other types of buildings, a total of six (6) copies, of a complete set of plans,
drawn to scale, with dimensions to show architectural and engineering details; and the plumbing, electrical, mechanical and, if required, fire
suppression systems. (Ord. 98-20, 3-5-1998; amd. 2011 Code)
b. All plans for the construction, remodeling, or repairing of any building, the total cost of which exceeds ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be
prepared under the supervision and bear the seal of a registered architect and/or registered engineer of the state of Illinois, except any
construction which does not involve the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load
bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements; nor addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil,
waste, vent or similar piping, electrical wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety. (Ord. 98-20, 3-5-1998)
5. A statement verifying that all contractors performing work on the proposed building are or will be licensed and bonded with the village. (1978 Code
§ 4-1-11)
6. If the proposed project involves construction activities other than required for the maintenance or repair of existing structures, a completed agency
action report on a form promulgated by the Illinois department of natural resources, which shall contain, but not be limited to, the following:
a. Name and address of the village of Glendale Heights;
b. The name of the director of community development; (1978 Code § 4-1-11; amd. 2011 Code)
c. The precise location of the proposed project in sufficient detail to determine the presence or absence of an endangered species;
d. A brief description of the proposed project; and
e. The starting and ending dates of the proposed project. (1978 Code § 4-1-11)
B. Review Of Application; Agency Action Report: After review of the application and the supporting documents in subsection A of this section, the director
of community development shall make a determination that: 1) there has been compliance with the provisions of title 12, chapter 1 of this code
including the posting of a performance bond, cash, or escrow account with the village clerk; 2) that the proposed foundation location is consistent with
the platting and zoning requirements for front yard and side yard setbacks; 3) that the proposed individual lot grading plan is in conformance with the
overall subdivision grading plan or bears the approval of the village engineer; 4) that the solid data submitted indicates compliance with applicable
village codes; 5) that the architectural or engineering plans submitted are in full compliance with all village codes and, where necessary, bear an
approved statement from the affected fire protection district; 6) that an all weather roadway or satisfactory access roadway has been constructed to
within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the building site to facilitate building inspection; 7) that all appropriate building permit fees, subdivision inspection
fees, sanitary sewer and water main tap-on fees, recapture or special assessment fees (where applicable), and contractor licensing fees have been
paid in full; and 8) that all other provisions of this section have been met and the application is complete.
C. Construction Process: If the proposed project involves construction activities other than required for the maintenance or repair of existing structures, the
director of community development shall forward the completed agency action report to initiate a consultation process. Action on the building permit
application shall not commence until completion of the consultation process.
D. Endangered Species:
1. Situation Addressed: The Illinois department of natural resources shall review the report of action and determine whether a valid record of
occurrence for all endangered species exists within the vicinity of the proposed project. The village will receive one of two (2) responses from the
department following submission of the report of action:
a. Upon receipt from the Illinois department of natural resources of notification that no known endangered species are known to be present and of
termination of the consultation process, action on the application shall commence.
b. Upon receipt from the Illinois department of natural resources of notification that an endangered species is identified within the vicinity of the
project, the applicant will be sent a letter explaining the continuation of the consultation process and a detailed action report. (1978 Code § 4-1-11;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 334/618
amd. 2011 Code)
2. Detailed Action Report:
a. The applicant shall complete the detailed action report and submit it to the village. Sufficient information must be provided about the proposed
project to determine the potential indirect, direct and cumulative adverse impacts to the endangered species present or its essential habitat. The
detailed action report shall include, but is not limited to, the following components:
(1) Name and address of the village of Glendale Heights; (1978 Code § 4-1-11)
(2) The name of the director of community development; (1978 Code § 4-1-11; amd. 2011 Code)
(3) A detailed map indicating the precise location of the proposed project;
(4) A detailed description of the proposed project including any direct or indirect alteration or destruction of the vegetation, change anticipated to
air or water quality, alteration of the topography, or any other detail that might jeopardize the listed species or its essential habitat;
(5) Starting and ending dates of the proposed project; and
(6) Discussion of alternatives which were considered.
b. Upon completing the portion of the detailed action report involving the proposed project, the applicant shall provide background information on the
endangered species present. The direct and indirect effects of the proposed project on the endangered species and its essential habitat including
cumulative effects shall be analyzed by the applicant. (1978 Code § 4-1-11)
3. Biological Opinions: Upon completion, the village shall submit the detailed action report to the Illinois department of natural resources for the
formulation of a biological opinion as to whether the proposed project, taken with its cumulative effects, will jeopardize the endangered species
present or have an adverse impact on its essential habitat. The biological opinion shall result in one of the following conclusions: (1978 Code § 4-1-
11; amd. 2011 Code)
a. The project may promote the conservation of an endangered species or its essential habitat, in which case, the consultation process is terminated;
b. The project is not likely to jeopardize an endangered species or its essential habitat, in which case, the consultation process is terminated; or
c. The proposed project is likely to jeopardize an endangered species or its essential habitat, in which case, the consultation process shall continue.
(1978 Code § 4-1-11)
4. Alternatives To Adverse Impacts:
a. If the biological opinion concludes that the proposed project is likely to have an adverse impact, recommendations to avoid these impacts shall be
provided to the applicant by the village upon receipt from the Illinois department of natural resources.
b. A meeting shall be scheduled with representatives of the applicant, the village and the Illinois department of natural resources to discuss
practicable alternatives to the proposed project that would avoid, minimize, or compensate for the impacts.
c. After the consultation meetings have taken place to discuss practicable alternatives, the applicant shall notify the village in writing stating its
decision to proceed, modify, or forgo the action and which, if any, of the alternatives included in the detailed action report it is adopting. The village
shall in turn notify the Illinois department of natural resources. (1978 Code § 4-1-11; amd. 2011 Code)
d. If the village disagrees with the applicant's decision, it shall notify the applicant in writing within twenty one (21) days.
5. Effect Of New Information: The consultation process shall be initiated or a terminated consultation process shall be reopened if:
a. New information reveals effects of the identified project that may adversely affect an endangered species or its essential habitat in a manner not
previously considered; or
b. The proposed project is subsequently modified such that it may adversely affect an endangered species or its essential habitat in a manner which
was not considered in the consultation process; or
c. Additional endangered species or their essential habitat is identified within the vicinity of the project. (1978 Code § 4-1-11)
E. Issuance Of Permit Or Return Of Application Noting Deficiencies: Upon favorable determination that all the above provisions have been met, a building
permit shall be issued. If the above provisions have not been met, the building permit application shall be returned with a list of deficiencies. (1978
Code § 4-1-11; amd. 2011 Code)
10-1-4: FRAMING PERMITS:
At least three (3) days before any framing is placed on the foundation, the property owner or his agent shall furnish to the director of community
development a spot survey prepared by a registered land surveyor of the state of Illinois showing: a) the elevation of the top of the foundation; b) the
location of the foundation with ties to front and side lot lines; and c) accurate dimensions of the foundation. Said survey shall be reviewed and approved by
the director of community development for compliance with the platting and zoning requirements for front and side yard setbacks and the approved
foundation elevation plan. Framing or any other structural improvements placed on the foundation before submittal and approval of the spot survey shall
be grounds for revocation of the building permit and subject the violator to a fine. Upon a favorable determination that the foundation has been installed in
conformance with the approved foundation plan and platting and zoning requirements, a framing permit shall be issued. (1978 Code § 4-1-11; amd. 2011
Code)
10-1-5: OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 335/618
A. Permit Required; Fees: When the director of community development finds that a building is in compliance with this code and other ordinances of the
village, after one or more inspections, he shall issue an occupancy permit. The fee charged for an occupancy permit shall be: (Ord. 96-55, 6-6-1996;
amd. 2011 Code)
Single-family $20.00
Multi-family $20.00, plus $5.00 for each dwelling unit
Other $50.00, plus $10.00 for each floor, basement or mezzanine
(Ord. 96-55, 6-6-1996)
B. Unexecuted Certificate; Receipt: Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy pursuant to this section, the director of community development shall
issue to the owner of the property an unexecuted certificate, and the owner of the property shall file the same with the proper township assessor and
shall obtain, in the form prescribed by said official, a receipt showing that the unexecuted certificate of occupancy has been duly filed and that the
property is subject to increased assessment from the date of issuance of the said certificate on a proportionate basis for the year in which the
improvement was completed.
C. Executed Certificate Filed: It shall be the duty of the owner of said property to file the receipt of the township assessor with the director of community
development, and the director of community development shall file a certified copy of the duly executed certificate of occupancy, when issued, with the
proper township assessor. (1978 Code § 4-1-5; amd. 2011 Code)
D. Issuance Procedures: The issuance of an occupancy permit for any principal building or structure shall be based on a close adherence to the following
procedures:
1. Application For Permit; Building Inspections: When the building or structure has been completed, the owner or his agent shall file with the director of
community development an application for an occupancy permit. Accompanying the application shall be: a) payment in full of the permit fee and a
receipt from the township assessor showing the property is subject to increased assessment from the date of issuance of the occupancy permit as
further defined in this section; and b) a field grading survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or engineer of the state of Illinois showing, in
addition to the as built foundation location and elevation previously required, the as built elevation of the finished grade at all corners of the
foundation and the elevation of the finished grade at the lot corners, building lines, high points and low points as shown on the approved grading
plan. The director of community development shall then make an inspection of the building and refer the field grading survey to the village engineer
for review.
2. Issuance Of Permit Or Return Of Application Noting Deficiencies:
a. No occupancy permit shall be issued for any building or structure unless the director of community development has determined: 1) the building or
structure is in compliance with this code and other ordinances of the village; 2) the final lot grading survey on file bears the stamped approval of
the village engineer; 3) there exists on file a copy of the certificate of completion by the village engineer for the sanitary sewer and water main
system serving the building, a copy of the resolution of acceptance by the board of trustees, and a copy of or statement from the village clerk
attesting to the fact that a ten percent (10%) maintenance bond vesting responsibility for maintenance of the sewer and water improvements for a
period of one year from the date of acceptance with the owner or developer has been furnished (in the case of existing subdivisions where
evidence of final acceptance is not on file, this requirement shall be deemed met by a letter from the village engineer adjudging the existing sewer
and water facilities adequate to serve the building or structure); 4) a letter has been received from the village engineer stating that roadways
providing access to the subject lot have been constructed or are in the course of construction and are suitable for vehicular traffic, the necessary
drainage facilities have been constructed to serve the lot, the installation or repair of sidewalks and final grading and landscaping of the parkway
and lot have been completed, and suitable street name signs have been erected.
b. Upon a favorable determination that all the above provisions have been met, an occupancy permit shall be issued. If the above provisions have
not been met, the occupancy permit application shall be returned with a list of deficiencies. (1978 Code § 4-1-11; amd. 2011 Code)
10-1-6: TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
A. A temporary six (6) month occupancy permit for any structure or building may be issued by the director of community development if, for reasons of
inclement weather or otherwise, the builder/developer or property owner has been unable to complete final grading, landscaping and installation or
repair of sidewalks, or furnish a final lot grading survey as stipulated in subsection 10-1-5D of this chapter. All other provisions of said subsection 10-1-
5D must, however, have been met. Issuance of a temporary occupancy permit shall be contingent on the following:
1. A written statement listing the uncompleted work necessary to bring the building site into compliance and an estimate of the cost thereof shall be
filed with the director of community development. The validity of said cost estimate shall be verified by the village engineer.
2. The builder/developer or property owner shall establish with the village clerk an escrow account consisting of a cash deposit, certified check, or
cashier's check in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost of uncompleted work in subsection A1 of this section.
The village clerk shall issue a receipt for said account listing the work to be accomplished and identifying, by legal description, the property for which
a temporary occupancy permit is being requested. A copy of the receipt shall be filed with the director of community development.
3. A written agreement signed by the builder/developer, property owner and/or contract purchaser shall be submitted to the director of community
development within six (6) months of the date of issuance of the temporary occupancy permit and their understanding that, upon expiration of the
temporary occupancy permit, it shall thereafter be unlawful for the building or structure to be occupied and that the escrow account established in
subsection A2 of this section shall be subject to forfeiture.
B. Upon completion of all improvements, submittal of the final grading survey, and approval thereof by the village engineer, the director of community
development shall then issue a regular occupancy permit, and the village clerk shall refund in full the escrow account previously established. If the
builder/developer or property owner fails to complete the required improvements within the six (6) month period allotted, the director of community
development shall authorize the use of the escrow funds provided in subsection A2 of this section to complete the required improvements.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 336/618
C. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1978 Code
§ 4-1-11; amd. 2011 Code)
10-1-7: SHEDS, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND PATIOS:
A. Permit Required: No person shall erect, install or construct any shed or accessory building (other than a garage structure) or any concrete, asphalt,
brick or stone patio area, or any combination thereof, on any premises within the village without first obtaining a permit therefor.
B. Application For Permit: Application for such permit shall be made at the community development department and shall include a sketch of the proposed
shed, accessory building or patio.
C. Expiration Of Permit: Any such permit issued pursuant to this section shall, in the absence of an extension being first obtained from the director of
community development upon good cause shown, expire six (6) months following the date of its issuance. (Ord. 96-55, 6-6-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
10-1-8: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
10-1-8-1: FEES ESTABLISHED:
A. Permit Costs: The following work, when performed individually and not as part of a larger overall work scope, shall be charged a fixed fee, as set forth
below:
1. Residential - single-family:
Permit Cost
Balcony (replacement) $ 75.00
Burglar alarm 50.00
Deck (covered or uncovered) 100.00
Demolition (interior) 50.00
Door replacement 50.00
Electric (minimum) 50.00
Electric panel 75.00
Fence 50.00
Fireplace - prefab 100.00
Flagpole 75.00
Generator 75.00
Lawn irrigation 75.00
Mechanical:
Minimum 50.00
Air conditioning 50.00
Furnace 50.00
Furnace and A/C 75.00
Water heater 50.00
Pavement:
Private - driveway, patio, service walk 50.00
Public - sidewalk, apron 50.00
Private and public 75.00
Plumbing - 3 fixtures or less (minimum) 50.00
Additional charge per fixture over 3 5.00
Roof with prepermit inspection 75.00
Roof without prepermit inspection 50.00
Shed/gazebo (on ground) 50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 337/618
Shed/gazebo (on slab) 75.00
Siding with prepermit inspection 75.00
Siding without prepermit inspection 50.00
Swimming pool/hot tub/spa - (aboveground) 75.00
Utility connection - water or sewer 50.00
Utility disconnection - water or sewer 50.00
Window replacement (1-5) 50.00
Window replacement (.6) 75.00
2. Commercial/industrial/office/multi-family:
Permit Cost
Construction/sales trailer $100.00
Elevator 100.00
Fire alarms 75.00
Fire sprinklers 100.00
Irrigation system 125.00
Pavement replacement:
Multi-family 75.00
<1,000 square feet 100.00
>1,000 square feet 150.00
Pavement - sealcoat and stripe 75.00
Security alarm 75.00
Sign:
Change of copy only 50.00
Monument 100.00
Illuminated monument 125.00
Temporary 75.00
Wall 75.00
Illuminated wall 100.00
Temporary electric service 75.00
Temporary use 100.00
Utility connection - water and sewer 100.00
Utility disconnection - water and sewer 100.00
Water heater (not boiler) 75.00
B. Permit Costs Based On Value Of Construction/Improvement: Fees for building permits, not specifically listed in subsection A of this section, shall be
assessed based on the market value of the construction or improvement to be completed.
1. Market Value: The market value shall be determined based upon the values stated in either, "Means Square Foot Costs", or "Building Construction
Cost Date", as published by R.S. Means Company, Inc. (Kingston, Massachusetts), as amended from time to time, which said publications are
hereby adopted by reference by the village of Glendale Heights. In lieu of using this publication, the village, at its sole and exclusive discretion, may
accept the value listed on a signed contract between the permit applicant and their contractor(s), or an estimate of probable construction cost, signed
and sealed by a registered architect or engineer.
2. Permit Fee: 1.5 percent of estimated construction/improvement cost, but not less than the sum of the minimum fees of all applicable trades.
C. Special Projects: There are certain special projects where the cost of construction does not accurately reflect the cost of plan review and inspection to
the village. In these instances, permit fees will be based on the hourly rate of plan review and inspection services, as determined from time to time by
the village of Glendale Heights.
1. Special projects include, but are not limited to, the following construction:
a. Demolition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 338/618
b. Inground swimming pools.
c. Site alteration including grading and utility installation on private property.
d. Cellular tower construction and/or modification.
D. Miscellaneous Provisions:
1. Reinspection And Phased Inspection Fee: Inspection fees shall be included in the building permit fee, along with one reinspection. Additional
reinspections due to failure, request for phasing or not being present at the scheduled inspection time will be charged a reinspection fee as listed
below:
Residential $25.00
Nonresidential 50.00
2. Expedited Real Estate Transfer Inspection: In accordance with section 10-14C-4 of this title, real estate transfer inspections shall be scheduled a
minimum of twenty one (21) days prior to transfer. An applicant may request an expedited inspection less than twenty one (21) days prior to transfer
at double the standard inspection fee. The village will schedule the inspection, if it can accommodate the request, but is not obligated to do so.
Payment of the fee is required prior to scheduling the inspection.
3. Consulting Services: The village, at its sole discretion, may determine that it is necessary to hire a consultant to provide professional services,
including, but not limited to, plan reviews, inspections and legal review. An applicant shall be responsible for payment of these costs as part of the
permit fee. If an applicant withdraws a permit application, he/she shall be responsible for any and all consultant fees incurred.
4. Consulting Services Fees: For any project that the village has determined consulting services are required, the following deposit shall be submitted
with the building permit application:
Projects which include architectural, structural and/or MEP plans $1,500.00
Projects which include civil engineering plans 1,500.00
If the deposit is depleted, the applicant shall submit an additional deposit to offset additional consulting services. Any remaining balance shall be refunded
after a final certificate of occupancy is issued.
5. Field Change Permit: Whenever a substantive change in the scope of work is proposed subsequent to approval of the permit application, a field
change permit application shall be submitted, along with such construction documents as are necessary to allow a comprehensive review of the
potential impact of the proposed change. The valuation used to determine permit fees shall equal the value of the proposed new scope of work
(example: If $10,000.00 worth of lighting is eliminated from a project, and $8,000.00 worth of alternative lighting is substituted, the valuation is
$8,000.00). The minimum permit fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential construction and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for commercial
construction.
6. Failure To Obtain A Permit: Commencing construction on work that requires a permit without having obtained a permit is a violation of this code. Any
person found to have violated this provision of this code shall be assessed additional permit fees in accordance with the following:
Calculated permit fee + 100% additional permit fee
The calculated permit fee shall include plan review, inspection, and development fees, but shall exclude expedited plan review and/or inspection,
which will be charged separately according to the method for each process.
7. Renewal Of Suspended Permit: An applicant may submit a written request to renew a suspended permit once. A permit may be renewed only if: a)
the project scope does not change, and b) a code amendment would not impact the project. The permit fee for a permit renewal shall be fifty percent
(50%) of the original permit fee.
8. Phased Permits:
a. An applicant may submit a written request to have a proposed development considered in phases. The following phased permits may be issued
provided that all of the submittal criteria are met:
(1) Mass grading.
(2) Site development.
(3) Foundation.
(4) Shell.
(5) Phased occupancy.
b. If and when the village, at its sole and exclusive discretion, determines that the criteria for issuance of a phased permit have been met, an
applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement before a phased permit may be issued.
c. The permit fee for a phased permit shall be based upon the value of the scope of the work proposed, plus ten percent (10%) to cover the village's
additional administrative expenses.
9. DuPage County Receipt Of Payment: No building permit or occupancy permit shall be authorized for constructing, enlarging or altering any building
or structure until the village has received a copy of a receipt of payment of the fees imposed by the county fair share transportation impact fee
ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 339/618
10. Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy: The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be as follows:
Residential - single-family $50.00
Commercial/industrial/office/multi-family 100.00
11. Written Zoning Verification: The fee for a written zoning verification shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
12. Irrevocable Letter Of Credit: Prior to issuance of a building permit, an applicant shall be required to provide an irrevocable letter of credit or similar
security for a sum equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of an approved estimate of construction cost for the site development work
scope, including public improvements, stormwater management, erosion control and permanent stabilized landscaping. (Ord. 2014-51, 8-21-2014)
10-1-8-2: MANNER OF COMPUTING SQUARE FOOTAGE:
In the calculation of the floor area, the exterior dimensions shall be used. The total floor area shall be the total of the area of all floors of the building,
except as follows:
A. Attic spaces which do not have an interior wall finish.
B. Unfinished parts of basements in a single-family, two-family or apartment occupancy. (1978 Code § 4-1-3)
Chapter 2
BUILDING CODE
10-2-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village and incorporated herein by reference the 2006 edition of the international building code, including appendix
chapters F, G, I, and J, as promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., as the building code for the control of buildings and structures within the
village, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the community development director available for public use, examination, and inspection. Each
and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the international building code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes set forth in section 10-2-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-52, 8-21-2008; amd.
2011 Code)
10-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The 2006 international building code adopted by section 10-2-1 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the building code of the village of Glendale Heights, herein after referred to as "this code".
Section 101.4.1 is amended to read as follows:
101.4.1 Electrical. The provisions of the 2008 edition of the national electrical code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including
alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto.
Section 101.4.4 is amended to read as follows:
101.4.4 Plumbing. The provisions of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the provisions of the 2006 edition of the international plumbing
code, as applicable, shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures,
fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. If the provisions of the 2004
edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code are in conflict, the more stringent provision shall control.
Section 101.5 is added to read as follows:
101.5 Interpretations.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public
health, safety, and welfare.
B. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this ordinance upon the construction, alteration, or maintenance of buildings or structures are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this ordinance or of any other applicable law,
ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation, the regulations which are more restrictive (or which impose higher standards or requirements) shall control.
C. This ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement provided that the regulations of this ordinance
are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements) than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement.
(Ord. 2008-52, 8-21-2008)
D. Any building or structure which was not lawfully existing prior to the time of adoption of this ordinance shall not become or be made lawful by reason
of the adoption of this ordinance, and to the extent that, and in any manner that such building or structure is in conflict with the requirements of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 340/618
ordinance, said building or structure remains unlawful hereunder.
(Ord. 2008-52, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Section 103 Department Of Building Safety. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section 104 is amended as follows:
Whenever a reference to "building official" is made within section 104 or anywhere else in this code, it shall mean director of community development
or his designee.
Section 104.12 is added to read as follows:
104.12 Complaints And Reports.
A. Investigation: It shall be the duty of the director of community development to cause an investigation to be made of all complaints made to the
department, which come within its jurisdiction. A record of such investigations shall be kept on file together with the reports and findings by the
inspector(s).
B. Compliance:
1. When such investigation, whether upon complaint or otherwise, shall disclose that violations of this ordinance do, in fact, exist, the director of
community development, or his designee, shall give written notice to the owner, occupant, lessee, or person in possession, charge, or control of such
building, structure, premises, or place to make such changes, alterations, or repairs or to perform such work, or to take such action as the provisions of
this ordinance may require within such time as shall be designated by the director of community development, or his designee, which shall in no event
exceed thirty (30) days after the service of such notice.
2. In the event that satisfactory changes, alterations, repairs, or requirements ordered by the director of community development, or his designee, are
not commenced within the time specified in said notice, the director of community development, or his designee, shall issue tickets or citations to
offenders of this ordinance or shall advise the village attorney of such violations of this ordinance or any default of such notice, and shall recommend
legal action.
Section 105.1.3 is added to read as follows:
105.1.3 Permits.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, repair, remove, or demolish any part of a building, structure, drive, underground or overhead
service or appurtenances thereto, dig any hole, ditch or drain in, or dig or remove any sod, stone, earth, sand or gravel from, or make any opening in
any public way or other public place, without first obtaining a permit therefore from the director of community development. For purposes of this article,
a private street shall not be deemed to be a "public way" or a "public place".
B. The director of community development shall not issue any permit for the opening of any public way or public place until he or she is fully advised of
the time, place, and character of such opening. All applications for permits shall be accompanied by an Illinois registered plat of survey indicating the
character and dimensions of any proposed opening for the installation of new work, or the location or character of any alterations involving changes in
the location of pipes, conduits or other conductors.
Section 105.1.4 is added to read as follows:
105.1.4 Insurance And Bond Requirements.No permit shall be issued to allow the construction, tearing up, removing or repairing of any public way
or other public place, or any part thereof, until application for such permit has been filed with the director of community development.
All contractors performing work in the right-of-way shall provide the village with a license and permit bond in the amount of twenty thousand
($20,000.00) dollars.
Section 105.1.5 is added to read as follows:
105.1.5 Surety Bond Requirement.
A. No permit shall be issued to a general contractor, plumbing contractor or sewer contractor for any construction work until the contractor files a
license and permit bond in the amount of twenty thousand ($20,000.00) dollars with the department of community development. In addition, any
contractor that performs any work on village property shall provide the village of Glendale Heights with a license and permit bond in the amount of
twenty thousand ($20,000.00) dollars. In the event the work performed under the permit is not completed or fails to meet the code requirements of this
chapter and all applicable ordinances of the village of Glendale Heights, the bond shall be forfeited.
B. Any contractor securing permits for the opening of streets, public areas, sidewalks, alleys, and other work in the village shall observe the ordinances
of the village in relation thereto and protect the village from any liability to any person or persons on account of damage arising from any such opening.
In addition, contractors shall fully remove all materials, dirt, and rubbish from the place of said openings, and restore same to their original condition
immediately upon completion of the work for which such opening is made, and shall abide by all agreements and ordinances relating to installation or
repair of sidewalks, apron, or street.
C. If any person registered as provided in this section shall fail in the execution of any work for which a permit was issued or fail to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the director of community development may initiate action to bring suit and prosecute such person for such violation. In case
of conviction, his or her name shall be stricken from the registration records and license revoked, and shall not be rendered or reinstated during such
time as any violation exists or any judgment remains unsatisfied with regard to said conviction.
Section 105.2 is amended as follows:
Under the subtitle of "Building:", delete subparagraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9.
Section 105.6.1 is added to read as follows:
105.6.1 Suspension Of Permits. If a substantial start is not made within six (6) months, or if substantial progress is not made within one (1) year, the
permit shall lapse. After two (2) years the permit must be extended to remain in force. Residential construction must be completed within one (1) year.
All permit fees shall be forfeited six (6) months after the lapse of a permit. All posted bonds will be forfeited within six (6) months after lapse of a permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 341/618
Section 106.1.4 is added to read as follows:
106.1.4 Grade Requirements.
A. General Lot Grade Maximums: No lot shall be graded in such a manner as to raise the grade of such lot to any point higher than a continuous grade
level between the grades of the lots on either side abutting such lot.
B. Foundation Grades And Rules:
1. All foundation grades shall be established in such a manner as to achieve free, natural and unobstructed flow of surface water.
2. The village engineer shall, from time to time, promulgate detailed rules, such as standards for engineering site plans, not inconsistent with this code,
for the purpose of determining foundation grades. Such rules shall become effective by filing the same in the office of the village clerk and shall then
have the force and effect of an ordinance of the village.
3. Every application for a building permit shall show the foundation grade and set forth a grading plan prepared by a professional engineer, for the
proposed construction, determined in accordance with this code and the rules established pursuant thereto. No building permit shall be issued unless
such a foundation grade and grading plan are in accordance with the provisions of this code and approved by the village engineer.
C. Subdivision Grade Plans: The provisions of sections 1 and 2 hereinabove shall be supplemental to subdivision regulations adopted from time to time
by the village of Glendale Heights respecting any subdivision approved pursuant to the provisions of said regulations. A building permit shall not be
issued by the director of community development unless a lot grading plan for said subdivision has been approved by the village engineer.
D. Conformity With Lot Grading Plan: Every building constructed in a location for which a lot grading plan is on file, pursuant to the provisions of section
3, shall conform to said lot grading plan.
E. Compliance Required Prior To Occupancy Permit: No occupancy permit or other indication of approval of new construction shall be issued or given
by the director of community development until all grade requirements set forth in this code have been met. Additionally, the following requirements
must be met before an occupancy permit is issued:
1. Final (as-built) surveys of the lot grading which show substantial compliance with the approved permit survey must be approved by the village
engineer. A registered land surveyor or professional engineer shall prepare said surveys. An occupancy permit shall not be issued if the property is not
in compliance with the subdivision grading plan and permit survey.
2. Landscaping, including sod, shall be in place prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. During inclement weather, a cash performance bond
reflecting actual construction costs, approximately $5,000.00, shall be posted.
3. Final inspections required by the community development department and engineering department shall be performed. Final (as-built) surveys must
be submitted to the engineering department prior to the final inspection.
F. Altering Grade Levels: No grades within the village shall be disturbed or otherwise altered except as allowed pursuant to a permit issued by the
director of community development.
G. Change In Grading: Any change in grading done without authorization of the director of community development and approved by the village
engineer must be regraded at the owner's expense. If the regrading is not completed within fourteen (14) days, regrading may be ordered by the village
and charged to the owner.
Section 106.2.1 is added to read as follows:
106.2.1 Compliance With Site Plan. All new work shall be located strictly in accordance with the approved site plan. Construction shall not commence
on any completed foundation walls until the foundation wall elevation(s) shown on the plat have been reviewed and accepted by the village engineer.
Section 106.2.2 is added to read as follows:
106.2.2 Plat Of Survey Required When Footing And Foundation Is Completed. A plat of the piece or parcel of land, lot(s), block(s), or parts or
portion thereof, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the land parcel, location of all buildings and improvements, including excavations and
foundation walls, and the elevation of the top of the foundation with respect to United States geological survey (U.S.G.S.) datum, and certified by a
registered land surveyor licensed by the state of Illinois as a true copy of the piece or parcel, lot(s), block(s), or portion thereof, according to the
registered or recorded plat of such land shall be submitted to the director of community development for review of the foundation elevation and location
immediately after the foundation wall(s) have been completed.
Section 106.3.4.3 is added to read as follows:
106.3.4.3 Design Professional Required. All building plans of projects or structural alterations, exceeding $10,000.00 shall be stamped by an Illinois
licensed architect or structural engineer.
Section 107.1.1 is added to read as follows:
107.1.1 Temporary Office Trailers. Temporary office trailers can be used on a property for the following purposes:
A. Temporary relocation of employees to facilitate permanent building expansion and remodeling.
B. Temporary housing of a sales office. A site plan showing grades, setbacks from property lines, and parking areas shall be submitted for approval.
C. Temporary use by construction personnel during construction of a new building or facility.
D. Building permits for trailers to be used for purposes other than those described above shall be issued only upon approval by the director of
community development.
A cash compliance bond shall be deposited with the village of Glendale Heights in the amount of $1,000.00 to be refunded upon the timely removal of
the temporary trailer, restoration of the trailer site, and upon the written approval of the director of community development. Non-removal of the
temporary trailer and restoration of the site will result in forfeiture of the $1,000.00 compliance bond.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 342/618
The building permit fee for temporary trailers shall be $100.00. All plans and drawings for buildings, structures, and equipment shall be presented to the
director of community development for his/her approval. The director of community development shall approve each set of plans presented before a
permit will be granted.
Section 107.1.2 is added to read as follows:
107.1.2 Permits. Building permits for temporary office trailers shall be valid for only six (6) months. Electrical, plumbing and other permits shall be
obtained by the applicant as required by Glendale Heights village code.
Section 110.5 is added to read as follows:
110.5 Temporary Occupancy Fee. A $200.00 non-refundable fee shall be charged for a temporary occupancy permit for a commercial, institutional, or
industrial application. The non-refundable temporary occupancy certificate fee for single family residential and duplex buildings shall be $100.00 per
unit, and $50.00 per unit for all other residential buildings containing three (3) or more units.
Section 113.2.1 is added to read as follows:
113.2.1 Liability.
A. Unless otherwise specifically provided, the owner, his or her agent for the purpose of managing, controlling, or collecting rents, and any other person
managing or controlling a building or premises, in any part of which there is a violation of the provisions of this code shall be liable for any violation
therein, existing or occurring, or which may have existed or occurred, at or during any time when such person is or was the person owning or
managing, controlling, or acting as agent in regard to said buildings or premises. Wherever used in said provisions of this code, the "owner" shall
include any person entitled under any agreement to the control or direction of the management or disposition of the building or premises or of any part
of the building or premises where the violation in question occurs.
B. The liability hereunder imposed on an owner shall attach to a trustee under a land trust, holding title to such building, structure, or premises without
the right of possession, management, or control, unless said trustee in a proceeding under said provisions of this code discloses in a verified pleading
or in an affidavit filed with the court, the name and last known address of each person who was a beneficiary of the trust at the time of the alleged
violation and of each person, if any who was then acting as agent for the purpose of managing, controlling, or collecting rents, as the same may appear
on the records of the trust.
C. Any architect, structural engineer, contractor, or builder, individual or corporate, who has designed, constructed, repaired, altered, removed, or
demolished any building or any part or equipment thereof in violation of or in a manner which fails to conform with the provisions of this code shall each
be subject to the fines established in section 113.4 for each and every violation.
(Ord. 2008-52, 8-21-2008)
Section 113.4 is amended to read as follows:
113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall
erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of this code shall be penalized with a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $1,000.00. Each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2008-52, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Section 116 is added to read as follows:
SECTION 116
LOTS
Section 116.1 is added to read as follows:
116.1 Lot Regulation. Whenever a structure is demolished or removed, the premises shall be maintained free from all unsafe or hazardous conditions
by the proper regulation of the lot, removal of all underground and in ground structures, restoration of established grades, and the erection of the
necessary retaining walls and fences in accordance with the provisions of chapter 33.
Section 201.3 is amended to read as follows:
201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code,
international fuel gas code, international fire code, international mechanical code, or international plumbing code, such terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in those codes.
Section 306.3 is amended to read as follows:
306.3 Factory Industrial F-2 Low-Hazard Occupancy. All uses which are classified as use group F-2 shall be considered to be use group F-1. The
provisions of this code for use group F-1 shall apply to such structures. No building or structure shall be classified as F-2, low-hazard occupancy.
(Ord. 2008-52, 8-21-2008)
Section 311.3 is amended to read as follows:
311.3 Low-Hazard Storage, Group S-2. All uses which are classified as use group S-2 shall be considered to be use group S-1, except those
buildings or structures used exclusively as a food pantry operated by a not-for-profit and/or volunteer organization. The provisions of this code for use
group S-1 shall apply to all S-classified structures, except those buildings or structures used exclusively as a food pantry operated by a not-for-profit
and/or volunteer organization. No building or structure shall be classified as S-2, low-hazard storage, except those buildings or structures used
exclusively as a food pantry operated by a not-for-profit and/or volunteer organization.
(Ord. 2010-50, 6-17-2010)
Section 403.2 is amended to read as follows:
403.2 Automatic Sprinkler System. All buildings and structures shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
section 903.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 343/618
Section 403.2.1 is added to read as follows:
403.2.1 Shut Off Valves And Flow Detection Devices. Shut off valves and water flow indicating devices shall be provided for each floor.
Section 406.1.5 is added to read as follows:
406.1.5 Attached To Rooms. Private garages attached side-by-side to rooms in occupancies in use group R-1, R-2, R-3, or I-1 shall be completely
separated from interior spaces and the attic by means of 5/8-inch gypsum board or the equivalent applied to the garage side.
Section 406.1.6 is added to read as follows:
406.1.6 Opening Protectives. The door opening protectives shall be self-closing and the door shall be labeled for minimum twenty (20) minute
protection.
Section 406.1.7 is added to read as follows:
406.1.7 Detached Garages. Detached garages located five (5) feet or less from a structure used for dwelling purposes must provide a fire rated
exterior wall complying with section 704.
Section 406.2.10 is added to read as follows:
406.2.10 Sprinkler Systems. All public garages shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.
Section 415.7.4 is added to read as follows:
415.7.4 Dry Cleaning Plants. The construction and installation of dry cleaning plants shall be in accordance with the requirements of this code, the
international mechanical code, the more restrictive provisions of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code or 2006 edition of the international
plumbing code, and NFPA 32. Dry cleaning solvents and systems shall be classified in accordance with the international fire code.
Table 503 is amended as follows:
By inserting "not permitted" in the cross sections of columns A and B of type V and the row entitled R-1.
Section 507.2 Nonsprinklered, One Story. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section 507.3 Sprinklered, One Story is amended as follows:
Delete exception 2 in its entirety.
Section 708.3 is amended to read as follows:
708.3 Fire-Resistance Rating. Fire partitions shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
Exceptions:
1. Corridor walls as permitted by table 1017.1.
2. Dwellings and sleeping unit separations in buildings of type IIB, IIIB, and VB construction shall have fire-resistance ratings of not less than one hour
in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1.
Section 711.3 Fire-Resistance Rating is amended by amending the last sentence of the first full paragraph to read as follows:
Floor assemblies separating dwelling units in the same building or sleeping units in occupancies in group R-1, hotel occupancies, R-2 and I-1 shall be a
minimum of 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.
Section 711.3 is further amended by amending the paragraph labeled "Exception" to read as follows:
Exception: Dwelling unit and sleeping unit separations in buildings of type IIB, IIIB, and VB construction shall have fire-resistance ratings of not less
than one hour in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1.
Section 717.5 Combustible Materials In Concealed Spaces In Type I Or II Construction is amended by amending the paragraph labeled "Exceptions".
Exception number 5 is amended to read as follows:
5. Combustible piping within concealed ceiling spaces installed in accordance with the international mechanical code and the more restrictive of the
2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code.
Section 903.2.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
Section 903.2.1.2 is amended to read as follows:
903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
Section 903.2.1.3 is amended to read as follows:
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
Section 903.2.1.4 is amended to read as follows:
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
Section 903.2.1.5 is amended to read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 344/618
903.2.1.5 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for group A-5 occupancies in the following areas: concession stands, retail
areas, press boxes, and other accessory use areas.
Section 903.2.1.6 is added to read as follows:
903.2.1.6 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in all use group B fire areas where the use group B fire area exceeds 1,500
square feet.
Section 903.2.2 is amended to read as follows:
903.2.2 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
Section 903.2.3 is amended to read as follows:
903.2.3 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
Section 903.2.3.1 is amended to read as follows:
903.2.3.1 Woodworking Operations. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
Section 903.2.6 is amended to read as follows:
903.2.6 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
Section 903.2.7 is amended by adding the following:
Exceptions:
1. R-3 single family residential structures are not required to be sprinklered unless they exceed 3,000 square feet.
2. R-2 attached single family residences of two (2) or more units (townhomes) are not required to be sprinklered if built to the specifications of type I or
II construction.
Section 903.2.8 is amended to read as follows:
903.2.8 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
Section 903.2.8.1 is amended to read as follows:
903.2.8.1 Repair Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
Section 903.2.8.2 is amended to read as follows:
903.2.8.2 Bulk Storage Of Tires. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
Section 903.2.9 Group S-2. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section 903.2.9.1 is amended to read as follows:
903.2.9.1 Commercial Parking Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided.
Section 903.2.14 is added to read as follows:
903.2.14 Speculative Buildings. All speculative warehouse buildings with a ceiling height of twenty five (25) feet or greater shall be protected with an
ESFP fire sprinkler system or a hydraulically calculated system for class N commodities with rack storage calculated to the greatest storage height. All
sprinkler systems shall be electronically supervised by a fire alarm system.
Section 903.3.5 is amended to read as follows:
903.3.5 Water Supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in 903.3.1. The
potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the more restrictive provisions of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing
code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code. Hydrant water flow data used for the design of any sprinkler system shall be no more
than one year old.
(Ord. 2008-52, 8-21-2008)
Section 903.3.5.3 is added to read as follows:
903.3.5.3 Fire Hydrants.
1. At least two (2) fire hydrants shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of buildings.
2. Fire hydrants shall be located along public streets so that no portion of the perimeter building will be over three hundred (300) feet from a fire
hydrant. When this is not feasible, additional hydrants shall be located on the premises accessible to motorized fire apparatus.
3. Hydrants shall be so located that:
A. Access to fire hydrants shall be by all-weather roadways adequate in width, clearance, and strength for firefighting purposes. Such routes should be
maintained accessible during all seasons of the year. Legal provisions will be required for private roads.
B. Hydrants shall be located approximately five (5) feet from all-weather roadways. At no time shall the closest part of the hydrant be setback less than
two (2) feet from the curb line.
C. Hydrants shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the building to be protected.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 345/618
D. One hydrant shall be located at each intersection, and there shall be intermediate hydrants where the distance between intersections exceeds four
hundred feet (400').
E. In apartments, townhouses, condominiums, town/row or cluster housing where streets or parking lots dead end, hydrants shall be placed along the
access route.
F. Additional fire hydrants shall be provided within five hundred feet (500') of the building so that the fire flow required divided by one thousand (1,000)
will equal the number of hydrants available.
4. Fire hydrants used in conjunction with water supplies shall:
A. Meet standard no. C-502 of the American Water Works Association.
B. Shall be approved by the Glenside or Bloomingdale fire protection district.
C. Shall be installed at the same time the water main is being installed.
5. Fire hydrants shall conform to the following specifications:
A. Hydrants shall have a six (6) inch diameter auxiliary valve installed within two (2) feet of the hydrant, at grade level.
B. Hydrants shall have a six (6) inch inlet, four and one-half (41/2) inch steamer nozzle, two (2) two and one-half (21/2) inch nozzles, and have NST
(national standard thread) hose coupling threads.
C. Hydrants shall open "left handed" (counter-clockwise). Steamer outlets shall face the adjacent roadway and be installed at sixteen (16) to twenty
four (24) inches above adjacent grade as measured to the bottom of the steamer nozzle.
D. Hydrants shall have break-away traffic flanges approximately 21/2 to 3 inches above grade and shall be designed for a minimum of 5'6" of cover.
E. The base elbow of the hydrant shall be properly thrust blocked and backfilled with clean, washed gravel.
F. All underground portions of the hydrant shall be poly-wrapped.
G. All above grade portions of the hydrant shall be painted in accordance with the Village Of Glendale Heights Standard Construction Notes And
Specifications.
6. Fire hydrants shall be protected from accidental damage by approved methods when located in areas subject to vehicular damage.
7. Engineered drawings showing fire hydrant placement and water main size and location shall be submitted to the appropriate bureau of fire
prevention and the village of Glendale Heights for approval before installation.
(Ord. 2008-52, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Section 904.3.1 is amended to read as follows:
904.3.1 Electrical Wiring. Electrical wiring shall be in accordance with the 2008 edition of the national electrical code.
Section 905.3.1 is amended as follows:
By inserting 18 feet (5486 mm) in place of 30 feet (9144 mm) wherever it may appear.
Section 907.2.1 is amended to read as follows:
907.2.1 Group A. A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in group A occupancies.
Section 907.2.2 is amended to read as follows:
907.2.2 Group B. A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in group B occupancies.
Section 907.2.3 is amended to read as follows:
907.2.3 Group E. A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in group E occupancies.
Section 907.2.4 is amended to read as follows:
907.2.4 Group F. A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in group F occupancies.
Section 907.2.5 is amended to read as follows:
907.2.5 Group H. A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in group H occupancies.
Section 907.2.6 is amended to read as follows:
907.2.6 Group I. A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in group I occupancies.
Section 907.2.7 is amended to read as follows:
907.2.7 Group M. A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in group M occupancies.
Section 907.2.8 is amended to read as follows:
907.2.8 Group R-1. A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in group R-1 occupancies.
Section 907.2.9 is amended to read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 346/618
907.2.9 Group R-2. A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in group R-2 occupancies.
Exception: R-2 occupancies that are classified as townhomes for single family occupancy.
Section 907.2.24 is added to read as follows:
907.2.24 Group S. A fire alarm system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with NFPA 72 in group S occupancies.
Section 907.5 is amended to read as follows:
907.5 Wiring. Wiring shall comply with the requirements of the 2008 edition of the national electrical code and NFPA 72. Wireless protection systems
utilizing radio frequency transmitting devices shall comply with the special requirements for supervision of low-power wireless systems in NFPA 72.
Section 907.8.3 is added to read as follows:
907.8.3 Zone Disconnects. All fire alarm systems shall be capable of zoned disconnects at the control panel. Disconnection of a zone shall cause the
fire alarm system to transmit a trouble signal.
Section 907.14 is amended to read as follows:
907.14 Monitoring. All fire alarms and fire suppression systems shall be connected to an approved remote station system of the jurisdiction in
accordance with NFPA 72.
Exceptions:
1. Standpipe systems.
2. Single and multiple-station smoke detectors as required by section 907.2.10.
3. Smoke detectors in occupancies in use group I-3.
4. Smoke detectors in patient sleeping rooms in use group I-2.
Section 909.11 is amended to read as follows:
909.11 Power Systems. The smoke control system shall be supplied with two sources of power. Primary power shall be the normal building power
systems. Secondary power shall be from an approved standby source complying with the 2008 edition of the national electrical code. The standby
power source and its transfer switches shall be in a separate room from the normal power transformers and switch gear and shall be enclosed in a
room of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction ventilated directly to and from the exterior. Power distribution from the two sources shall
be by independent routes. Transfer to full standby power shall be automatic and within 60 seconds of failure of the primary power. The systems shall
comply with the 2008 edition of the national electrical code.
Section 909.12.1 is amended to read as follows:
909.12.1 Wiring. In addition to meeting the requirements of the 2008 edition of the national electrical code, all wiring, regardless of voltage, shall be
fully enclosed within continuous raceways.
Section 909.16.3 is amended by amending the exception to paragraph 1 to read as follows:
Exception: Power disconnects required by the 2008 edition of the national electrical code.
Section 913 is added to read as follows:
SECTION 913
FIRE DEPARTMENT COMMUNICATIONS
Section 913.1 is added to read as follows:
913.1 Radio Communications. When conditions exist with radio equipment which interfere with the efficiency and use of fire protection equipment
and/or response of the fire department, a bi-directional radio amplification system shall be required to be installed within or on the building to ensure a
ninety (90) percent reliability factor for radio use within the structure. This system shall be designed to operate in conjunction with the equipment
utilized by the Glenside fire protection district or Bloomingdale fire protection district. When any required fire communication enhancement system is
installed and becomes inoperative, thus affecting the fire safety of the building, structure, or the occupants therein, the fire officer shall order the
system, unit, or device to be repaired and returned to service, or the building shall be vacated until the inoperative system, unit, or device is repaired
and returned to service. It will be the responsibility of the owner or occupant to make tests, repairs, alterations, or additions.
Section 1008.1.2 Door Swing is amended by deleting the first sentence after the eight (8) listed exceptions and inserting the following sentence:
Doors shall swing in the direction of egress travel and be approved with an automatic closing device.
Table 1017.1 is amended by inserting "2" in the cross section of the column entitled "without sprinkler system" and the row entitled "R".
Section 1205.4.1 is amended to read as follows:
1205.4.1 Controls. The controls for activation of the required stairway lighting shall be in accordance with the 2008 edition of the national electrical
code.
Section 1206.3.3 is amended to read as follows:
1206.3.3 Court Drainage. The bottom of every court shall be properly graded and drained to a public sewer or other approved disposal system
complying with the more restrictive of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code.
Section 1405.10.4 is amended to read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 347/618
1405.10.4 Grounding. Grounding of metal veneers on buildings shall comply with the requirements of the 2008 edition of the national electrical code.
Section 1503.4 is amended to read as follows:
1503.4 Roof Drainage. Design and installation of roof drainage systems shall comply with the more restrictive of the 2004 edition of the Illinois
plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code.
Table 1607.1 is amended by inserting "40" in place of "30" in the cross section of the column entitled "Uniform (psf)" and occupancy use number 28:
residential, habitable attics and sleeping areas.
Section 1612.3 Establishment Of Flood Hazard Zones is amended by inserting the words "village of Glendale Heights" to specify the jurisdiction and
"January 1 Plan # 170206 0001C" to specify the date of issuance.
Section 1805.4.5 Timber Footings. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section 1805.4.6 Wood Foundations. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section 1807.4.3 is amended to read as follows:
1807.4.3 Drainage Discharge. The floor base and foundation perimeter drain shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved
drainage system that complies with the more restrictive of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international
plumbing code.
Exception: Where a site is located in well-drained gravel or sand/gravel mixture soils, a dedicated drainage system is not required.
Section 1905.12 is amended by adding the following sentence:
Concrete shall only be placed when temperature forecast is for 28 degrees Fahrenheit and rising, and all other stipulations of 1905.12 are followed.
Section 2303.1.2.1 is added to read as follows:
2303.1.2.1 Fire Protection. In all use groups, except R-3 and R-4, prefabricated wood I-joists must be protected by a one-hour fire separation
assembly or a fire sprinkler system in accordance with section 903. In use groups R-3 and R-4, prefabricated wood I-joists supporting first floor
construction shall be protected with unpenetrated 5/8-inch gypsum board or a fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.
Exception: Prefabricated wood I-joists that are equal to or exceed the burn through times of solid wood components of the same size and dimensions.
Section 2303.1.3.1 is added to read as follows:
2303.1.3.1 Fire Protection. In all use groups, except R-3 and R-4, glue laminated structural components must be protected by a one-hour rated fire
separation assembly or a fire sprinkler system in accordance with section 903. In use groups R-3 and R-4, glue laminated structural components
supporting first floor construction shall be protected with unpenetrated 5/8-inch gypsum board or a sprinkler system installed in accordance with section
903.
Exception: Glue laminated structural members that are equal to or exceed the burn through times of solid wood components of the same size and
dimensions.
Section 2303.4.1.8 is added to read as follows:
2303.4.1.8 Fire Protection. In all use groups, except R-3 and R-4, prefabricated wood trusses must be protected by a one-hour rated fire separation
assembly or a fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903. In use groups R-3 and R-4 prefabricated wood trusses supporting first
floor construction shall be protected with unpenetrated 5/8-inch gypsum board or a sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.
Section 2308.3.3.1 Anchorage To All-Wood Foundations. Delete section in its entirety.
Chapter 27 Electrical. Delete this chapter in its entirety.
Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems is amended as follows:
The more restrictive provisions of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code shall govern.
Section 3002.4 is amended to read as follows:
3002.4 Elevator Car To Accommodate Ambulance Stretcher. In all buildings and structures serviced by an elevator, at least one elevator shall be
provided for fire department emergency access to all floors. Such elevator car shall be of such a size and arrangement to accommodate a twenty four
(24) inch by eighty four (84) inch ambulance stretcher in the horizontal, open position and shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency
medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less than 3 inches high and shall be placed inside on both sides of the hoistway frame.
Section 3003.3 is added to read as follows:
3003.3 Emergency Signal Devices And Lighting. New and existing passenger elevators and freight elevators which are located in buildings shall
provide in the car the following emergency signal devices operable from within the car in accordance with sections 211 and 204.7 ANSI A17.1:
1. An electric signal bell not less than six (6) inches in diameter located inside the building and audible outside the hoistway. Only one bell is required
for a group/bank of elevators if operable from all cars in the group/bank, with battery backup.
2. A telephone connected to a central telephone exchange system or fire department. The phone to be installed no more than forty eight (48) inches
from the floor.
3. All emergency lighting is to be equipped with a battery pack backup.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 348/618
4. Existing passenger and freight elevators that do not have emergency devices and lighting shall be in compliance by January 1, 2010, or they will be
removed from service.
Section 3305.1 is amended to read as follows:
3305.1 Facilities Required. Sanitary facilities shall be provided during construction, remodeling or demolition activities in accordance with the more
restrictive of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code.
Section 3401.3 is amended to read as follows:
3401.3 Compliance With Other Codes. Alterations, repairs, additions and changes of occupancy to existing structures shall comply with the
provisions for alterations, repairs, additions and changes of occupancy in the international fire code, international fuel and gas code, international
mechanical code, the more restrictive of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code,
international property maintenance code, international residential code, and the 2008 edition of the national electrical code.
Section 3403.1 Existing Buildings Or Structures is amended by deleting the last sentence and inserting the following sentence:
For additions, the entire structure shall be made to conform to the provisions of this code as it pertains to means of egress, fire protection systems,
lighting, and ventilation.
Section 3410.2 Applicability is amended by inserting "January 1, 1959" to specify the date.
Chapter 35 Referenced Standards is amended by inserting 2008 edition of the national electrical code in place of ICC electrical code wherever it may
appear and by inserting the more restrictive of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code in
place of international plumbing code wherever it may appear.
Chapter 35 is further amended by adding the following sentence to the section which refers to the NFPA:
All referenced NFPA standards shall refer to the most current standard available.
(Ord. 2008-52, 8-21-2008)
Chapter 3
RESIDENTIAL CODE
10-3-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village and incorporated herein by reference the 2006 edition of the international residential code for one- and two-family
dwellings, as promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., as the one- and two-family dwelling code for regulating and governing the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of one- and twofamily
dwellings and townhouses, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the director of community development available for public use,
examination, and inspection. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of the international residential code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes set forth in section 10-3-2 of this
chapter. (Ord. 2008-57, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
10-3-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The 2006 international residential code adopted by section 10-3-1 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section R101.1 is amended to read as follows:
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the residential code for one and two-family dwellings of the village of Glendale Heights, and shall be
cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code".
Section R103 DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section R104 is amended as follows:
Wherever a reference to "building official" is made within section R104 or anywhere else in this code, it shall mean director of community development
or his designee.
Section R107.3 is amended by amending the last sentence to read as follows:
The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the 2008 edition of
the national electrical code.
(Ord. 2008-57, 8-21-2008)
Section R113.4 is amended to read as follows:
R113.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be penalized
with a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $1,000.00. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 2008-57, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Section R309.1 Opening Protection is amended by adding the following sentence to read as follows:
Doors shall be self-closing.
Section R309.3.1 is added to read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 349/618
R309.3.1 Attached Garages. Openings between attached garages and the principal building shall have doorsills raised a minimum of four (4) inches.
Section R325 is added to read as follows:
SECTION R325
RODENT PROOFING
Section R325.1 is added to read as follows:
R325.1 Rodent Proofing. Building additions, decks, patio enclosures, or any structure added to the existing foundation not provided with a continuous
foundation shall be provided with protection against rodents at grade by either an apron in accordance with section R325.2 or a floor slab in
accordance with section R325.3.
Section R325.2 is added to read as follows:
R325.2 Apron. Where an apron is provided, the apron shall not be less than eight (8) inches above, nor less than twenty-four (24) inches below, grade.
The apron shall not terminate below the lower edge of the siding material. The apron shall be constructed of an approved non-decayable, waterresistant
rat-proofing material of required strength and shall be installed around the entire perimeter of the building. Where constructed of masonry or
concrete materials, the apron shall not be less than four (4) inches in thickness.
Section R325.3 is added to read as follows:
R325.3 Grade Floors. Where continuous concrete grade floor slabs are provided, open spaces shall not be left between the slab and walls, and
openings in the slab shall be protected.
Section R326 is added to read as follows:
SECTION R326
PATIO ENCLOSURES AND OTHER ROOFED STRUCTURES
Section R326.1 is added to read as follows:
R326.1 General. Patio enclosures and any other type(s) of roofed structures, greater than one hundred (100) square feet, added to an existing
structure shall be required to have a minimum of an eight (8) inch full perimeter bell trench foundation. Such trench shall be formed a minimum of six
(6) inches above grade and extend forty-two (42) inches below grade to the accepted depth of the frost line.
(Ord. 2008-57, 8-21-2008)
Section R327 is added to read as follows:
SECTION R327
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
Section R327.1 is added to read as follows:
R327.1 General. Provide an anchorage system approved by the director of community development.
(Ord. 2008-57, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Section R328 is added to read as follows:
SECTION R328
R-3 RESIDENTIAL FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM
Section R328.1 is added to read as follows:
Section R328.1 General. Provide an approved residential fire suppression system for single family dwellings in excess of 3,000 square feet. Provide
an approved fire suppression system for townhomes of two (2) or more combined units.
Exception: Townhomes are exempt from suppression requirement when built to type I or II construction criteria.
Section R402.1 Wood Foundations. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section R402.1.1 Fasteners. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section R402.1.2 Wood Treatment. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section R504 Pressure Preservatively Treated-Wood Floors (On Ground). Delete this section in its entirety.
(Ord. 2008-57, 8-21-2008)
Section AJ401.2 is added to read as follows:
AJ401.2 Door And Window Dimensions. Minor reductions in the clear opening dimensions of replacement doors and windows that result from the
use of different materials shall be allowed, whether or not they are permitted by this code. This reduction is limited to a maximum of two (2) inches in
either direction, provided that it is the only option available to the homeowner.
(Ord. 2015-52, 9-3-2015)
Section G2414.5.3 Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing. Delete this section in its entirety.
Chapters 25-32, inclusive, shall be deleted in their entirety. All plumbing shall comply with the more restrictive of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 350/618
code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code.
Chapters 33-39, inclusive, shall be deleted in their entirety. All electrical work, equipment, and installations shall comply with the 2008 edition of the
national electrical code.
Chapter 43 Referenced Standards is amended by inserting 2008 edition of the national electrical code in place of ICC electrical code wherever it may
appear and by inserting the more restrictive of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code.
(Ord. 2008-57, 8-21-2008)
Chapter 4
ELECTRICAL CODE
10-4-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village and incorporated herein by reference the national electrical code, March 2008 edition, as published by the National
Fire Protection Association as the electrical code for the control of buildings and structures within the village, three (3) copies of which are on file in the
office of the director of community development available for public use, examination and inspection. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions
and terms of the national electrical code, including annexes A, B, and C, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
section with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes set forth in section 10-4-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-54, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
10-4-2: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In the event any provisions, articles, wording, and the like of the 2008 edition of the national electrical code and latest amendments are in conflict with any
ordinances, amendments, and/or addenda, as recognized, approved, and adopted by the village, or in conflict with the state law, the most restrictive
provisions, articles, wording, and the like shall prevail. (Ord. 2008-54, 8-21-2008)
10-4-3: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Article 80 Add new article as follows:
Article 80 Administrative Power And Duties: Electrical Regulations Defined
Section 80-1 Suspension Of Permit Privileges: Failure on the part of any electrical contractor to correct any defect, error, or deficiency in any work
installed under the authority of a permit issued to him/her by the director of community development within ten (10) calendar days after written
notification thereof by the said director or within such further reasonable time as may, upon request, be prescribed, the director of community
development shall, without further notice, stop the issuance of permits to such registered electrical contractor until such corrections have been made,
inspected, and approved. In addition thereto the penalty provided in this chapter may be enforced.
The director of community development is hereby empowered to suspend the permit privileges of any registered electrical contractor who shall fail to
pay any just indebtedness for inspection fees for electrical wires and apparatus as fixed by that part of this chapter dealing therewith, until such
registered electrical contractor shall discharge and pay to the village all just indebtedness then due and owing from such electrical contractor.
Section 80-2 Removal Of Abandoned Materials: All abandoned wiring, conductors, conduit systems, raceways, junction boxes, electrical devices,
electrical materials and/or equipment, etc. shall be removed prior to a final electrical inspection.
Section 110-14(A) Amend section as follows:
Section 110-14(A) Terminals: No more than one (1) conductor shall be connected and/or installed to a single screw terminal on any electrical device.
Section 210-8(B)(3) Add new section as follows:
Section 210-8(B)(3) Duplex Receptacle Requirements: All receptacles that are installed in locker rooms, or installed in and/or associated with foliage,
plants, and the like, shall be ground fault interrupter protected.
Section 210-10(B)(5) Add section as follows:
Section 210-10(B)(5) Receptacles: All duplex receptacles in other than dwelling units shall be a minimum of twenty (20) ampere rated.
Section 210-70(D) Add new section as follows:
Section 210-70(D) Illumination In Basement Areas: A minimum of one (1) switched lighting fixture shall be installed in the immediate area of the top
stair tread of all staircases leading to basement areas. A minimum of one (1) switched lighting fixture shall be installed in the area of the lower most
stair tread of all staircases that lead to the basement area.
The switch device that is required to control both upper and lower lighting fixtures shall be installed at a readily accessible location at the uppermost
tread area of the staircase.
Note: Said lighting fixtures as noted above may be relocated because of the staircase layout where it may be necessary to provide sufficient
illumination on the general stair tread areas as deemed necessary by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
Panelboards that are installed in basement areas shall have a minimum of one (1) lighting fixture installed within three (3) feet of the panelboard cover.
Section 210-70(E) Add new section as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 351/618
Section 210-70(E) Three And Four-Way Switch Locations: A three (3) way switch shall be installed at each entrance and/or exit in all hallways for the
purpose of controlling the lighting fixtures that are required.
A four (4) way switching arrangement may be required in hallways where the length and/or the construction layout of the walls are installed in a manner
where it is deemed necessary by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction to require the four (4) way switching arrangement.
All rooms that have more than one (1) entrance and/or exit to said room(s) (such as kitchens, dining rooms, etc.) shall have the lighting fixtures and/or
a wall mounted receptacle that is installed for general lighting purposes be controlled by a three (3) way switching arrangement.
A four (4) way switching arrangement may be required in rooms as noted above where the wall construction of said rooms is installed in a manner
where it is deemed necessary by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction to require.
Section 220-40 Add new section as follows:
Section 220-40 General: Ampacity And Computed Loads: In single family attached dwellings the service size shall be a minimum of 100 amps per
dwelling unit. In detached single family dwellings the service size shall be a minimum of 200 amps.
Section 230-7 Change section as follows:
Section 230-7 Delete all exceptions.
Section 230-23(B) Add to section as follows:
Section 230-23(B) Minimum Size: The conductors shall not be smaller than number three (3) copper and installed in a minimum of 11/4" rigid heavy
wall galvanized steel, IMC, or aluminum heavy wall conduit.
Section 230-31(B) Change section as follows:
Section 230-31(B) Minimum Size: The conductors shall not be smaller than number three (3) copper.
Section 230-42(B) Change section as follows:
Section 230-42(B) Ungrounded Conductors: Reference to ungrounded conductors shall be deleted.
Section 230-42(B) Add new section as follows:
Section 230-42(B) Service Entrance Conductors Single Family Type: All service entrance conductors installed for new single family type construction
shall be a minimum AWG wire size of number 3/0 gauge copper conductor.
(a) Regardless of the minimum size of service conductors as required in the above paragraph all service conductors shall be adequate for the
connected load.
(b) The required service entrance conductors as noted in paragraph (a) above shall be installed in a minimum of two (2) inch trade size conduit, which
shall be rigid heavy wall galvanized steel, IMC, or heavy wall aluminum conduit.
(c) All circuit breakers shall be fully sized in dimensions and for proper insertion into the panelboard, as set forth by the switchgear and panelboard
manufacturer and as listed by a recognized testing laboratory.
Substitution of two or more circuit breakers in a space so designed or previously occupied by a lesser number shall not be approved and will not be
accepted.
(d) Deterioration of electric service entrance equipment and/or branch circuit panelboards, and the like: All incoming electrical service equipment, and
to include any existing switchgear, branch circuit panelboards, and/or parts thereof, and to include any electrical equipment that is not mentioned in this
paragraph, shall be completely free from any corrosion, rusts, and/or deterioration of any kind.
If in the opinion of the electrical inspector having jurisdiction there is evidence of any electrical equipment and/or parts thereof, that is observed to be
corroded, rusted, deteriorated and/or of an unsafe nature, said electrical equipment, switchgear, panelboards, and the like, shall be completely
replaced with electrical equipment that is manufactured of "new" condition.
Section 230-52 Change section as follows:
Section 230-52 Individual Conductors Entering Buildings Or Other Structures: Delete section in its entirety.
Section 230-54(B) Change section as follows:
Section 230-54(B) Service Cable Equipped With Raintight Service Head Or Gooseneck: Delete section with reference to use of gooseneck.
Section 230-54(C) Change section as follows:
Section 230-54(C) Service Heads And Goosenecks Above Service-Drop Attachment: Delete reference to use of gooseneck.
Section 230-70(A) Add to section as follows:
Section 230-70(A) Location: The main service disconnecting means (circuit breaker or fused switch device) shall be located within five (5) feet of the
point where the service conductors enter the building and/or five (5) feet of the metering device.
Where the use and installation of multi-metering devices are required in buildings and/or structures such as apartment type complexes, condominiums,
multi-family type structures, etc., all service entrance equipment, (such as tenant metering equipment, main service disconnecting means, etc.) shall be
grouped and shall be installed in a dedicated electrical room so approved for the purpose.
Section 230-71(A) Amend section as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 352/618
Section 230-71(A) General: The service disconnecting means for each service permitted by section 230-2, or for each set of service entrance
conductors permitted by section 230-40, exception number one (1), shall consist of not more than one (1) main disconnect mounted in a single
enclosure, in a group of separate enclosures, or in or on a switchboard. There shall be no more than one (1) disconnect per service grouped in any
location.
Section 230-79(C) Amend section as follows:
Section 230-79(C) One Family Dwelling: For a new one-family dwelling, the service disconnect means shall have a rating of not less than two hundred
(200) amperes.
Section 240-23(a) Add new section as follows:
Section 240-23(a) Service Entrance Neutral Conductors: All service entrance neutral conductors shall be fully rated and fully sized equal to the rating of
the service entrance conductors.
Undersizing or derating of the neutral conductors is not permitted and will not be accepted.
Section 240-83(F) Add new section as follows:
Section 240-83(F) Bolt-In Circuit Breakers: All commercial and industrial installations shall use bolt-in type circuit breakers.
Section 240-84 Add new section as follows:
Section 240-84 Number Of Conductors Permitted On A Circuit Terminal: The application and/or installation of more than one (1) conductor to a circuit
breaker terminal or a fuse holder terminal shall not be approved and will not be accepted.
(A) In wiring installations where it is required to install parallel sets of conductors, each conductor shall be connected and/or attached to a lug or
terminal so designated or sized as to accept not more than one (1) conductor.
Section 250-26(A) Add new section as follows:
Section 250-26(A) Residential Grounding, Primary Ground: When interior water pipe is utilized for grounding method, grounding shall be installed to the
street side of the water meter ahead of any shut-off valves.
(A) All ground conductors shall be installed in EMT, rigid heavy wall galvanized steel conduit or IMC.
(B) An approved ground clamp and a metal identification tag shall be installed where the ground is connected to the grounding conductor. Grounding
connector shall terminate at a grounding electrode/water pipe.
Section 250-26(B) Add new section as follows:
Section 250-26(B) Grounding: When grounding for any combination of service entrance systems and equipment, the grounding conductor shall be
installed directly from the grounding lug and/or neutral buss in the service disconnect enclosure or service distribution enclosure, to the street side of
the incoming water service and ahead of any shut-off valve.
Section 250-26(C) Add new section as follows:
Section 250-26(C) Ground Conductor In Conduit: The ground conductor for service entrance equipment, where said service entrance equipment is
rated at four hundred (400) amperes and larger, shall be installed in rigid heavy wall galvanized steel or intermediate grade rigid conduit. All fittings,
couplings, etc. shall be of the threaded type. Set screws type and/or compression type fittings will not be accepted.
Section 250-26(D) Add new section as follows:
Section 250-26(D) Ground Identification: An approved ground clamp and a metal identification tag shall be installed where the grounding conductor is
connected to the grounding electrode.
Section 250-26(E) Add new section as follows:
Section 250-26(E) Ground Conductor: All grounding conductors shall be copper.
Section 300-3(D) Add new section as follows:
Section 300-3(D) Voltage Identification: When more than one (1) voltage is installed or when voltages exceed 240 volts in a building, tenant space, etc.,
black lettering on an orange sticker shall be installed on the following covers:
(a) Switchgear.
(b) Panelboard.
(c) Junction box.
(d) Pull and/or tap box.
(e) Disconnects.
Section 300-5(L) Add new section as follows:
Section 300-5(L) Detached Structures: All conduits that contain conductors for the purpose of supplying electricity to detached structures such as
garages, storage sheds, etc., shall be rigid heavy wall galvanized steel conduit, intermediate metallic conduit, or non-metallic raceway.
Section 314.3 Change section as follows:
Section 314.3 Nonmetallic Boxes: Delete section in its entirety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 353/618
Section 314.6 Add new section as follows:
Section 314.6 Sizes Of Junction Boxes: In all single family dwellings, apartment units and/or apartment type complexes, condominiums, townhouses,
multifamily structures, detached structures, general outdoor electrical installations, storage sheds, etc. all junction boxes shall be metallic. The
minimum dimensions of any junction box, splicing box, pull box, etc. shall be four (4) by four (4) by one and one half (11/2) inches in depth.
Note: Junction boxes required for use for the proper installation and/or mounting of lighting fixtures may be of the eight (8) sided type but shall be a
minimum of one and one half (11/2) inches deep.
(A) Junction boxes that are required to be installed in brick and/or masonry walls or structures need not be of the sizes as stated in the paragraph
above, however, said junction boxes shall be of the masonry type and approved for location by the electrical inspector having jurisdiction.
Section 314.17(C) Change section as follows:
Section 314.17(C) Nonmetallic Boxes And Conduit Bodies: Delete section in its entirety.
Section 314.20 Add new section as follows:
Section 314.20 Ceiling Fixtures: Ceiling openings in habitable rooms of residential dwellings shall have a fan rated junction box.
Article 320 Change article as follows:
Article 320 Armored Cable: Type AC: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 322 Change article as follows:
Article 322 Flat Cable Assemblies: Type FC: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 324 Change article as follows:
Article 324 Flat Conductor Cable: Type FCC: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 326 Change article as follows:
Article 326 Integrated Gas Space Cable: Type IGS: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 328 Change article as follows:
Article 328 Medium Voltage Cable: Type MV: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 330 Change article as follows:
Article 330 Metal Clad Cable: Type MC: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 334 Change article as follows:
Article 334 Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable: Type NM, NMC, And NMS: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 336 Change article as follows:
Article 336 Power And Control Tray Cable: Type TC: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 338 Change article as follows:
Article 338 Service-Entrance Cables: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 340 Change article as follows:
Article 340 Underground Feeder And Branch-Circuit Cable: Type UF: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 352 Change article as follows:
Article 352 Rigid Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit: Type PVC: Delete article in its entirety with exception of II Installation G.
Article 352 Add new article as follows:
Article 352 Rigid Polyvinyl Chloride Conduit: Type PVC: Rigid nonmetallic conduit type PVC is to be terminated with rigid wall conduit of the same size
and shall contain a ground wire sized in accordance with table 250-95 (minimum size number twelve (12)) and shall be terminated at a ground bar in
the distribution panel (not the neutral) and a grounding bushing shall be installed on the live load side. All penetrations up and into the ground are
required to be rigid metallic conduit through the first bend into the ground and continuous on the exterior until penetration into a weather sheltered area.
Article 353 Change article as follows:
Article 353 High Density Polyethylene Conduit: Type HDPE Conduit: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 354 Change article as follows:
Article 354 Nonmetallic Underground Conduit With Conductors: Type NUCC: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 355 Change article as follows:
Article 355 Reinforced Thermosetting Resin Conduit: Type RTRC: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 356 Change article as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 354/618
Article 356 Liquidtight Flexible Nonmetallic Conduit: Type LFNC: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 362 Change article as follows:
Article 362 Electrical Nonmetallic Tubing: Type ENT: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 366 Change article as follows:
Article 366 Auxiliary Gutters: Delete all references to nonmetallic gutters.
Section 370-17(c) Change section as follows:
Section 370-17(c) Nonmetallic Boxes: Delete section in its entirety.
Section 370-27(d) Add new section as follows:
Section 370-27(d) Ceiling Fixtures: Ceiling openings in residential living rooms, dining rooms, breakfast rooms, kitchens, and bedrooms shall have a
fan rated junction box installed.
Article 378 Change article as follows:
Article 378 Nonmetallic Wireways: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 382 Change article as follows:
Article 382 Nonmetallic Extensions: Delete article in its entirety.
Section 384-100(D) Add new section as follows:
Section 384-100(D) Electrical Equipment Rooms And/Or Closets: In all commercial buildings, industrial buildings, and to include residential buildings,
(such as apartment type complexes, condominium type structures, etc.), where vaults, transformers, electrical equipment (such as switchgear,
panelboards, distribution points, etc.) are established throughout various floors of the building, all such electrical equipment shall be grouped and
installed in an approved electrical closet and/or switchroom so designed and designated for the purpose. Such electrical closets shall be for the
exclusive use of the electrical equipment and/or electrical system and shall be so constructed as to provide the required working space around and/or
in front of all electrical equipment installed therein.
Section 384-100(E) Add new section as follows:
Section 384-100(E) Rooms To Be Vented: All electrical closets, switchrooms, electrical equipment rooms, transformer rooms and/or vaults, and the like,
that contain transformer(s) that are rated one hundred-(100) kVa or larger, shall be power vented to the outside air environment. Ventilation
requirements shall be of sufficient size so that said rooms shall not exceed an operating temperature of eighty (80) degrees F.
Section 384-100(F) Add new section as follows:
Section 384-100(F) Industrial-Commercial Panelboards: All panelboards used in an industrial or commercial application shall be of the bolt-in type.
Article 388 Change article as follows:
Article 388 Surface Nonmetallic Raceways: Delete article in its entirety.
Article 604 Change article as follows:
Article 604 Manufactured Wiring Systems: Delete article in its entirety.
Section 605-4 Change section as follows:
Section 605-4 Partition Interconnections: Delete all exceptions.
Section 680-41 Add to section as follows:
Section 680-41 Indoor Installation: Spas and hot tubs installed within a residence, hotel, motel, health spa, or other commercial building shall be
protected by an approved GFCI circuit breaker (a GFCI receptacle with the appliance connected to the load side of the receptacle or plugged into a
GFCI under the tub shall not be accepted).
Section 720-11 Amend section as follows:
Section 720-11 Mechanical Execution Of Work: All conductors installed for low voltage applications such as door bells, door lock release devices,
thermostat control, control wiring in general, music systems, communication systems, TV and cable TV systems, etc. shall be installed in electrical
metallic tubing, rigid heavy wall galvanized steel conduit, intermediate metallic conduit, and the like, or other approved raceway within walls or other
inaccessible locations in areas where said low-voltage installations may be subject to mechanical damage, or where exposed below the bottom of the
lowest structural support of the ceiling or floor above.
(Ord. 2008-54, 8-21-2008)
Chapter 5
PLUMBING CODE
10-5-1: ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS:
The current edition of the Illinois plumbing code (77 Ill. adm. code, part 890) promulgated by the Illinois department of public health is hereby adopted as
the plumbing code of the village of Glendale Heights, to establish regulations for the minimum control of plumbing materials and fixtures, and for the
design, construction and installation of plumbing systems in the village, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the Illinois
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 355/618
plumbing code, promulgated by the Illinois department of public health are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set forth in this
section as amended by the local amendments set forth in section 10-5-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-02, 1-5-2017)
10-5-2: AMENDMENT OF REGULATIONS:
A. The Illinois plumbing code adopted pursuant to section 10-5-1 of this chapter is adopted with the following local amendments:
1. Required Use Of WaterSense Products. Pursuant to 17 Ill. admin. code 3730.307(c)(4) and subject to the Illinois plumbing code (77 Ill. admin.
code 890) and the lawn irrigation contractor and lawn sprinkler system registration code (77 Ill. admin. code 892), all new and replacement plumbing
fixtures and irrigation controllers shall bear the WaterSense label (as designated by the U.S. environmental protection agency WaterSense program),
when such labeled fixtures are available.
(Ord. 2017-02, 1-5-2017)
10-5-3: WATER CONSERVATION:
A. Water Saving Device Required: In all new construction and in all repair and/or replacement of fixtures or trim, every building equipped with plumbing
fixtures and used for human occupancy or habitation shall be provided with a water saving device on all plumbing fixtures. These fixtures shall not
utilize a water flow rate in excess of the maximum rates published by the Illinois department of transportation in "Rules And Procedures For Lake
Michigan Allocation", or as may be forthcoming from the secretary of housing and urban development, pursuant to the energy conservation and
production act (H.R. 12169) and its energy conservation standards for new buildings (Pub.L. 94-385).
B. Flushing Devices For Toilet Facilities:
1. Each water closet, toilet, urinal, clinical sink, or other plumbing fixtures which depend on trap siphonage to discharge its waste contents to the
drainage system to which it is connected shall be provided with a flushometer valve, flush tank, or similar device designed and installed so as to
supply water in sufficient quantity and rate of flow to flush to the sewer the contents of the fixture to which it is connected, to cleanse the fixture and
to refill the fixture trap.
2. All flushometer and/or tank type urinals shall be of a water conserving nature and operate at a rate not to exceed three (3.0) gallons maximum per
flush. Where flush tanks are equipped for manual flushing, they shall be controlled by a float valve or other automatic device designed to refill the
tank after each discharge, and to completely shut off the water flow to the tank when the tank is filled to operational capacity. Provision shall be made
to automatically supply water to the fixtures so as to refill the trap seal after each flushing. The water supply to flush tanks equipped for automatic
flushing shall be controlled by a suitable timing device to thus act as a water conserving device and prohibit the valve from remaining in the open
position.
3. Water closets for flush tanks shall be of a conserving nature and operate at a rate not to exceed three and one-half (3.5) gallons maximum per flush.
C. Showers:
1. Water Supply Riser: Every water supply riser from the shower valve to the showerhead outlet, whether exposed or not, shall be securely attached to
the structure.
2. Showerhead: Every shower shall be equipped with a limited flow showerhead of a water conserving nature and operate at a rate not to exceed three
(3.0) gallons per minute.
3. Shower Waste Outlet: Waste outlets serving showers shall be at least two inches (2") in diameter and, for other than those in bathtubs, shall have
removable strainers not less than three inches (3") in diameter having strainer openings not less than one-fourth inch (1/4") in minimum dimension.
Where each shower space is not provided with an individual waste outlet, the waste outlet must be so located and the floor so pitched that
wastewater from one shower does not flow over the floor area serving another shower. Waste outlets shall be securely fastened to the waste pipe,
making a watertight connection thereto.
4. Shower Compartments: Shower compartments shall have at least one thousand twenty four (1,024) square inches of floor area and be not less than
thirty inches (30") in minimum dimension, measured from its finished interior dimension as the side of a rectangle, altitude of a triangle or diameter of
a circle or other angular shape. The wall area above built in tubs having installed showerheads and in shower compartments shall be constructed of
smooth, noncorrosive and nonabsorbent waterproof materials to a height of not less than six feet (6') above the floor level. Such walls shall form a
watertight joint with each other and with either the tub, receptor or shower floor.
5. Shower Floors Or Receptors: Floors or receptors under shower compartments shall be laid on, or be supported by, a smooth and structurally sound
base. Floors under shower compartments, other than those laid directly on the ground surface or where prefabricated receptors have been provided,
shall be lined and made watertight by the provision of suitable shower pans or durable material. Such pans shall turn up on all sides at least two
inches (2") above the finished threshold level. Pans shall be securely fastened to the waste outlet at the seepage entrance, making a watertight joint
between the pan and the outlet. Floor surfaces shall be constructed of smooth, noncorrosive, nonabsorbent and waterproof materials.
D. Sinks: Sinks shall be provided with waste outlets not less than one and one-half inches (11/2") in diameter. A strainer, crossbar, or other device shall be
provided to restrict the clear opening of the waste outlet. Sinks on which a food grinder is installed shall have a waste opening not less than three and
one-half inches (31/2") in diameter. The water supply to sinks shall be equipped with water saving devices that utilize aerators plus restrictors to operate
at a rate not to exceed three (3.0) gallons per minute. The water supply to sinks in public facilities shall be equipped with self-closing faucets which will
not permit the unattended faucet to be left in the open position.
E. Valves:
1. All public use plumbing fixtures shall be equipped with standard valves.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 356/618
2. A gate or ball valve shall be installed in the line on each side of each water meter and backflow assembly. The valve shall not be less in size than the
building water service, with a drip valve on the discharge side of the meter.
3. All commercial water services shall be split outside the structure and valued separately for fire protection and domestic water supply. (Ord. 2008-55,
8-21-2008)
10-5-4: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a provision of this chapter or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof, or who shall
install, extend, alter or remove any plumbing work or plumbing system in violation of an approved plan or directive of the director of community
development or his designee, or of a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with
the penalties prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2008-55, 8-21-2008)
Chapter 6
MECHANICAL CODE
10-6-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village and incorporated herein by reference the international mechanical code, 2006 edition, as promulgated by the
International Code Council, Inc., as the mechanical code for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems within the village, three (3) copies of which are on file in the
office of the director of community development available for public use, examination, and inspection. Each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions, and terms of the international mechanical code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section with the
additions, insertions, deletions, and changes set forth in section 10-6-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-56, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
10-6-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The 2006 international mechanical code hereinabove adopted is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Change section as follows:
Section 101.1 Title: Insert village of Glendale Heights for jurisdiction.
Section 106.5.2 Change section as follows:
Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule: Insert see subsection 10-1-5A and section 10-1-8-1 of the village code.
Section 106.5.3 Change section as follows:
Section 106.5.3 Fee Refunds: Delete section in its entirety.
(Ord. 2008-56, 8-21-2008)
Section 108.4 Change section as follows:
Section 108.4 Violation Penalties: Add misdemeanor for offense. Add one thousand (1,000) dollars for amount.
Section 108.5 Change section as follows:
Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders: Add fifty (50) dollars to first amount. Add one thousand (1,000) dollars to second amount.
(Ord. 2008-56, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Section 109 Change section as follows:
Section 109 Means Of Appeal: Delete section in its entirety.
Section 602.2 Amend section as follows:
Section 602.2 Construction: Plenum enclosures shall be constructed of noncombustible materials.
Delete paragraph two (2) in its entirety.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 357/618
Section 602.2.1.3 Change section as follows:
Section 602.2.1.3 Pneumatic Tubing: Delete section in its entirety.
Section 602.3 Change section as follows:
Section 602.3 Stud Cavity And Joist Space Plenums: Delete entire section.
Section 603.5.1 Change section as follows:
Section 603.5.1 Gypsum Ducts: Delete entire section.
(Ord. 2008-56, 8-21-2008)
Chapter 7
FUEL GAS CODE
10-7-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village and incorporated herein by reference the international fuel gas code, March 2006 edition, as promulgated by the
International Code Council, Inc., as the fuel gas code for the control of buildings and structures within the village, three (3) copies of which are on file in the
office of the director of community development available for public use, examination, and inspection. Each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions, and terms of the international fuel gas code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section with the
additions, insertions, deletions, and changes set forth in section 10-7-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-58, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
10-7-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The 2006 international fuel gas code adopted in section 10-7-1 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Insert in section as follows:
Section 101.1 Title: Insert village of Glendale Heights.
Section 106.5.2 Insert in section as follows:
Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule: Insert see section 10-1-8-1 of the village code.
(Ord. 2008-58, 8-21-2008)
Section 301.6 Change section as follows:
Section 301.6 Plumbing Connections: Delete reference to the international plumbing code and insert the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code
and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code, provided, in conflict, the more restrictive provision shall control.
(Ord. 2008-58, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Section 306.3.1 Change section as follows:
Section 306.3.1 Electrical Requirements: Delete reference to ICC electric code and insert 2008 national electrical code.
Section 306.4.1 Change section as follows:
Section 306.4.1 Electrical Requirements: Delete reference to the ICC electrical code and replace with 2008 national electrical code.
Section 309.2 Change section as follows:
Section 309.2 Connections: Delete reference to ICC electric code and replace with 2008 national electrical code.
Section 413.9.2.4 Change section as follows:
Section 413.9.2.4 Grounding And Bonding: Delete reference to ICC electric code and replace with 2008 national electrical code.
(Ord. 2008-58, 8-21-2008)
Section 624.1.1 Change section as follows:
Section 624.1.1 Installation Requirements: Delete reference to international plumbing code and replace with the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing
code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code, provided, in conflict, the more restrictive provision shall control.
Section 624.2 Change section as follows:
Section 624.2 Water Heaters Utilized For Space Heating: Delete reference to international plumbing code and replace with the 2004 edition of the
Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code, provided, in conflict, the more restrictive provision shall control.
(Ord. 2008-58, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 358/618
Chapter 8
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
10-8-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village and incorporated herein by reference the international energy conservation code, March 2006 edition, as
promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., as the energy conservation code for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the building envelope, mechanical, lighting and power systems
within the village, three (3) copies of which are on file in the office of the director of community development available for public use, examination, and
inspection. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the international energy conservation code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes set forth in section 10-8-2 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2008-59, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
10-8-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The 2006 international energy conservation code adopted in section 10-8-1 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Change the section as follows:
Section 101.1 Title: Insert the village of Glendale Heights as jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2008-59, 8-21-2008)
Section 201.3 Amend section as follows:
Section 201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes: Delete ICC electrical code and international plumbing code and replace with 2008 national electrical
code and the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code, provided, in conflict, the more
restrictive provision shall control.
(Ord. 2008-59, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Table 302.1 Insert values as follows:
Table 302.1 Exterior Design Conditions: Insert -5 degrees Fahrenheit for winter design dry-bulb.
Insert 97 degrees Fahrenheit for summer design dry-bulb.
Insert 97 degrees Fahrenheit for summer design wet-bulb.
Insert 6800 for degree-days heating.
Insert 14B for climate zone.
(Ord. 2008-59, 8-21-2008)
Chapter 9
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
10-9-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
There is hereby adopted by the village and incorporated herein by reference the 2006 edition of the international property maintenance code, as
promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., as the basic existing structures code for the control of buildings and structures within the village, three
(3) copies of which are on file in the office of the community development director available for public use, examination and inspection. Each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the international property maintenance code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes set forth in section 10-9-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008-53, 8-21-2008; amd.
2011 Code)
10-9-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The 2006 international property maintenance code adopted by section 10-9-1 of this chapter is amended as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the property maintenance code of the village of Glendale Heights, hereinafter referred to as "this
code".
Section 102.3 is amended to read as follows:
102.3 Application Of Other Codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the international building code, international fuel and gas code, international mechanical code, and the 2008 edition of the
national electrical code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 359/618
Section 103 Department Of Property Maintenance Inspection. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section 104 is amended as follows:
Whenever a reference to "code official" is made within section 104 or anywhere else in this code, it shall mean director of community development or
his designee.
Section 104.8 is added to read as follows:
104.8 Coordination Of Inspections. Whenever one or more officials from the jurisdiction is involved in the enforcement of this code or another code
or ordinance, it shall be the duty of the officials involved to coordinate their inspections and administrative orders as fully as practicable so that the
owners and occupants of the structure shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders. Whenever an inspector
from any agency or department observes an apparent or actual violation of some provision of some law, ordinance or code not within the inspector's
authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the findings to the official having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2008-53, 8-21-2008)
Section 106.3 Prosecution Of Violation. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section 106.4 is amended to read as follows:
106.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any requirements thereof, shall be
penalized with a fine of not less than $75.00 or more than $1,000.00. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 107.2 Form. Amend this section by deleting subsections 107.2(5) and 107.2(6) in their entirety.
Section 107.3 Method Of Service. Amend this section by amending subsection 107.3(3) to read as follows:
3. Posted upon the property where the violation is found when the person is the owner or manager of the property.
(Ord. 2014-69, 11-20-2014)
Section 111 Means Of Appeal. Delete this section in its entirety.
Section 201.3 is amended to read as follows:
201.3 Terms Defined In Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the international building code, international fire
code, 2004 Illinois plumbing code or 2006 edition of the international plumbing code, international mechanical code, or the 2008 edition of the national
electrical code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.
(Ord. 2008-53, 8-21-2008)
Section 302.2.1 is added to read as follows:
302.2.1 Approved Ground Cover. All premises shall be covered with an approved ground cover such as grass, gravel, or any material approved by
the director of community development. Should gravel, or any approved non impervious substance be selected for ground cover, it shall be installed in
such a manner as to discourage or eliminate the capacity to park a motor or recreational vehicle on the gravel ground cover.
Section 302.4 Weeds is amended by inserting "eight (8) inches" to specify the height.
Section 302.8 Motor Vehicles is amended by adding the following sentence to the first paragraph:
A vehicle that has not moved in thirty (30) days, does not display a valid village vehicle sticker, does not display a valid state registration plate, has flat
tires and/or broken windows or lights shall be deemed by the director of community development as inoperable.
(Ord. 2008-53, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Section 302.10 is added to read as follows:
302.10 Interior Furniture. Furniture commonly and typically accepted as for interior use (such as foam and fabric lined and stuffed materials) shall not
be permitted for outdoor use.
Section 302.11 is added to read as follows:
302.11 Harborage Of Unleashed, Uncontrolled Animals. The harborage of unleashed, uncontrolled animals shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 2008-53, 8-21-2008)
Section 304.3 Premises Identification is amended by adding the following sentence:
Addresses are required on all commercial and multi-family units as provided in subsection 10-12-5E of the village code.
(Ord. 2008-53, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Section 304.14 is amended by inserting "May 1" to specify the first date and "September 30" to specify the second date.
Section 304.19 is added to read as follows:
304.19 Window Well Covers. All basement or below grade windows that include a window well shall be covered with an approved protective guard.
(Ord. 2008-53, 8-21-2008)
Section 305.1.1 is added to read as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 360/618
305.1.1 Interior Inspection. Every owner of a building or structure containing a rooming house, a hotel, a dormitory, or four (4) or more dwelling units
shall submit for an interior inspection of ten (10) percent of the total units on an annual basis, with a unit rotation, established by the director of
community development, to facilitate a complete and total inspection of the property in a timely manner.
(Ord. 2008-53, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Section 404.4.4 is amended to read as follows:
404.4.4 Prohibited Occupancy. Kitchens, dining rooms, living rooms, unfinished basements, and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping
purposes.
Section 404.4.6 is added to read as follows:
404.4.6 Area For Sleeping Room. Every bedroom occupied by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every bedroom
occupied by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof.
Section 404.5.1 is added to read as follows:
404.5.1 Minimum Area Requirements. Required minimum area of living space in square feet:
Living Room
1. Living room for 2 or less occupants, no requirements.
2. Living room for 3-5 occupants, 120.
3. Living room for 6 or more occupants, 150.
Dining Room
1. Dining room 2 or less occupants, no requirements.
2. Dining room 3-5 occupants, 80.
3. Dining room 6 or more occupants, 100.
(Ord. 2008-53, 8-21-2008)
Kitchen
1. Kitchen 1-5 occupants, 50.
2. Kitchen 6 or more occupants, 60.
(Ord. 2008-53, 8-21-2008; amd. 2011 Code)
Bedrooms shall comply with section 404.4.6.
Section 404.5.2 is added to read as follows:
404.5.2 Sleeping Area. The minimum occupancy area required by section 404.5 shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum
occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with section 404.4.6.
Section 404.5.3 is added to read as follows:
404.5.3 Combined Spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of section 404.5.1 if the total area is
equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room.
Section 505.1 General is amended by amending the last sentence to read as follows:
All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with
the more restrictive of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code.
Section 507.1.1 is added to read as follows:
507.1.1 Sump Pump Discharge. Sump pump discharge piping shall not extend more than five (5) feet beyond the front of a dwelling unit and shall not
be permitted to discharge less than ten (10) feet from any property line.
Section 602.3 Heat Supply is amended by inserting "September 1" to specify the first date and "May 30" to specify the second date in the first paragraph.
Section 602.4 Occupied Work Spaces is amended by inserting "September 1" to specify the first date and "May 30" to specify the second date.
Section 604.2 is amended to read as follows:
604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance
with 2008 edition of the national electrical code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a
rating of not less than 60 amperes.
Section 605.2.1 is added to read as follows:
605.2.1 Protection. All receptacles within six (6) feet of any water source shall be ground fault circuit interrupter protected.
Section 704.5 is added to read as follows:
704.5 Fire Extinguisher. All multi-family structures with over four (4) units shall have at least one fire extinguisher in each separate common way on
each floor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 361/618
Chapter 8 Referenced Standards is amended by inserting 2008 edition of the national electrical code in place of ICC electrical code wherever it may
appear and by inserting the more restrictive of the 2004 edition of the Illinois plumbing code and the 2006 edition of the international plumbing code in
place of international plumbing code wherever it may appear.
(Ord. 2008-53, 8-21-2008)
Chapter 10
ELEVATORS AND ESCALATORS
10-10-1: STANDARDS ADOPTED:
The following standards are adopted and shall be adhered to within the village:
A. American Society Of Mechanical Engineers (ASME):
1. "Safety Code For Elevators And Escalators" (ASME A17.1-2005, A17.1(a)-2005, and A17.1(s)-2005);
2. "Guide For Inspection Of Elevators, Escalators, And Moving Walks" (ASME 17.2-2004);
3. "Safety Code For Existing Elevators And Escalators" (ASME A17.3-2005);
4. "Safety Standards For Platform Lifts And Stairway Chairlifts" (ASME A18.1-2005); and
5. "Standard For The Qualification Of Elevator Inspectors" (ASME QEI-1-2004).
B. American National Standards Institutue (ANSI):
1. "Safety Requirements For Personal Hoists And Employee Elevators" (ANSI A10.4-2004).
C. American Society Of Civil Engineers (ASCE):
1. "Automated People Mover Standards" (ASCE 21-2000). (Ord. 2007-113, 12-6-2007)
10-10-2: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with provisions of this chapter shall be punishable under the general penalty provisions of section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2007-113, 12-
6-2007)
Chapter 11
APPEARANCE CODE
10-11-1: TITLE:
This chapter, including any regulations adopted hereunder, shall be hereafter known, cited and referred to as the VILLAGE OF GLENDALE HEIGHTS
APPEARANCE CODE. (Ord. 2015-50, 9-3-2015)
10-11-2: INTENT, PURPOSE AND POLICY:
The village board finds and declares:
A. That the appearance of residential, commercial, and industrial structures visible from public streets, places and ways has a material and substantial
relationship to property values in the village and the cost of the municipal services provided therefor.
B. That neighborhoods have deteriorated in the past by reason of neglect of proper maintenance standards and the erection of structures unsuitable to
and incompatible with the character of the neighborhood, resulting in a reduction of property values and impairment of the public health, safety, morals
and welfare therein.
C. That the purposes of an appearance review are:
1. To promote those qualities in the environment which bring value to the community;
2. To foster the attractiveness and functional utility of the community as a place to live and work;
3. To preserve the character and quality of our heritage by maintaining the integrity of those areas which have a discernible character;
4. To protect public investments in the village; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 362/618
5. To raise the level of community expectations for the quality of its environment.
D. It is the policy of the village to:
1. Avoid and prevent deterioration of the character and appearance of the community;
2. Provide a favorable environment for residents and business activities; and
3. By the various means provided in this chapter, preserve and enhance the property and taxable values and the public health, safety, morals,
aesthetics and welfare of the village. (Ord. 2015-50, 9-3-2015)
10-11-3: REVIEW PROCESS:
A. Review: Appearance review of the proposed development and related plans shall be conducted by the community development department for
compliance with requirements outlined in, but not limited to, section 10-11-7, "Design Guidelines", of this chapter.
B. Decision By The Community Development Department: The community development department shall determine if the proposed development meets
the village's design guidelines and may modify the proposal or impose conditions of approval to bring the proposal into compliance with village design
guidelines. These conditions shall pertain to the external appearance of the development, including signage, and may include additional landscaping,
fencing or other exterior treatment as required to meet the village design guidelines.
C. Appeal Process: The applicant may appeal the decision of the community development department to the village board within fifteen (15) days of the
community development department determination.
D. Village Board Decision: The village board may either sustain or overrule the determination of the community development department determination in
whole or in part. The decision of the village board shall be a final determination subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the administrative
review law.
E. Expiration Of Appearance Approval: Appearance review approval of a proposal shall expire one year after the date of approval by the community
development department or the village board, unless extended specifically by a written application to the community development department. (Ord.
2015-50, 9-3-2015)
10-11-4: APPLICABILITY:
A. Permits To Be Reviewed; Exemptions:
1. The following building permit applications are subject to review for compliance with the guidelines set forth herein:
a. Residential additions, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or alterations;
b. Commercial additions, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or alterations;
c. Industrial additions, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or alterations;
d. Signs;
e. Lighting; and
f. Any and all additional exterior work which requires a permit and which is not exempted by subsection A2 of this section.
2. The following building permit applications are exempt from review for compliance with the guidelines set forth herein:
a. Any interior construction that has no exterior visibility.
b. Certain minor residential accessory structures such as open decks, sheds and fences.
B. Permit Approval: Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the director of community development shall review the applicant's documentation for
compliance with this code. Building permits shall only be issued upon authorization of the director of community development. (Ord. 2015-50, 9-3-2015)
10-11-5: FEES AND DOCUMENTATION REQUIRED:
A. The fee for appearance review is included in the permit fees.
B. Any costs incurred by the village necessary for the processing of the application, such as, but not limited to, consulting engineering services, consulting
planning services, or legal services, shall be paid by the applicant.
C. Applicants for appearance review shall submit a completed application form with the following information, as determined and modified by the director
of community development from time to time:
1. Plat of survey showing the proposed project and total building elevations to which improvements are proposed, in true color.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 363/618
2. Photographs of all sides of the existing structure and the front of neighboring buildings (if applicable).
3. List of building materials and colors.
4. Material samples.
5. Catalog cut sheets for certain items such as lighting fixtures.
6. Building plans. (Ord. 2015-50, 9-3-2015)
10-11-6: QUALITY OF DESIGN AND SITE DEVELOPMENT:
All development and redevelopment requiring appearance review shall be evaluated pursuant to the following quality of design and site development
criteria:
A. Open Spaces: The quality of the open spaces between buildings and between street and facade.
B. Materials: The quality of materials and their relationship to those of existing adjacent structures.
C. General Design: The quality of the design in general and its relationship to the overall character of the neighborhood.
D. Site Development: The quality of the site design development in terms of landscaping and other aesthetic features.
E. Special Considerations For Existing Buildings: For existing buildings, the appearance review shall consider the availability of materials, technology, and
craftsmanship to duplicate existing styles, patterns, textures, and overall detailing.
F. Manuals And Guidelines: The board of trustees may from time to time provide for specific manuals or guidelines for architectural styles or common
occurring buildings or site features and elements to assist applicants for exterior design elements. Such manuals or guidelines shall be advisory only
and shall bind neither the applicant nor the community development department with respect to any specific case. (Ord. 2015-50, 9-3-2015)
10-11-7: DESIGN GUIDELINES:
A. Architectural style is not restricted; however, extremes of style not indigenous to the village are not encouraged. Evaluation of the appearance of a
project shall be based on quality of its design and relationship to its surroundings.
B. Buildings shall be in scale and harmonious with permanent neighboring developments.
C. Materials shall be in harmony with adjoining structures.
D. A minimum of different types of exterior wall materials should be used. Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of building and design in
which they are used.
E. Materials shall be of durable quality.
F. There should be definite transitions between changes of material and plane while maintaining an overall simple geometry for the building mass.
G. In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall be compatible within themselves and harmonious to their
surroundings.
H. Exterior building components such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets shall have balanced proportions.
I. All sides of a structure should receive design consideration. A facade unrelated to the rest of the building is not in keeping with acceptable design.
J. Colors shall be harmonious, and accents, if used, shall be compatible.
K. All reconstruction, alteration, rehabilitation, or addition to an existing structure shall be done with building materials that are the same in color and type
as existing materials. If a matching building material is not available, the entire structure will be required to be altered.
L. All projections and mechanical details such as louvers, exposed flashing, flues, vents, gutters and downspouts are to be recognized as architectural
features and are to be treated to match the color of the adjacent surface, or an approved complementary color.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 364/618
M. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on the roof, ground, or elevations shall, wherever possible, be located so as not to be visible from any
public ways or adjacent residential areas. Where such limitation on location is not possible, the facilities shall be screened from public view with
materials harmonious with the building.
N. Refuse and waste removal areas, side yards, storage yards, and exterior work areas shall be screened from public ways with materials harmonious
with the building.
O. Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In
multiple building projects, variable siting of individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous appearance.
P. Roofing or reroofing shall be uniform in color and material on the entire surface of an existing structure.
Q. Siding shall be uniform in color and material on the entire surface of an existing structure.
R. Gutter, downspout, and fascia shall be uniform in color and material throughout an existing structure. (Ord. 2015-50, 9-3-2015)
10-11-8: SIGNS:
A. Every sign shall have appropriate scale in its design and in its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.
B. Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates.
C. The height of a sign shall not exceed the predominant height of the principal building to which it relates, or the maximum height permitted by the village
sign regulations, whichever is lower.
D. The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be restrained and harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates.
E. The number of colors and graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's major message, and shall be
composed in proportion to the area of the sign face. The listing of individual services rendered or items offered for sale, and the use of telephone
numbers, street addresses, arrows and multiple logos on a sign are generally unacceptable.
F. Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos shall conform to the criteria for all other signs.
G. Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises and shall not compete for attention. (Ord. 2015-50, 9-3-2015)
10-11-9: LIGHTING:
A. All exterior lighting should balance the need for energy conservation with needs for safety, security and decoration.
B. Where decorative exterior floodlighting is used, it shall consist of an appropriate composition of brightness relationships, textures, and restrained colors
to dramatize a setting and extend the hours of the setting's usefulness. Floodlighting fixtures shall be located or shielded so that their presence is
minimized.
C. All exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural landscape design concept. Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories shall be concealed or
harmonious with other project design materials.
D. In general, the height of exterior lighting fixtures shall not exceed the predominant height of the principal building to which they relate. (Ord. 2015-50, 9-
3-2015)
10-11-10: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2015-50, 9-3-2015)
10-11-11: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2015-50, 9-3-2015)
10-11-12: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof shall be penalized with a fine of not less
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 365/618
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 2015-50, 9-3-2015)
Chapter 12
MINIMUM SECURITY CODE FOR COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS
10-12-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard property and public welfare by reducing the potential of successful
crime through regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and maintenance of commercial buildings and structures
within the village and certain equipment specifically regulated herein. (1978 Code § 4-10-1)
B. Scope: The provisions of the code shall apply to:
1. All existing commercial buildings, effective May 1, 1987.
2. All new construction of commercial buildings. (1978 Code § 4-10-2)
10-12-2: EFFECT ON OTHER REGULATIONS:
No portion of this chapter shall supersede any other village or federal laws, regulations or the national fire protection life safety code. (1978 Code § 4-10-
10)
10-12-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:
ACCESSIBLE OPENING: Any opening in the exterior of a building larger than eight inches by twelve inches (8" x 12") (e.g., door, window, transom, vent
duct, skylight, etc.), that is within either:
A. Eighteen feet (18') from the ground or the roof of an adjoining structure; or
B. Fourteen feet (14') from, directly or diagonally, opposite windows, fire escapes or ledges.
COMBINATION DEAD LATCH AND DEAD BOLT: A device combining a dead latch and a dead bolt operable by knobs from inside and by a key from
outside.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING: Any building or structure which is located in a commercial zoning district which is used for commercial purposes.
CYLINDER GUARD: A hardened steel ring or plate surrounding the otherwise exposed portion of a cylinder lock designed to prevent cutting, prying,
pulling or wrenching with common tools.
DEAD BOLT: A bolt which has no automatic spring action and which is operated by a key, thumb turn or lever and is positively held fast in the protected
position.
DOUBLE CYLINDER DEAD BOLT: A dead bolt lock actuated by a key from the inside and outside.
LOUVERS: A series of removable, fixed, slated or movable slats. ("Glass louvers" is descriptive of jalousies. Glass, wood or metal jalousies are
considered to be louvers. Awning windows having sections more than 12 inches in height are not considered to be louvers.)
RATED: As listed by the Underwriters Laboratories.
SINGLE CYLINDER DEAD BOLT: A dead bolt activated from the outside by a key and from the inside by a knob, thumb turn, lever or similar actuator.
STRIKE: A stationary metal plate designed to momentarily depress a moving latch for final secure engagement requiring a separate operation for
disengagement. (1978 Code § 4-10-11)
10-12-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR SECURITY:
The owner and his/her agents shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (1978 Code § 4-10-6)
10-12-5: MINIMUM SECURITY STANDARDS:
A. Exterior Doors:
1. Requirements:
a. A single door shall be secured with a dead bolt lock with thumb latch on the inside. Any dead bolt must contain hardened material to repel
attempts at cutting through the bolt.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 366/618
b. On pairs of doors, the active leaf (door) shall be secured with the type lock required for single doors in subsection A1a of this section. The inactive
leaf shall be equipped with throw bolts or flush bolts at top and bottom with a minimum throw of five-eighths inch (5/8"). The throw bolt must contain
hardened material.
c. Lock cylinder(s) or lock plug(s) shall be of solid brass or steel. Die cast materials are prohibited.
d. Exterior sliding commercial entrances shall be secured as in subsections A1a and A1b of this section.
e. Rolling overhead doors, solid overhead doors, or sliding or accordion garage type doors shall be secured with a cylinder lock or padlock on the
inside, when not otherwise controlled or locked by electrical power operation.
f. Metal accordion grate or grill type doors shall be equipped with a metal lock guide track at the top and bottom and a cylinder lock and/or padlock.
The bottom track shall be so designed that the door cannot be lifted from the track when the door is in the locked position.
g. Outside hinges on all exterior doors shall be provided with nonmovable pins when using pin type hinges, or the center hinge shall have a steel
dowel projecting a minimum of three-fourths inch (3/4") from one plate into the opposite plate of the hinge.
h. Doors with glass panels within or adjacent to the doorframe shall be of one-fourth inch (1/4") safety glass, or wire reinforced glass.
i. In swinging doors shall have rabbitted jambs.
j. Jambs for all doors shall be constructed or protected so as to prevent violation of the function of the strike.
k. All doorframes shall be of steel or wood and be so reinforced as to prevent spreading strike plates. All wood frame doorways shall have a one inch
(1") heavy duty striker plate a minimum of four inches (4") in length and held in place with at least two (2) screws, the minimum length of which
shall be sufficient to extend one and one-half inches (11/2") with the stud directly adjacent to the doorframe.
2. Exemptions: Any building requiring panicproof hardware locks on exit doors shall be exempt from the exterior door locking security.
B. Accessible Windows:
1. Accessible windows shall be as defined in section 10-12-3 of this chapter.
2. If the window is the type capable of being opened, it shall be secured with a locking mechanism capable of withstanding a force of three hundred
(300) pounds applied in any direction.
3. Outside hinges on all accessible windows shall be provided with nonremovable pins or steel dowels projecting a minimum of one-half inch (1/2") from
one plate into the opposite plate of the hinge.
C. Ventilating Openings: Ventilating openings, larger than ninety six (96) square inches and utilized for the intake or exhausting of air, shall have a cover
securely fastened to the roof or wall so as to prevent removal from the exterior by a person using common tools.
D. Roof Openings:
1. All glass skylights or portions of openings utilizing transparent panels shall be securely fastened to the roof in such a manner as to prevent removal
from the exterior by a person using common tools.
2. All hatchway openings on the roof shall be secured as follows:
a. If the hatchway is of wood material, it shall be covered on the inside with at least 16-gauge sheet steel, or its equivalent, attached with screws on
minimum six inch (6") centers, or at least 17-gauge sheet steel, or its equivalent, attached to the outside by rounded head flush bolts or
vandalproof screws.
b. The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar or slide bolts. The use of a crossbar or padlock must be approved by the
department of community development.
c. Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with nonremovable pins when using pin type hinges or steel dowels projecting a
minimum of one-half inch (1/2") from one plate into the opposite plate of the hinge.
3. All air duct or air vent openings exceeding eight inches by twelve inches (8" x 12") on the roof or exterior walls should be secured as follows:
a. Iron bars of at least one-half inch (1/2") round or one inch by one-fourth inch (1" x 1/4") flat steel material spaced no more than five inches (5")
apart and securely fastened.
b. A steel grill of at least one-eighth inch (1/8") material of two inch (2") mesh and securely fastened.
c. If the barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with rounded head flush bolts on the outside.
E. Building Numbering: All exterior doors, excluding front doors for each individual commercial establishment, shall have the street name and number
displayed on the door corresponding to the correct address of the commercial establishment. Minimum height of letters and numbers shall be six
inches (6"), set on a contrasting background.
F. Illumination:
1. All exterior doors, excluding front doors, shall have a minimum of a one hundred (100) watt bulb over the outside of the door. Such bulb shall be
protected with a clear polycarbonate cover or cover of equal breaking resistant material and shall be illuminated during the period from sunset to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 367/618
sunrise.
2. Open parking lots, and access thereto, providing more than ten (10) parking spaces, parking and other nonenclosed areas under or within buildings
at grade, shall be illuminated from sunset to sunrise to provide a minimum of four-tenths (0.4) horizontal foot-candles of illumination.
G. Safe For Securing Money: Commercial establishments having one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more in cash on the premises after closing hours
shall secure such money in a safe. (1978 Code § 4-10-12)
10-12-6: MAINTENANCE REQUIRED:
All devices or safeguards which are required by this chapter in a building when erected, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The
owner and his/her agents shall be responsible for the maintenance of such devices or safeguards. (1978 Code § 4-10-3)
10-12-7: ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION:
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of alternate devices or methods of construction other than those prescribed, provided
such alternatives afford the same or a greater degree of security, and they are approved by the department of community development. The burden of
proving that such alternative meets or surpasses the provisions of this chapter shall be on the person requesting its approval. (1978 Code § 4-10-4)
10-12-8: TESTING:
Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that any material or any construction does not
conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for alternate materials or methods of construction, the department of
community development may require tests as proof of compliance. These tests are to be made at the expense of the owner by an approved agency. If
there are no appropriate test methods specified in this chapter, the enforcing authorities shall determine the test procedure. (1978 Code § 4-10-5)
10-12-9: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY:
A. Enforcement Officials: The code enforcement officers, under the supervision of the head of the department of community development, shall administer
and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (1978 Code § 4-10-8)
B. Board Of Appeals: In order to determine the suitability of an alternate material and method of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretation of
the provisions of this chapter, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be the village board of trustees.
(1978 Code § 4-10-9; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Violations; Penalty:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, remove, convert, equip, occupy or maintain
any commercial building or structure within the village, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter. (1978 Code § 4-10-7)
2. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. (1978 Code § 4-10-7; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 13
CONDOMINIUMS
10-13-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A majority of the corporate authorities of the village, having determined that there are a significant number of new condominium projects and a significant
number of rental units throughout the village being converted to condominiums, and that the applicable laws of the state of Illinois are not in themselves
adequate to meet certain problems in the village, find that it is necessary and appropriate to regulate the various procedures relating to the construction of
condominiums, or the conversion of rental property, for the purpose of guaranteeing that prospective purchasers are in possession of all information
necessary to make an informed decision to purchase. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to introduce regulatory elements into the condominium
process that are aimed at extending the protection of the rights of condominium purchasers and displaced tenants in an effort to encourage orderly
development of the condominium concept in the village. (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005)
10-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
BLANKET ENCUMBRANCE: A trust deed, mortgage, judgment or other lien on a condominium, including an option or contract to sell, or a trust
agreement affecting a condominium, including any lien or other encumbrance arising as a result of the imposition of any tax assessment by a public
authority.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 368/618
BOARD OF MANAGERS: The body designated to act on behalf of the unit owners' association as provided and referred to in the Illinois condominium
property act.
CLOSING THE SALE: The operation of transferring legal or equitable ownership of a condominium to the prospective purchaser from the developer
through a deed of conveyance.
COMMON ELEMENTS:
General Common Elements: Except as otherwise provided in the plat of condominium subdivision, all portions of the property except the condominium
units, including limited common elements unless otherwise specified.
Limited Common Elements: A portion of the common elements so designated in the declaration as being reserved for the use of certain units to the
exclusion of other units including, but not limited to, balconies, terraces, patios and parking spaces or facilities.
CONDOMINIUM: Real estate, portions of which are designated to separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership
solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the divided interests in the common elements are vested in the unit
owners.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT: The sale or plan by a developer to sell or the offering for sale of residential condominium units in an existing building or a
building to be constructed or under construction.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT OR UNIT: A separate three-dimensional area within the condominium identified as such in the declaration and on the condominium
plat and includes all improvements contained within such area except those excluded in the declaration.
CONVERSION, CONVERT OR LIKE WORDS: The offering for sale by a developer or his agent of a condominium unit occupied or rented for any purpose
by any person before commencement of a condominium project which includes such unit.
DEVELOPER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture or corporation or any other entity or combination of entities or successors thereto
who, at any time after the effective date hereof, undertakes to develop a condominium project by conversion or otherwise to condominium status.
OFFERING: Any inducement, solicitation, advertisement, publication or announcement by a developer to any person or the general public to encourage a
person to purchase a condominium unit in a condominium or prospective condominium.
PERSON: A natural individual, corporation, partnership, association, trustee or other legal entity capable of holding title to real property.
PROPERTY REPORT: The property report required in accordance with section 10-13-3 of this chapter.
PROSPECTIVE PURCHASER: A person who visits the condominium project site for the purpose of inspection for possible purchase or who requests the
property report. (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005)
10-13-3: PROPERTY REPORT:
Prior to offering for sale any condominium units in a condominium project, a developer shall prepare a condominium property report and shall certify by
affidavit that all disclosures are true to the best of his knowledge and belief. The condominium property report must be filed with the village, and with all
tenants in a conversion condominium. A copy of the condominium property report must be available for public inspection in the sales office of the
developer. The report shall contain the following information about the condominium project:
A. A statement indicating the names and addresses of the following:
1. The developer and legal and beneficial owner, if different, of the land and improvements including, but not limited to, all general partners of a
partnership, all principal executive officers and directors of a corporation, or all beneficiaries of a trust.
2. Interim and permanent mortgage or construction lenders secured by a blanket encumbrance.
3. All professionals or professional firms involved in the condominium development including, but not limited to, the principal sales and management
agents, attorneys, accountants, architects, engineers and contractors.
B. A description of all property and improvements including the following:
1. Map, plat of survey or architect's drawing showing location and dimensions of the condominium project and the land it occupies, together with all
improvements, including recreational facilities, proposed construction and present and planned location of streets and driveways.
2. Description of the condominium units offered and the nature and extent of individual ownership in such condominium unit.
3. The identity of owners of such condominium unit including the percentage of former renters who have purchased or contracted to purchase a
condominium unit when the property is a conversion, if known. If such units are owned in trust or by nominees, the beneficiaries or principal shall be
named, if known.
4. Description and nature and extent of ownership of all common elements, general and limited, including a description of all existing and proposed
recreational facilities, and other such facilities within the project.
5. A description of the nature and ownership of all improvements occupying the same zoning lot but which are not part of the condominium.
6. A description of the location, ownership and availability to unit owners and the general public of accessory off street parking associated with the
condominium. If all of such parking facilities are not: a) part of the common elements; or b) divided as individual parking space among and designed
as being part of the units, the following statement shall be included under a conspicuous caption:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 369/618
PARKING FACILITIES ASSOCIATED WITH THIS BUILDING ARE NOT OWNED BY THE UNIT OWNERS AND SAID OWNERS MAY BE
DEPRIVED USE OF SAME.
7. Location, nature and ownership of easements, streets and driveways on or contiguous to the condominium.
8. The identification of drawings, architectural plans and other suitable documents setting forth the necessary information for location, maintenance and
repair of all condominium facilities and equipment, to the extent these documents exist, their location, and times at which they may be inspected.
9. Projected initiation and completion dates for proposed construction, renovation or conversion. Such description shall disclose the existence of
penalties, if any and to whom, if the construction, renovation, or conversion completion date is not met and the costs, if any, to be imposed on unit
owners if construction is not timely completed.
10. A description of limitations upon uses permitted in individual condominium units as contained in the declaration and bylaws of the condominium
association and applicable zoning provisions. Such description shall state whether or under what conditions the condominium units may be rented
together by the unit owner.
11. A statement as to whether a purchaser may purchase more than one unit and under what circumstances or conditions.
12. A statement of legal ownership, listing all restrictions, notices, lis pendens and encumbrances of record.
13. In the case of a conversion, a zoning statement disclosing whether the property subject to the conversion is a conforming or nonconforming use for
its intended purpose.
C. The method and timing of transfer of control of the condominium to the board of managers and the nature and extent of any interest retained by the
developer thereafter.
D. Nature and extent of any protection to a prospective purchaser if the developer defaults on a blanket encumbrance. If there is no protection for
purchasers from a developer's default on a blanket encumbrance, the following statement in capital letters must be inserted under a conspicuous
caption entitled "PURCHASER'S FINANCIAL RISK":
THE DEVELOPER HAS MADE NO ARRANGEMENTS TO PROTECT THE PURCHASER OF A CONDOMINIUM FROM THE DEVELOPER'S
POSSIBLE DEFAULT ON A BLANKET ENCUMBRANCE. ACCORDINGLY, THERE IS A RISK OF LOSING YOUR FINANCIAL INTEREST IN THE
EVENT OF THE DEVELOPER'S FAILURE OR BANKRUPTCY.
E. A statement of all financial aspects of the condominium project including, but not limited to:
1. Name of construction mortgagor or the interim mortgagor;
2. Name of institution offering long term mortgage financing for the condominium units, if available, and terms and conditions of such mortgages;
3. Statement of financial ability to complete, within a specified period of time, construction, renovation or conversion of proposed condominium units
and recreational and other facilities, including projected costs and methods of payment;
4. If financed by the developer, the proposed financing of each unit, including percent of sales price required for down payment, duration of the loan,
interest rate, service charge, appraisal charge, closing charges, and total monthly payment.
F. A statement of any litigation which would affect the condominium or the developer's ability to convey clear title.
G. A statement of the current taxes and estimated changes in the tax assessment of the condominium units which buyers may encounter during the first
two (2) years.
H. Copies of sales documents and literature applicable to the individual units including, but not limited to:
1. Copies of purchase contract.
2. Deeds of conveyance.
3. Deeds of trust, mortgage and promissory note.
4. Statement of sales prices, terms and options.
5. Copy of sales brochure and floor plans.
6. Identity of selling agent.
7. Statement of terms and conditions of sale, including estimated itemized closing and settlement costs, taxes and expected special assessments
levied either by the condominium or a governmental entity.
8. Statement of anticipated monthly payments to be itemized as to principal, interest, taxes, condominium fee and utilities for a period of one year from
the expected date of settlement.
I. A description of all appliances and personal property included with each unit.
J. Copies of all required legal documents binding or to be binding upon the condominium (proposed documents acceptable until final version is available),
including:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 370/618
1. The declaration and plat of survey. However, prior to the recordation of the declaration, a preliminary declaration and plat may be supplied, provided
it is accompanied by the following statement:
THE DESCRIPTION OF UNITS AND PERCENTAGE OF OWNERSHIP INTEREST IN COMMON ELEMENTS HEREIN IS PRELIMINARY AND
MAY BE CHANGED IN MATERIAL RESPECTS UPON THE RECORDING OF THE DECLARATION AND PLAT.
2. The articles of incorporation or charter of the condominium association.
3. The bylaws and regulations of the condominium association.
4. Any leases of real or personal property in the condominium expiring later than two (2) years after the first unit is offered for sale.
5. Any management contract, employment contract, insurance policy, or other contract affecting the use, maintenance or access of all or part of the
condominium expiring later than two (2) years after the first unit is offered for sale.
6. The coverage and amounts of insurance policies applicable to the condominium, maintained by or on behalf of the developer.
K. A statement of management and expected management costs of the condominium including:
1. Name of management agent, if any, and the services the agent will perform.
2. Length of term of any management contract, its costs, and the circumstances, if any, under which the charges may be increased.
3. The conditions, if any, under which the contract may be canceled or terminated.
4. A statement stating the relationship between the developer and the management firm and their respective corporate officers and controlling
interests, if any.
L. An estimated operating budget, including the basis on which each item included in such operating budget was formulated for the condominium,
projected for a period of one year from the expected date that control of the condominium project passes to the board of managers. The operating
budget shall include the following:
1. Operating costs as follows:
a. Utilities.
b. Heating fuels.
c. Janitorial services.
d. Trash and garbage disposal.
e. Ground and building maintenance.
f. Security.
g. Maintenance and operation of recreational and other facilities.
h. Building insurance.
i. Elevator maintenance.
j. Sidewalks and street maintenance.
k. Other operating costs.
2. Management costs as follows:
a. Accounting services.
b. Legal services.
c. Management fees.
d. Other management costs.
3. Reserve costs as follows:
a. Reserve for improvements.
b. Reserve for unexpected repair work.
c. Reserve for replacement and upkeep of common area and facilities.
d. Reserve for taxes and special assessments.
e. Other reserve costs.
If no reserve is provided for any one or more of the costs listed in this subsection, the following statement must be inserted in the property report
under a conspicuous caption entitled "NO RESERVE FUND HAS BEEN PROVIDED":
THE DEVELOPER HAS NOT PROVIDED A RESERVE FOR CERTAIN POSSIBLE FUTURE COSTS OF THE CONDOMINIUM IN HIS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 371/618
BUDGET. ACCORDINGLY, IT MAY BE NECESSARY TO PROVIDE FOR A SPECIAL ASSESSMENT TO ALL CONDOMINIUM UNIT OWNERS
TO PAY FOR SUCH COSTS SHOULD THEY OCCUR.
M. Provisions, if any, the developer has made to cover the proposed operations and maintenance budget if an insufficient number of units are sold.
N. In the case of a conversion from rental or other legal status to condominium, a report from a qualified licensed engineer or registered architect, not
associated with the developer/builder, describing the condition and expected useful life of the roof, foundation, external and supporting walls;
mechanical, electrical, plumbing, heating and structural elements; and all other common facilities, together with an estimate of repair and replacement
costs for those items needing repair or replacement, at current market prices. This report shall include the approximate dates of installation of the
facilities listed in this subsection and the dates of major repairs to such facilities. There shall be attached to such report the following:
1. A statement of the developer that no notice of violations of the building sections of this code pertaining to the condominium building have been
received by the owner or his predecessors for twenty (20) years preceding the property report and its latest amending; or
2. A list of all notices of violations of the building sections of this code received, together with a detailed statement of all violations referred to in such
notices, for the prior twenty (20) years.
3. A statement of all warranties and disclaimers being made to the purchaser.
O. A statement of whether and under what circumstances the unit owners are required to be members of, to support, or to participate financially in
recreational facilities such as, but not limited to, health clubs, exercise rooms, swimming pools, party rooms and golf putting greens. If any such facility
is not part of the common elements, the following warning shall be included:
THE (name facility) ARE NOT INCLUDED IN THE COMMON ELEMENTS. THESE FACILITIES ARE AVAILABLE TO UNIT OWNER FOR (monthly
charge and initiation fee). UNIT OWNERS ARE/ARE NOT REQUIRED TO PARTICIPATE FINANCIALLY.
(Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005)
P. The board of managers may approve the rental of a unit; provided, however, that at no time shall more than thirty percent (30%) of the units in the
association be occupied by other than the unit owner or his immediate family. Any restrictions upon the free sale, transfer, conveyance, encumbrance
or leasing of a unit shall include the following statement:
THE SALE, LEASE OR TRANSFER OF YOUR UNIT IS RESTRICTED OR CONTROLLED.
Immediately following this statement, there shall appear a reference to the documents, articles, paragraphs and pages in the property report where the
restriction, limitation or control on the sale, lease or transfer of units is set forth or described in detail. (Ord. 2006-46, 8-17-2006)
Q. The following statement shall be included on the first page in capital letters:
THE VILLAGE OF GLENDALE HEIGHTS SPECIFICALLY PROHIBITS ANY REPRESENTATION TO THE EFFECT THAT THE VILLAGE HAS
PASSED UPON THE MERITS OF OR GIVEN APPROVAL TO MAKE OR CAUSE TO BE MADE TO ANY PROSPECTIVE PURCHASER ANY
REPRESENTATIONS WHICH DIFFER FROM THE STATEMENTS IN THIS PROPERTY REPORT. ORAL REPRESENTATIONS CANNOT BE RELIED
UPON AS CORRECTLY STATING THE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE DEVELOPER AND ARE NOT BINDING ON THE DEVELOPER. REFER TO
THE PROPERTY REPORT FOR BINDING REPRESENTATIONS.
R. The developer shall amend the property report from time to time when any material changes occur in any matter contained in such report. Amendments
shall be made as soon as practicable after such change occurs or the developer has reason to know of such change.
1. Amendments shall be attached to reports subsequently distributed to prospective purchasers and shall be immediately distributed to all persons who
have purchased or agreed to purchase condominium units.
2. No later than thirty (30) days prior to the recording of the declaration and plat of survey, the developer shall give notice of any material changes in
the declaration and plat of survey as described in the property report to each person who has executed a contract to purchase a unit. (Ord. 2005-56,
9-8-2005)
10-13-4: DEVELOPMENTS OF MORE THAN SIX UNITS:
A. Not later than the offering for sale of the first unit, a developer of a condominium of more than six (6) units must:
1. Have a property report available for distribution to each prospective purchaser and for examination by the community development director.
2. Make available for inspection by prospective purchasers copies of all documents that were filed or required to be filed in connection with the
condominium project with the county recorder of deeds.
3. Keep a receipt signed by each purchaser acknowledging that the person entering a contract to purchase has received and has had an opportunity to
review the property report. Such receipts are to be kept on file in the possession of the developer for a period of three (3) years from the date of
signature of the purchaser, and such receipts are subject to the inspection of the community development director at any reasonable time.
B. The board of managers shall keep a copy of the latest property report for seven (7) years following the date of the property report's initial distribution.
Upon reasonable notice, the property report shall be made available for inspection by any prospective purchaser of a unit from a unit owner. (Ord.
2005-56, 9-8-2005)
10-13-5: CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 372/618
A. All rental dwellings must file an application for a condominium conversion permit with the village clerk prior to any conversion to a condominium
development. All applications shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Completed property report.
2. Applications for any and all building permits necessary for conversion.
B. All condominiums and townhomes must comply with chapter 14, article A of this title.
C. All rental units to be converted to condominiums must be inspected and receive a "certificate of compliance" pursuant to the requirements of subsection
D of this section prior to the occupancy of the unit, whether offered for sale or sold in an "as is" condition, remodeled, refurbished or upgraded in any
manner.
1. It shall be the responsibility of the developer or contractor to schedule the compliance inspection a minimum of forty eight (48) hours prior to
occupancy of the unit(s).
2. Inspection and occupancy fees shall be as established in this code.
D. In addition to any and all other requirements required by this code, the developer of any residential condominium conversion in the village shall provide
the village clerk with satisfactory proof of compliance with the following:
1. That all building common areas and condominium units are protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13R,
and the automatic sprinkler system has been certified to be in good and proper working order. For buildings with six (6) units or less which are
located on their own individual lots, an automatic sprinkler system is required to be installed in the furnace room only;
2. Each exit stairwell enclosure has a minimum of one hour fire resistance rating for those buildings of three (3) stories in height or less and two (2)
hour fire resistance rating for those buildings in excess of three (3) stories in height;
3. All stair treads and stair risers are in compliance with the requirements of the current village building code;
4. All common walls and dwelling units comply with the minimum sound transmission requirements of the current village building code;
5. Exterior wood surfaces and all other exterior surfaces requiring painting to maintain durability and appearance shall be replaced or covered with an
approved maintenance free material; (Ord. 2005-64, 9-8-2005)
6. All exterior windows, doors, exterior walls, roof/ceiling construction, mechanical systems and equipment and water heating units shall comply with
the minimum standards as set forth in the international energy conservation code, 2006 edition; (Ord. 2005-64, 9-8-2005; amd. 2011 Code)
7. All structural systems, structural components and foundations have been inspected by an Illinois registered structural engineer or have undergone a
code compliance inspection, and written inspection findings shall be submitted to the community development department director;
8. All roofing materials used on any building within the condominium conversion development shall have a minimum life expectancy of ten (10) years
following the sale of the last condominium unit, as determined by generally accepted roofing industry standards and as evidenced by a written report
submitted to the community development department director;
9. Landscaping and site beautification that is required to be installed has a value of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per dwelling unit,
and all landscaping and site beautification plans have received prior approval of the community development director prior to landscaping and site
beautification installation; and
10. That all parking areas, driving isles, driveways and appurtenances are in good repair and meet the minimum standards as set forth in this code and
have a life minimum expectancy of ten (10) years following the date of sale of the last condominium unit. A certification by an approved and
independent industry evaluator shall be submitted to the village clerk.
E. No less than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to recording the declaration submitting the property to the provisions of the Illinois condominium
property act, a developer shall give notice of such intent to record to all persons who are tenants of the building on the property on the date notice is
given.
F. Any person who was a tenant as of the date of the notice of intent and whose tenancy expires other than for cause prior to the expiration of one hundred
twenty (120) days from the date on which a copy of the notice of intent was received by the tenant shall have the right to an additional tenancy on the
same terms and conditions and for the same rental until the expiration of such one hundred twenty (120) day period by giving written notice thereof to
the developer within thirty (30) days of the date upon which a copy of the notice of intent was received by the tenant. However, if any tenant is over
sixty five (65) years of age or is deaf or blind or is unable to walk without assistance, the tenant shall have the right to an additional tenancy on the
same terms and conditions and for the same rental for one hundred eighty (180) days following receipt of the notice of intent to record by giving notice
as provided in this section.
G. During the period of one hundred twenty (120) days following his receipt of the notice of intent and during a period of one hundred eighty (180) days
following his receipt of notice of intent for any person who is over sixty five (65) years of age or who is deaf or blind or who is unable to walk without
assistance, any person who was both a tenant on the date of the notice of intent and a current tenant shall have the right of first refusal to purchase his
unit. The tenant must exercise the right of first refusal, if at all, by giving notice thereof to the developer and to the tenant that a contract to purchase the
unit has been executed. Each contract for sale of a unit shall conspicuously disclose the existence of and shall be subject to such right of first refusal.
The statement in the deed conveying the unit to a purchaser to the effect that the tenant of the unit either waived or failed to exercise the right of first
refusal or had no right of first refusal with respect to the unit shall extinguish any legal or equitable right or interest to the possession or acquisition of
the unit which the tenant may have or claim with respect to the unit arising out of the right of first refusal provided in this section. This shall not affect
any claim which the tenant may have against the developer for damages arising out of the right of first refusal provided in this section, nor shall it affect
the penalties provided in this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 373/618
H. No occupied unit shall be shown to any purchaser or prospective purchaser for thirty (30) days after notice of intent to record, as provided therein, is
given.
I. Any notice provided in this section shall be written and delivered in person or mailed, certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the party
who is being given the notice. (Ord. 2005-64, 11-3-2005)
10-13-6: RIGHT OF OWNERS TO EXAMINE RECORDS:
No person shall fail to allow condominium unit owners to inspect the financial books and records of the condominium association within three (3) business
days of the time written request for examination of the records is received. (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005)
10-13-7: DEPOSITS PLACED IN ESCROW:
A. Any deposit made in connection with the purchase or reservation of a unit shall be placed in escrow and held in an account designed solely for that
purpose by an institution whose accounts are insured by a government agency until:
1. Delivered to the declarant at closing;
2. Delivered to the declarant because of the purchaser's default under a contract to purchase the unit; or
3. Refunded to the purchaser.
B. If the deposit is placed in an interest bearing account, the interest shall be paid to the purchaser.
C. Such escrow funds shall not be subject to attachment by the creditors of either the purchaser or the developer. (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005)
10-13-8: RESALE OF UNITS:
A. There shall be no clause in the sales contract between the developer and the prospective purchaser of a condominium unit that would create an
exclusive sales agreement with a real estate agent as to the subsequent sale of the condominium unit. Any condominium owner shall have the right to
decide what agent, if any, shall be used in the subsequent sale of a condominium unit.
B. A unit owner, other than the developer, offering for sale his own unit shall provide to the purchaser, concurrently with execution of any contract for sale,
a copy of the declaration, bylaws and rules and regulations of the association, and the following items:
1. A statement setting forth:
a. The amount of the monthly common expense assessment.
b. Any unpaid common expense or special assessment currently due and payable from the selling unit owner.
c. The information on the total actual expenditures, by category, made for all repairs, maintenance, operation or upkeep of the common areas of the
building in which the unit is located within the last three (3) years as found in the regular books of the association. If the property has not been
occupied as a condominium for a period of three (3) years, the information, if available, shall be provided for such lesser time as the property has
been so occupied.
2. A statement of any other fees payable by the unit owners.
3. A statement of any future capital expenditures approved by the association or the board of directors.
4. A statement of the amount of the reserves for capital expenditures and of any portions of those reserves designated by the association for specified
projects.
5. The most recent regularly prepared balance sheet and income and expense statement, if any, of the association.
6. The current operating budget of the association.
7. A statement of any judgments against the association, and the status of any pending suits to which the association is a party, of which it has
knowledge.
8. A statement describing any insurance coverage provided for the benefit of unit owners.
9. A statement of whether the board of managers has received written notice from any federal, state or local government of any violations of any
applicable codes with respect to the unit or of the condominium common elements.
C. The association, within ten (10) days after a written request by a unit owner, shall make a good faith effort to furnish accurate information necessary to
enable the unit owner to comply with this section. A unit owner delivering a statement of such information is not liable to the purchaser for any
erroneous information from the association; provided, that the errors are unknown to the owner.
D. A unit owner is not liable to a purchaser for the failure or delay of the association to provide such information in a timely manner. Inability to obtain any
of the information shall be set forth in the sworn statement of the unit owner. The purchaser shall have five (5) days from receipt of such affidavit to void
said contract for said failure to provide data.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 374/618
E. Immediately upon execution by both parties of a sales contract, the seller shall provide to his condominium board the name and address of the
purchaser, and the board shall, from that time on, send duplicates of all notices sent to seller to the purchaser.
F. If any special assessment is voted for a capital improvement between the provision of the statement of information and the closing of the sale of the unit,
and this assessment exceeds five percent (5%) of the contract sale price, said assessment shall be grounds for recision of the contract by the
purchaser. Said recision shall be by a writing delivered to the seller not more than five (5) calendar days following receipt by the purchaser of the notice
of the special assessment. Where, however, the seller notifies the purchaser that the seller shall assume the special assessment obligation, the
purchaser may not utilize this recision provision.
G. This section shall be attached to, incorporated into, and made part of the bylaws of all condominiums hereinafter created and shall apply to all resale
contracts entered into subsequent to the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005)
10-13-9: ANNUAL RENTAL INSPECTION REPORT:
The condominium association shall file an annual rental inspection report with the village. This report shall include a list of all units which are not owner
occupied. (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005)
10-13-10: PROHIBITIONS:
A. Requiring Participation In Nonowned Recreational Facilities: The developer may not require nor, except as established by the board of managers
following assumption of control by unit purchasers, may the condominium bylaws require that a unit owner be a member of or participate in recreational
or similar facilities that are not owned in fee by the unit owners or by an association in which they are members, individually or through the board of
managers. (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005)
B. Discrimination: No person shall be denied the right to purchase or lease a unit because of race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, sex, marital
status, physical or mental disability, military status, age, familial status, sexual orientation, order of protection status or unfavorable discharge from
military service, as these terms are defined in the Illinois human rights act, 775 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq. (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005; amd.
2011 Code)
C. Misrepresentations Or Omissions: No person shall, with the intent that a prospective purchaser rely on such act or omission, advertise, sell or offer for
sale any condominium unit by:
1. Employing any statement or pictorial representation that is false; or
2. Omitting any material statement or pictorial representation. (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005)
10-13-11: FEES:
Upon initial condominium development, the developer shall pay an administration and document review fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per dwelling unit, but
not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005)
10-13-12: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The village administrator, assistant village administrator, and the community development director shall administer this chapter and may adopt rules and
regulations for the chapter's effective administration. (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005)
10-13-13: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the sections of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this
code. Each failure to comply with the sections of this chapter with respect to each person shall be considered a separate offense. A separate and distinct
offense shall be regarded as committed each day on which such person shall continue or permit any such violation. In addition to such penalty, violation of
any section of this chapter shall be cause for revocation of any license issued to such violator or offending party by the village. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to preclude the revocation of any license for violation of any other section of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005; amd. 2011 Code)
10-13-14: RIGHTS, OBLIGATIONS AND REMEDIES:
The rights, obligations and remedies set forth in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any others available at law or in equity. The community
development director or any prospective purchaser, purchaser or owner of a unit may seek compliance of any section of this chapter. In any action brought
to enforce any section of this chapter, the prevailing plaintiff shall be entitled to recover, in addition to any other remedy available, reasonable attorney
fees. (Ord. 2005-56, 9-8-2005)
Chapter 14
LICENSING AND INSPECTION OF PROPERTIES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 375/618
ARTICLE A. LICENSING AND INSPECTION OF SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
10-14A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Words or phrases as used in this article and not herein defined shall be defined as provided by the current edition of the international property
maintenance code, international residential code, national electrical code, and the Illinois state plumbing code, as adopted and amended by the village.
ABANDONED VEHICLE: All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair which renders the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or
any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
CODE OFFICIAL: The director of community development or his/her designee.
COMMON AREAS (EXTERIOR): The private roads and streets and private sidewalks adjacent thereto, landscaping, retaining walls, detention ponds,
utility facilities, trash receptacles and enclosures, playground equipment, swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball courts or any other recreational
facilities, trail areas, parking areas, private drives, detached garages, lighting fixtures, signage, mailboxes, street benches, entrance monuments, perimeter
fencing and such other improvements or structures from time to time or at any time located or constructed on a common area.
COMMON AREAS (INTERIOR): Any portion or part thereof of a multiple-family dwelling having communal areas (laundry, furnace, storage rooms,
hallways, stairways, meeting rooms) and all other areas located within a dwelling, outside of a dwelling unit. Interior common areas shall also include
stoops, entrance doors, roofs, attics, balconies, lighting fixtures, signage, railings, patios, storage areas, garages, exterior building surfaces, gutters and
downspouts and any area of a multiple-family dwelling or building to which the owner is directly responsible for the proper maintenance thereof. Nothing
herein shall be construed to permit or authorize the entrance into or access to the interior of the individual units which are occupied.
DWELLING: A building that contains one or more dwelling units used, intended, or designed to be used, rented, or leased for living purposes.
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
MANAGING AGENT: Any person or firm, acting for another, with authority to rent, manage and make expenditures.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: One or more residential buildings, designed and built as a group of individual dwelling units, which contain three (3) or
more dwelling units per building and contain either or both interior and exterior common areas as defined in this section. Each building that is separated by
another building by virtue of a firewall or fire separation assembly, and has its own address and individual, ground level, outside entrance shall be
considered a separate building.
OCCUPANCY/OCCUPANT: Any natural person living and sleeping in a dwelling unit designated as his primary residence, or any natural person having
actual possession or control of such dwelling or rooming unit.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care, control or management of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
OWNER: Any person who, alone, jointly, or severally with others, has legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without actual possession thereof;
or who has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, owner, or other person; or is an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the
estate of the owner; is a mortgagee in possession, or is a senior officer of a trustee of the association of unit owners of a condominium or homeowners'
association. Any person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and the rules and regulations
pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. The term owner shall also mean any managing agent, property agent, or any condominium
or homeowners' association having the charge, care or control of any common area which is part of the dwelling or dwelling unit.
PROPERTY: Any real property, including its land and that which is affixed, incidental, or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to, any premises, room,
house, building, or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof, whether occupied or leased for residential purposes, owned, leased or used for
commercial purposes, whether under written or oral agreement.
PROPERTY AGENT: A person, operator, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity designated in writing by the owner to the director of community
development to be responsible for compliance with property maintenance of a single-family dwelling or a multi-family dwelling, and authorized to receive
any notices or citations.
RENTAL OR LEASE AGREEMENT: All written and oral agreements of whatever duration, which embody the terms and conditions of the use and
occupancy of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Residential structures or dwelling units, not owner occupied, intended to be rented or leased, including single-family
detached structures containing only one dwelling unit, condominium units, townhouse units, duplexes, and multiple-family dwelling residential structures
which are intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more persons that maintain a household, together with all land,
appurtenances, buildings and common areas, whether rented or leased, with or without compensation, to tenants, including family members.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: Single-family detached structures containing only one dwelling unit, condominium units, townhouse units, and duplexes
which are not owner occupied and intended to be rented or leased, and intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more
persons that maintain a household, together with all land, appurtenances, buildings and common areas, whether rented or leased, with or without
compensation, to tenants, including family members.
TENANT: A person who has entered into an oral or written lease with a landlord whereby the person is the lessee under the lease, or otherwise entitled to
possession of the property whether or not payment is provided for the tenancy.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR: The village administrator of Glendale Heights or his or her designated representatives. Designated representatives for the
administration of this article include the village clerk and the director of community development, and their representatives of the village of Glendale
Heights.
VILLAGE CODE: The village code of ordinances of the village of Glendale Heights, from time to time in effect, including all codes adopted by specific
reference. (Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 376/618
10-14A-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required:
1. Single-family dwelling rental licenses ("license") shall be administered through the community development department.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, managing agent, property agent, or other legal entity to operate,
maintain or offer for rent within the village any single-family dwelling, whether vacant or occupied, without first having obtained and maintained a
current license, as provided in this article.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a single-family dwelling, or for any owner, managing agent, or property agent to allow anyone to occupy
a single-family dwelling, which is not currently licensed as provided for in this article.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation, managing agent, property agent, or other legal entity to offer for rent or to occupy
any vacant dwelling unit or any dwelling unit that becomes vacant in a single-family dwelling for which a license has been revoked or while such
license is under suspension.
5. Whenever an owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single-family dwelling fails to obtain a proper license, the code official shall notify all
tenants of the single-family dwelling by first class mail, certified mail, return receipt requested, and posting a notice on all entrances to the singlefamily
dwelling indicating the following:
a. You are hereby notified that the owner, managing agent, or property agent of this single family dwelling has failed to license this property with
the Village of Glendale Heights in violation of Title 10, Chapter 14, Article A of the Village Code.
b. You must vacate this property within sixty (60) days of this notice.
c. If you fail to vacate this property, you will be subject to a minimum fine of $100.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00 for each day you remain in
the single family dwelling in violation of this article.
6. Whenever an owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single-family dwelling fails to obtain a license, and allows persons to remain on the
property, it shall be considered a violation of this article, until such time as the owner, managing agent, or property agent obtains a license or takes
appropriate steps to vacate the property, including, but not limited to, filing a suit for forcible entry.
B. Rental Agreements And Leases Required:
1. All rental agreements, leases and renewal agreements shall be in writing, signed by the tenant(s).
2. Each rental agreement, lease or renewal agreement shall contain the following provisions and lease addendum stating the following:
The Village of Glendale Heights has enacted the following in its Code of Ordinances: You are hereby given notice that the Village of Glendale
Heights established a Crime Prevention Partnership Program, which includes the following requirements. A signed lease for the rental of the property
which identifies all tenants eighteen (18) years of age or older. Written notice of any guests who will be temporarily residing at the rental property
more than seven (7) consecutive days shall be provided to the landlord. Each tenant shall be informed in writing of the maximum occupancy
restrictions for the property. All adult tenants shall sign the Crime Prevention Partnership Lease Addendum. Upon request of a police or code
enforcement official the owner or owner's agent shall provide a copy of the signed Crime Prevention Partnership Lease Addendum.
5-2-1 et seq., Nuisance Ordinance: This ordinance prohibits chronic nuisance activity on properties located within the corporate limits of the Village of
Glendale Heights. The tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest or any other person or persons associated with the tenant or his or
her household:
*Shall not engage in any criminal activity or violation of municipal codes or ordinances or any other violations of local, state or federal law on or near
the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances;
*Shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate any violation of local municipal ordinances or codes or any other violations as defined by local state
or federal law and/or obstruction or resistance of law enforcement efforts against criminal activity on or near the rental unit, common areas or
appurtenances;
*Shall not permit on or near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances to be used for or to facilitate any violations of local municipal ordinances
or codes or any other violation of local, state or federal law;
*Is informed that should the tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest or any other person or persons associated with the tenant, or
his/her household, violate any provisions stated herein on or near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenance, such a violation shall constitute a
material noncompliance with the lease and shall further constitute grounds for termination of tenancy and eviction;
*Is informed that the owner(s), manager(s) or other persons in charge of the property, tenant(s) in possession thereof may raise any affirmative
defense delineated in Section 5-2-8 of the Nuisance Ordinance;
*Is informed that this Ordinance is not intended to deter those persons in need of Police, Fire or Paramedic services from calling for those services.
Tenants and all persons who reside in the leased premises, by assuming possession of the same, agree that the landlord or his agents may release
to the Police Department any information concerning the identity of all occupants.
The maximum occupancy restrictions for this property is occupants.
The tenant(s) is(are) hereby notified that, upon proper notice, the Village of Glendale Heights may conduct reasonable inspections of the rental
residential property, with the consent of the tenant, for purposes of determining compliance with the Village of Glendale Heights' requirements for
Licensing and Inspection of Rental Residential Properties and other relevant provisions of the Village Code.
TENANT(S): Signature denotes the above information was provided by your landlord and you have read and understand the information regarding
the Crime Prevention Partnership Program and Village Ordinance, and you are 18 years of age or older. (Use additional copies of the addendum for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 377/618
additional tenant signatures.)
Print Name Tenant 1: Print Name Tenant 2:
Signature Tenant 1: Signature Tenant 2:
Date: Date:
Print Name Tenant 3: Print Name Tenant 4:
Signature Tenant 3: Signature Tenant 4:
Date: Date:
LANDLORD: Signature denotes understanding of the above information and that the information has been provided to the tenant(s) in accordance
with the Crime Prevention Partnership Program and Village Ordinance. (Landlord signature required on each addendum/tenant signature page
submitted.)
Print Landlord Name: Landlord Signature:
( ) Landlord or ( ) Legal Representative Date:
3. Except as provided herein, this article is not intended to affect the rights and obligations of the parties to a lease or rental agreement for rental
residential property.
C. Owner Responsibilities:
1. The owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single-family dwelling shall maintain a record for each property with the full legal name of every
tenant in each dwelling unit.
2. The owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single-family dwelling shall provide each tenant with the name and telephone number of a
responsible person that will be available on a twenty four (24) hour basis and who has the authority to make repairs as needed.
3. The owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single-family dwelling shall, prior to occupancy, inform each tenant in writing of the maximum
number of persons, per dwelling unit, allowable by the international property maintenance code, as adopted and amended by the village.
4. The owner, managing agent, or property agent shall report to the community development department any changes in the designation of the
managing agent within seven (7) days of said change.
D. Crime Prevention Rental Housing Requirements: Each applicant for a license to maintain a rental residential property shall review the "Crime
Prevention Rental Properties Manual" and acknowledge understanding of and compliance with its requirements prior to issuance of a license. (Ord.
2016-66, 11-17-2016)
10-14A-3: APPLICATION REQUIRED:
A. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, managing agent, property agent, or other legal entity that intends to operate, maintain or offer
for rent within the village any single-family dwelling, whether vacant or occupied, shall submit an application for a license to the community
development department.
B. Each application filed with the director of community development shall state:
1. The full legal name, address, and home and work telephone numbers of every owner of record.
2. If the single-family dwelling is held in a trust, the name, address, and phone number of each trustee and each beneficial interest holder.
3. The address of the single-family dwelling.
4. The number of dwelling units within the single-family dwelling.
5. The full legal name and phone number of each tenant, eighteen (18) years and older, and the number of minor children under eighteen (18) years of
age.
6. The name, address, and phone number of the managing agent and/or property agent.
7. The name, address, and twenty four (24) hour phone number or numbers of a contact person that will be available on a twenty four (24) hour basis,
and that has the authority to make or authorize repairs as needed.
8. The total square footage designated for living and sleeping purposes, including individual room sizes, as stipulated by the international property
maintenance code, as adopted and amended by the village. (Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
10-14A-4: LICENSING FEE, TERM AND RENEWAL:
A. License Fee And Term:
1. Each complete application for a new license or a renewal of an existing license shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in section 4-2-2 of this
code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 378/618
a. All such fees shall be payable at the community development department and shall be due and payable on or before February 1 of each year.
b. If the completed license application is not submitted together with the required fee prior to February 1 in any given year, the license fee shall be
increased by twenty five dollars ($25.00) on February 2 and on the first day of each subsequent month until such time as a complete license
application is submitted and the required license fee is paid.
2. Fees shall not be prorated.
3. No refund of any license fee paid shall be made.
4. Each license granted hereunder shall be an annual license, the term of which shall commence on February 1 of a given year and shall terminate on
January 31 of the next year.
5. The owner, managing agent, or property agent is responsible for obtaining a license each year the property is a rental residential property. If it is
determined that an owner, managing agent, or property agent has failed to obtain a license, the owner, managing agent, or property agent shall be
responsible for paying the current license and the license fee for all previous years the property was a rental residential property.
a. Such past due fees shall be established in accordance with subsection A1b of this section.
b. The maximum past due fee for an annual license shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00).
6. Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, no license shall be issued until such time as all fees, costs, and fines provided for by
this code have been paid.
B. License Renewal:
1. Application for license renewal shall be made in the same manner as for new applications; except, that such application shall state thereon that it is
for license renewal.
2. A license issued pursuant to this article shall not be renewed unless the applicant is in conformance with the provisions of this article, including the
correction of outstanding code violations, and the payment of all fees, costs, and fines provided for by this code.
C. Nontransferability Of License: A license for a single-family dwelling cannot be transferred to another single-family dwelling or to a succeeding owner,
managing agent, or property agent.
D. Changes In Ownership Or Occupancy:
1. Whenever there is a change in the ownership or in the occupancy of a single-family dwelling the owner shall, within thirty (30) days of such change,
provide written notification to the code official indicating such change.
2. No owner, managing agent, or property agent shall permit the occupancy of any single-family dwelling to exceed the maximum number of persons
allowable by the international property maintenance code, as adopted and amended by the village. (Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
10-14A-5: INSPECTION REQUIRED AND REINSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Inspection Requirements:
1. An inspection to determine if a rental residential property is in full compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, and regulations of the village
shall be required and scheduled with the community development department at the time of the application for a new license for any rental residential
property.
2. Thereafter, the village shall conduct an annual inspection of every rental residential property during the license year, or as necessary, to determine if
said rental residential property is in full compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, and regulations of the village. The village may also conduct
additional inspections whenever it is necessary to ensure that a rental residential property is in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, and
regulations of the village.
3. Licensing inspections of single-family rental residential properties shall include the interior and exterior of the premises.
4. When a licensing inspection of a rental residential property reveals any violations of applicable ordinances, codes, or regulations, a compliance time
frame will be set by the code official. In establishing a compliance time frame, the code official shall determine the reasonable minimal time
necessary to correct the violations based upon the number and severity of the violations. The code official shall send notice to the property owner,
managing agent, or property agent by regular U.S. mail, hand delivery, or via e-mail at the last address provided on the most recent license
application. Said notice shall include the following:
a. Description of the rental residential property sufficient for identification;
b. A statement listing the violations of applicable codes; and
c. A statement of the deadline by which a reinspection shall be scheduled.
5. A licensing reinspection will be conducted at the end of the compliance time frame. Upon completion of the licensing reinspection of the rental
residential property, an inspection approval shall be issued if the rental residential property meets the requirements of applicable village ordinances,
codes, and regulations. If the code official finds that the requirements of applicable village ordinances, codes, and regulations have not been met,
then a written violation notice specifying the defect shall be transmitted by regular U.S. mail, hand delivery, or via e-mail to the applicant.
6. If compliance is not achieved at the time of reinspection, a citation may be issued and/or the village may suspend the license.
B. Compliance With Zoning And Building Code:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 379/618
1. Every rental residential property shall be owned, operated and maintained in full compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, and regulations of
the village.
2. No structural, mechanical, electrical, or plumbing alterations or repairs, or remodeling, shall be made to a rental residential property unless all zoning
and building code requirements have been met, and appropriate building permits obtained.
3. In addition to all other requirements set forth in this code, the following requirements shall be applicable to a rental residential property:
a. Safe And Sanitary Conditions:
(1) No person shall occupy and no owner, managing agent, or property agent shall allow another person to occupy any single-family dwelling
unless it is clean, safe, sanitary, fit for human occupancy and complies with all applicable ordinances, codes, and regulations of the village.
(2) Every owner, managing agent, or property agent shall at all times maintain in a safe, clean and sanitary condition, the interior and exterior
common areas.
b. Abandoned Vehicle Removal Required: The owner, managing agent, or property agent of any rental residential property shall be responsible for
the removal of any and all abandoned vehicles located on the premises of said rental residential property.
(1) Such removal shall be accomplished within the time period specified in the notice. If any abandoned vehicle poses a hazard to human safety, it
shall be removed immediately.
(2) Such removals shall be accomplished as otherwise provided by law.
c. Fire Protection Devices Maintained: The owner, managing agent, or property agent shall be responsible for the maintenance and annual testing of
fire alarm, fire sprinkler and emergency lighting systems and backflow prevention devices, if applicable.
(1) These systems shall be tested by an approved service company and a written report provided.
(2) The owner, managing agent, or property agent shall retain all test results.
C. Reinspection Fee:
1. The licensing inspection and first reinspection provided for in this article shall be without charge to the owner. Subsequent to the initial licensing
inspection and first reinspection for a licensing year, each additional reinspection shall be at a cost of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour, per inspector,
based on the number of inspector hours required to make said inspections and prepare the required report. The minimum charge for any
reinspection shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00).
2. A reinspection fee shall be charged if the owner, managing agent, property agent, tenant, or other authorized adult is not present or fails to allow
access to the inspector.
3. A reinspection fee shall be charged if, upon arrival of the inspector, conditions exist at the property which prohibit the inspector from completing the
inspection.
4. A reinspection fee shall be charged if a scheduled inspection is canceled after three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the business day before the inspection.
a. A scheduled Monday inspection shall be canceled by three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the Friday before the scheduled inspection.
b. An inspection scheduled on a day following a village holiday shall be canceled by three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the business day prior to the village
holiday.
5. Failing to schedule a required reinspection prior to the start of the next licensing year shall cause a reinspection fee to be charged at the time of a
license renewal.
D. Consent To Inspections And Right Of Access:
1. If any owner, managing agent, property agent, tenant, occupant, or other person in control of rental residential property fails or refuses to consent to
free access and entry to the rental residential property under his/her/its control for any inspection pursuant to this article, and if the village has the
probable cause necessary to obtain an administrative search warrant, the code official or his designee may apply to the circuit court for an
administrative search warrant or other appropriate court order authorizing such inspection.
2. Upon twenty four (24) hour notice to the owner, managing agent, or property agent, the owner, managing agent, or property agent shall provide
access to such portions of the rental residential property which are otherwise inaccessible to the village inspectors. During any inspection of an
inaccessible portion of the rental residential property, the owner, managing agent, or property agent shall designate an adult representative to
accompany village inspector(s) during such inspection. (Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
10-14A-6: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement Authority: It shall be the duty of the community development department to enforce the provisions of this article, as authorized by this
code, and the International Code Council codes, as adopted and amended from time to time by the village.
B. Violations:
1. The following shall constitute violations of this article:
a. Failure of the owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single-family dwelling to license such property with the village.
b. Failure to comply with the terms of this article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 380/618
c. Failure of the occupants of a single-family dwelling to vacate such property within sixty (60) days after receiving notice from the code official that
such property is not properly licensed or that the license has been revoked.
d. Failure of the owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single-family dwelling to vacate all tenants from said property within sixty (60) days
after the license has been revoked.
e. Failure of the owner, managing agent, or property agent of a single-family dwelling to maintain a single-family dwelling in compliance with
applicable building, property maintenance and zoning ordinances.
f. For any person other than one authorized by the code official to remove or deface any notices which have been posted pursuant to this article.
C. License Suspension Or Revocation:
1. Suspension Procedures:
a. A license may be suspended by the code official when a violation of applicable village ordinances has been identified by the community
development department and the owner, managing agent, or property agent has been properly notified of the violation and given a period of time in
which to correct the violation, but has failed to do so. A license may also be suspended by the code official when any information provided in the
license application is determined by the code official to be false.
b. When a license is suspended, the code official shall send notice to the property owner, managing agent, or property agent and the tenant at the
last address provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall
include the following:
(1) Description of the single-family dwelling sufficient for identification;
(2) A statement of the reasons for the suspension;
(3) An explanation of the owner's right to appeal the suspension to the village administrator; and
(4) If the owner changes his/her/its address or changes the managing agent or property agent and fails to notify the community development
department, such notice shall be sufficient if sent by certified mail to the owner's, managing agent's, or property agent's last address provided on
the last license application.
c. An owner whose license has been suspended may request a reinspection prior to revocation. If, upon reinspection, the community development
department finds that the single-family dwelling, in connection with the notice which was issued, is now in compliance with this article, then the
code official may reinstate the suspended license upon payment of a seventy five dollar ($75.00) reinstatement fee. The request for a reinspection
shall not stay the revocation of the license.
d. Any owner whose license has been suspended shall be entitled to appeal said suspension to the village administrator by filing a written petition
within twenty (20) days after the date of suspension. The code official shall transmit to the village administrator copies of all records and notices
upon which the suspension is based. A hearing shall be scheduled as soon as practical upon receipt of a timely petition. The village administrator,
in considering any such petition, may immediately revoke the license or continue the suspension to a definite compliance date. The penalty for
noncompliance shall be revocation by the village administrator and/or prosecution of violations in the circuit court or administrative hearings and
any fines and penalties imposed by said court or administrative hearing officer. The village administrator may dismiss the charges and reinstate the
suspended license upon proof of compliance or lack of evidence of noncompliance. A seventy five dollar ($75.00) reinstatement fee may be
imposed after proof of compliance is shown.
2. Revocation Procedures:
a. A license may be revoked by the village administrator when a petition for appeal has not been filed within twenty (20) days following the date of
issuance of an order of suspension. A license may be revoked by the code official when, in the opinion of the code official, emergency conditions
exist in a single-family dwelling that requires the immediate vacating of a structure as specified in the international property maintenance code.
b. A license which has been properly revoked as herein provided shall not be reinstated. The owner may, however, obtain a new license after all
violations have been corrected and by following the procedures for obtaining a new license and the payment of appropriate fees as set forth in this
article.
c. If a license is revoked without having the opportunity of a suspension hearing, the owner has the right to appeal that revocation. Said appeal shall
conform to subsection C1d of this section. Such an appeal shall not operate as a stay of revocation until such time as the village administrator
renders a decision on the appeal, unless the code official grants a request for a stay upon a showing of good cause by the owner.
d. Whenever a license is revoked, the code official shall send notice to the property owner, managing agent, or property agent at the last address
provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The code official shall also
notify all tenants of the single-family dwelling by posting a notice on all entrances to the single-family dwelling. The notice to the tenants shall
include the following:
1. You are hereby notified that the license for this single family dwelling has been revoked pursuant to Title 10, Chapter 14, Article A of the
Village Code.
2. You must vacate this single family dwelling within sixty (60) days of the date of this notice, except if said revocation is pursuant to a
declaration of emergency condition by the Code Official. If emergency conditions exist, the notice to tenants shall provide for the immediate
vacation of the single family dwelling.
3. If you fail to vacate this single family dwelling, you will be in violation of Title 10, Chapter 14, Article A of the Village Code and subject to a
minimum fine of $100.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00 for each day you remain in the single family dwelling in violation of this article.
D. Enforcement Costs: If any court of competent jurisdiction finds that any owner, managing agent, or property agent has violated any provision(s) of this
article, such court shall award to the village all of the village's costs related to the enforcement of this article, including, but not limited to, court costs,
attorney fees, building inspection costs, and administrative costs. (Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 381/618
10-14A-7: PENALTY:
A. Fines: Any person, firm or corporation in violation of any of the provisions of this article, in addition to other legal and equitable remedies available to the
village shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to fines of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each violation. Each day during which a violation of this article continues or is permitted to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
B. Exemptions: This article shall not apply to the following properties:
1. Single-family dwellings which are owner occupied;
2. Properties which are vacant and which are not intended to be rented;
3. Hotels, motels, and other structures which rent rooms to occupants if such occupancy is transient only; and
4. Properties and uses licensed and inspected by the state of Illinois, including, but not limited to, nursing homes, retirement communities and rest
homes.
C. Village Rights Retained: This article shall not be construed to impede in any way the right of the village to inspect any property pursuant to any other
provisions of this code or to seek penalties for violations of other provisions of this code. (Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
ARTICLE B. LICENSING AND INSPECTION OF MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
10-14B-1: DEFINITIONS:
Words or phrases as used in this article and not herein defined shall be defined as provided by the current edition of the international property
maintenance code, international residential code, national electrical code, and the Illinois state plumbing code, as adopted and amended by the village.
ABANDONED VEHICLE: All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair which renders the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or
any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
CODE OFFICIAL: The director of community development or his/her designee.
COMMON AREAS (EXTERIOR): The private roads and streets and private sidewalks adjacent thereto, landscaping, retaining walls, detention ponds,
utility facilities, trash receptacles and enclosures, playground equipment, swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball courts or any other recreational
facilities, trail areas, parking areas, private drives, detached garages, lighting fixtures, signage, mailboxes, street benches, entrance monuments, perimeter
fencing and such other improvements or structures from time to time or at any time located or constructed on a common area.
COMMON AREAS (INTERIOR): Any portion or part thereof of a multiple-family dwelling having communal areas (laundry, furnace, storage rooms,
hallways, stairways, meeting rooms) and all other areas located within a dwelling, outside of a dwelling unit. Interior common areas shall also include
stoops, entrance doors, roofs, attics, balconies, lighting fixtures, signage, railings, patios, storage areas, garages, exterior building surfaces, gutters and
downspouts and any area of a multiple-family dwelling or building to which the owner is directly responsible for the proper maintenance thereof. Nothing
herein shall be construed to permit or authorize the entrance into or access to the interior of the individual units which are occupied.
DWELLING: A building that contains one or more dwelling units used, intended or designed to be used, rented, or leased, for living purposes.
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
MANAGING AGENT: Any person or firm, acting for another, with authority to rent, manage and make expenditures.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: One or more residential buildings, designed and built as a group of individual dwelling units, which contain three (3) or
more dwelling units per building and contain either or both interior and exterior common areas as defined in this section. Each building that is separated by
another building by virtue of a firewall or fire separation assembly, and has its own address and individual, ground level, outside entrance shall be
considered a separate building.
OCCUPANCY/OCCUPANT: Any natural person living and sleeping in a dwelling unit designated as his primary residence, or any natural person having
actual possession or control of such dwelling or rooming unit.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care, control or management of a multiple-family dwelling or building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or
rooming units are let.
OWNER: Any person who, alone, jointly, or severally with others, has legal title to any multiple-family dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or who has charge, care or control of any multiple-family dwelling or dwelling unit, an owner, or other person; or
is an executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner; is a mortgagee in possession, or is a senior officer of a trustee of the
association of unit owners of a condominium or homeowners' association. Any person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with
the provisions of this article, and the rules and regulations pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. The term owner shall also mean
any managing agent, property agent, or any condominium or homeowners' association having the charge, care or control of any common area which is
enclosed, part of, a portion of, or the entire multiple-family dwelling unit.
PROPERTY: Any real property, including its land and that which is affixed, incidental, or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to, any premises, room,
house, building, or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof, whether occupied or leased for residential purposes, owned, leased or used for
commercial purposes, whether under written or oral agreement.
PROPERTY AGENT: A person, operator, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity designated in writing by the owner to the director of community
development to be responsible for compliance with property maintenance of a multi-family dwelling, and authorized to receive any notices or citations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 382/618
RENTAL OR LEASE AGREEMENT: All written and oral agreements of whatever duration, which embody the terms and conditions of the use and
occupancy of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
RENTAL RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: Residential structures or dwelling units, not owner occupied, intended to be rented or leased, including single-family
detached structures containing only one dwelling unit, condominium units, townhouse units, duplexes, and multiple-family dwelling residential structures
which are intended to be used as a home, residence or sleeping place by one or more persons that maintain a household, together with all land,
appurtenances, buildings and common areas, whether rented or leased, with or without compensation, to tenants, including family members.
TENANT: A person who has entered into an oral or written lease with a landlord whereby the person is the lessee under the lease, or otherwise entitled to
possession of the property whether or not payment is provided for the tenancy.
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR: The village administrator of Glendale Heights or his or her designated representatives. Designated representatives for the
administration of this article include the village clerk and the director of community development, and their representatives, of the village of Glendale
Heights.
VILLAGE CODE: The village code of ordinances of the village of Glendale Heights, from time to time in effect, including all codes adopted by specific
reference. (Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
10-14B-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
A. License Required:
1. Multi-family dwelling rental licenses ("license") shall be administered through the community development department.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, managing agent, property agent, or other legal entity to operate,
maintain or offer for rent within the village any multi-family dwelling, whether vacant or occupied, without first having obtained and maintained a
current license, as provided in this article.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a multi-family dwelling, or for any owner, managing agent, or property agent to allow anyone to occupy a
multi-family dwelling, which is not currently licensed, as provided for in this article.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation, managing agent, property agent, or other legal entity to offer for rent or to occupy
any vacant dwelling unit or any dwelling unit that becomes vacant in a multi-family dwelling for which a license has been revoked or while such
license is under suspension.
5. Whenever an owner, managing agent, or property agent of a multi-family dwelling fails to obtain a proper license, the code official shall notify all
tenants of the multi-family dwelling by first class mail, certified mail, return receipt requested, and posting a notice on all entrances to the multi-family
dwelling indicating the following:
a. You are hereby notified that the owner, managing agent, or property agent of this multi-family dwelling has failed to license this property with the
Village of Glendale Heights in violation of Title 10, Chapter 14, Article B of the Village Code.
b. You must vacate this property within sixty (60) days of this notice.
c. If you fail to vacate this property, you will be subject to a minimum fine of $100.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00 for each day you remain in
the multi-family dwelling in violation of this article.
6. Whenever an owner, managing agent, or property agent of a multi-family dwelling fails to obtain a license, and allows persons to remain on the
property, it shall be considered a violation of this article until such time as the owner, managing agent, or property agent obtains a license or takes
appropriate steps to vacate the property, including, but not limited to, filing a suit for forcible entry.
B. Rental Agreements And Leases Required:
1. All rental agreements, leases and renewal agreements shall be in writing, signed by the tenant(s).
2. Each rental agreement, lease or renewal agreement shall contain the following provisions and lease addendum stating the following:
The Village of Glendale Heights has enacted the following in its Code of Ordinances: You are hereby given notice that the Village of Glendale
Heights established a Crime Prevention Partnership Program, which includes the following requirements. A signed lease for the rental of the property
which identifies all tenants eighteen (18) years of age or older. Written notice of any guests who will be temporarily residing at the rental property
more than seven (7) consecutive days shall be provided to the landlord. Each tenant shall be informed in writing of the maximum occupancy
restrictions for the property. All adult tenants shall sign the Crime Prevention Partnership Lease Addendum. Upon request of a police or code
enforcement official the owner or owner's agent shall provide a copy of the signed Crime Prevention Partnership Lease Addendum.
5-2-1 et seq., Nuisance Ordinance: This ordinance prohibits chronic nuisance activity on properties located within the corporate limits of the Village of
Glendale Heights. The tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest or any other person or persons associated with the tenant or his or
her household:
*Shall not engage in any criminal activity or violation of municipal codes or ordinances or any other violations of local, state or federal law on or near
the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances;
*Shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate any violation of local municipal ordinances or codes or any other violations as defined by local state
or federal law and/or obstruction or resistance of law enforcement efforts against criminal activity on or near the rental unit, common areas or
appurtenances;
*Shall not permit on or near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances to be used for or to facilitate any violations of local municipal ordinances
or codes or any other violation of local, state or federal law;
*Is informed that should the tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest or any other person or persons associated with the tenant, or
his/her household, violate any provisions stated herein on or near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenance, such a violation shall constitute a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 383/618
material noncompliance with the lease and shall further constitute grounds for termination of tenancy and eviction;
*Is informed that the owner(s), manager(s) or other persons in charge of the property, tenant(s) in possession thereof may raise any affirmative
defense delineated in Section 5-2-8 of the Nuisance Ordinance;
*Is informed that this Ordinance is not intended to deter those persons in need of Police, Fire or Paramedic services from calling for those services.
Tenants and all persons who reside in the leased premises, by assuming possession of the same, agree that the landlord or his agents may release
to the Police Department any information concerning the identity of all occupants.
The maximum occupancy restrictions for this property is occupants.
The tenant(s) is(are) hereby notified that, upon proper notice, the Village of Glendale Heights may conduct reasonable inspections of the rental
residential property, with the consent of the tenant, for purposes of determining compliance with the Village of Glendale Heights' requirements for
Licensing and Inspection of Rental Residential Properties and other relevant provisions of the Village Code.
TENANT(S): Signature denotes the above information was provided by your landlord and you have read and understand the information regarding
the Crime Prevention Partnership Program and Village Ordinance, and you are 18 years of age or older. (Use additional copies of the addendum for
additional tenant signatures.)
Print Name Tenant 1: Print Name Tenant 2:
Signature Tenant 1: Signature Tenant 2:
Date: Date:
Print Name Tenant 3: Print Name Tenant 4:
Signature Tenant 3: Signature Tenant 4:
Date: Date:
LANDLORD: Signature denotes understanding of the above information and that the information has been provided to the tenant(s) in accordance
with the Crime Prevention Partnership Program and Village Ordinance. (Landlord signature required on each addendum/tenant signature page
submitted.)
Print Landlord Name: Landlord Signature:
( ) Landlord or ( ) Legal Representative Date:
3. Except as provided herein, this article is not intended to affect the rights and obligations of the parties to a lease or rental agreement for rental
residential property.
C. Owner Responsibilities:
1. The owner, managing agent, or property agent of a multi-family dwelling shall maintain a record for each property with the full legal name of every
tenant in each dwelling unit.
2. The owner, managing agent, or property agent of a multi-family dwelling shall provide each tenant with the name and telephone number of a
responsible person that will be available on a twenty four (24) hour basis and who has the authority to make repairs as needed.
3. The owner, managing agent, or property agent of a multi-family dwelling shall, prior to occupancy, inform each tenant in writing of the maximum
number of persons, per dwelling unit, allowable by the international property maintenance code, as adopted and amended by the village.
4. The owner, managing agent, or property agent shall report to the community development department any changes in the designation of the
managing agent or property agent within seven (7) days of said change.
5. As part of the application for a license under this article, every condominium and homeowners' association shall provide the village with the number
of owner occupied units and the number of nonowner occupied units contained in each building, along with a list identifying every nonowner
occupied unit, as well as the name and address of the unit owner. If the list is provided, the standard license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
building shall apply. If a condominium or homeowners' association fails to provide the list, then the license fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per building, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) per unit, notwithstanding the license fee delineated in section 4-2-2 of this code.
D. Crime Prevention Rental Housing Requirements: Each applicant for a license to maintain a rental residential property shall review the "Crime
Prevention Rental Properties Manual" and acknowledge understanding of and compliance with its requirements prior to issuance of a license. (Ord.
2016-66, 11-17-2016)
10-14B-3: APPLICATION REQUIRED:
A. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, managing agent, property agent, or other legal entity that intends to operate, maintain or offer
for rent within the village any multi-family dwelling, whether vacant or occupied, shall submit an application for a license to the community development
department.
B. Each application filed with the director of community development shall state:
1. The full legal name, address, and home and work telephone numbers of every owner of record.
2. If the multi-family dwelling is held in a trust, the name, address and phone number of each trustee and each beneficial interest holder.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 384/618
3. The address of the multi-family dwelling.
4. The number of dwelling units within the multi-family dwelling.
5. The full legal name and phone number of each tenant, eighteen (18) years and older, and the number of minor children under eighteen (18) years of
age.
6. The name, address, and phone number of the managing agent and/or property agent.
7. The name, address, and twenty four (24) hour phone number or numbers of a contact person that will be available on a twenty four (24) hour basis,
and that has the authority to make or authorize repairs as needed.
8. The total square footage designated for living and sleeping purposes, including individual room sizes, as stipulated by the international property
maintenance code, as adopted and amended by the village.
9. The full legal name, address, and phone number of the homeowners' association or condominium association, if applicable. (Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-
2016)
10-14B-4: LICENSING FEE, TERM AND RENEWAL:
A. License Fee And Term:
1. Each complete application for a license shall be accompanied by a license fee as provided in section 4-2-2 of this code.
a. All such fees shall be payable at the community development department and shall be due and payable on or before February 1 of each year.
b. If the completed license application is not submitted together with the required fee prior to February 1 in any given year, the license fee shall be
increased by twenty percent (20%) on February 2; and further, the base license fee shall be increased by an additional twenty percent (20%) on
the first day of each subsequent month until such time as a complete license application is submitted and the required license fee is paid.
2. Fees shall not be prorated.
3. No refund of any license fee paid shall be made.
4. Each license granted hereunder shall be an annual license, the term of which shall commence on February 1 of a given year and shall terminate on
January 31 of the next year.
5. The owner, managing agent, or property agent is responsible for obtaining a license each year the property is a rental residential property. If it is
determined that an owner, managing agent, or property agent has failed to obtain a license, the owner, managing agent, or property agent shall be
responsible for paying the current license and the license fee for all previous years the property was a rental residential property.
a. Such past due fees shall be established in accordance with subsection A1b of this section.
b. The maximum past due fee for unlicensed prior years shall be the total amount due according to subsection A1b of this section as of December 31
of each unlicensed year, per annual licensing year.
6. Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, no license shall be issued until such time as all fees, costs, and fines provided for by
this code have been paid.
7. The license applied for with respect to any multiple-family dwelling under this article shall not be issued to any owner for any multiple-family dwelling
if, at the time of application, litigation is pending with respect to code violations at such multiple-family dwelling.
B. License Renewal:
1. Application for license renewal shall be made in the same manner as for new applications; except, that such application shall state thereon that it is
for license renewal.
2. A license issued pursuant to this article shall not be renewed unless the applicant is in conformance with the provisions of this article, including the
correction of outstanding code violations, and the payment of all fees, costs, and fines provided for by this code.
C. Nontransferability Of License: A license for a multi-family dwelling cannot be transferred to another multi-family dwelling or to a succeeding owner,
managing agent, or property agent.
D. Changes In Ownership Or Occupancy:
1. Whenever there is a change in the ownership or in the occupancy of a multi-family dwelling or the owner's managing or property agent, the owners
shall, within thirty (30) days of such changes, provide written notification to the code official indicating such changes.
2. No owner, managing agent, or property agent shall permit the occupancy of any multi-family dwelling to exceed the maximum number of persons,
per dwelling unit, allowable by the international property maintenance code, as adopted and amended by the village. (Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
10-14B-5: INSPECTION REQUIRED AND REINSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Inspection Requirements:
1. An inspection to determine if a multi-family dwelling is in full compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, and regulations of the village shall be
required and scheduled with the community development department at the time of application for a new license for any rental residential property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 385/618
2. Thereafter, the village shall conduct an annual inspection of every multiple-family dwelling in accordance with subsection A3 of this section during
the license year to determine if said multiple-family dwelling is in full compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, and regulations of the village.
The village may also conduct inspections whenever it is necessary to ensure that a rental residential property is in compliance with all applicable
ordinances, codes, and regulations of the village.
3. Licensing inspections of multi-family dwellings shall include the exterior of each multi-family dwelling, the common interior elements of each multifamily
dwelling, and the interior of ten percent (10%) of the dwelling units in each multi-family dwelling, each year, on a rotating basis, or as required
to ensure compliance with the ordinances, codes, and regulations of the village.
a. The number of interior dwelling units inspected in each multi-family dwelling shall compound yearly if an owner fails to schedule the prior year's
required inspection, e.g., one year missed equates to twenty percent (20%) of the units, two (2) years equals thirty percent (30%) of the units.
4. When a licensing inspection of a multi-family dwelling reveals any violations of applicable ordinances, codes, or regulations, a compliance time frame
will be set by the code official. In establishing a compliance time frame, the code official shall determine the reasonable minimal time necessary to
correct the violations based upon the number and severity of the violations. The code official shall send notice to the property owner, managing
agent, or property agent by regular U.S. mail, hand delivery, or via e-mail at the last address provided on the most recent license application. Said
notice shall include the following:
a. Description of the multi-family dwelling sufficient for identification;
b. A statement listing the violations of applicable codes; and
c. A statement of the deadline by which a reinspection shall be scheduled.
5. A licensing reinspection will be conducted at the end of the compliance time frame. Upon completion of the licensing reinspection of the multi-family
dwelling, an inspection approval shall be issued if the multi-family dwelling meets the requirements of applicable village ordinances, codes, and
regulations. If the code official finds that the requirements of applicable village ordinances, codes, and regulations have not been met, then a written
violation notice specifying the defect shall be transmitted by regular U.S. mail, hand delivery, or via e-mail to the applicant.
6. If compliance is not achieved at the time of reinspection, a citation may be issued and/or the village may suspend the license.
B. Compliance With Zoning And Building Code:
1. Every multiple-family dwelling shall be owned, operated and maintained in full compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, and regulations of
the village.
2. No structural, mechanical, electrical or plumbing alterations or repairs, or remodeling, shall be made to a multi-family dwelling unless all zoning and
building code requirements have been met, and appropriate building permits obtained.
3. In addition to all other requirements set forth in this code, the following requirements shall be applicable to a multi-family dwelling:
a. Safe And Sanitary Conditions:
(1) No person shall occupy and no owner, managing agent, or property agent shall allow another person to occupy any dwelling or dwelling unit
unless it is clean, safe, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and complies with all applicable ordinances, codes, and regulations of the village.
(2) Every owner shall maintain in a safe, clean and sanitary condition, the interior and exterior common areas at all times.
b. Abandoned Vehicle Removal Required: The owner, managing agent, or property agent of any multi-family dwelling shall be responsible for the
removal of any and all abandoned vehicles located on the premises of said multi-family dwelling.
(1) Such removal shall be accomplished within the time period specified in the notice. If any abandoned vehicle poses a hazard to human safety, it
shall be removed immediately.
(2) Such removals shall be accomplished as otherwise provided by law.
c. Fire Protection Devices Maintained: The owner, managing agent, or property agent shall be responsible for the maintenance and annual testing of
fire alarm, fire sprinkler and emergency lighting systems and backflow prevention devices.
(1) These systems shall be tested by an approved service company and a written report provided.
(2) The owner, managing agent, or property agent shall retain all test results.
C. Reinspection Fee:
1. The licensing inspection and first reinspection provided for in this article shall be without charge to the owner. Subsequent to the initial licensing
inspection and first reinspection for a licensing year, each additional reinspection shall be at a cost of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour, per inspector,
based on the number of inspector hours required to make said inspections and prepare the required report. The minimum charge for any
reinspection shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00).
2. A reinspection fee shall be charged if the owner, managing agent, property agent, tenant, or other authorized adult is not present or fails to allow
access to the inspector.
3. A reinspection fee shall be charged if, upon arrival of the inspector, conditions exist at the property which prohibit the inspector from completing the
inspection.
4. A reinspection fee shall be charged if a scheduled inspection is canceled after three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the business day before the inspection.
a. A scheduled inspection shall be canceled by three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the Friday before the scheduled inspection.
b. An inspection scheduled on a day following a village holiday shall be canceled by three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the business day prior to the village
holiday.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 386/618
5. Failing to schedule a required reinspection prior to the start of the next licensing year shall cause a reinspection fee to be charged at the time of a
license renewal.
D. Consent To Inspections And Right Of Access:
1. Each owner, managing agent, or property agent, by operating under a license or an application for a license pursuant to this article, irrevocably
consents to inspections by the village entering any and all portions of, excepting those areas that comprise the individual units which are occupied,
the multi-family dwelling for purposes of making the inspections required and/or permitted pursuant to this article.
2. If any owner, managing agent, property agent, tenant, occupant, or other person in control of multi-family dwelling or a dwelling unit contained
therein fails or refuses to consent to free access and entry to the multi-family dwelling or dwelling unit under his/her/its control for any inspection
pursuant to this article, and if the village has the probable cause necessary to obtain an administrative search warrant, the code official or his
designee may apply to the circuit court for an administrative search warrant or other appropriate court order authorizing such inspection.
3. Upon twenty four (24) hour notice to the owner, managing agent, or property agent, the owner, managing agent, or property agent shall provide
access to such portions of the multiple-family dwelling which are otherwise inaccessible to the village inspectors. During any inspection of an
inaccessible portion of the multiple-family dwelling, the owner, managing agent, or property agent shall designate an adult representative to
accompany the village inspector(s) during such inspection. (Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
10-14B-6: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Enforcement Authority: It shall be the duty of the community development department to enforce the provisions of this article, as authorized by this
code, and the International Code Council codes, as adopted and amended from time to time by the village.
B. Violations:
1. The following shall constitute violations of this article:
a. Failure of the owner, managing agent, or property agent of a multi-family dwelling to license such property with the village.
b. Failure to comply with the terms of this article.
c. Failure of the occupants of a multi-family dwelling to vacate such property within sixty (60) days after receiving notice from the code official that
such property is not properly licensed or that the license has been revoked.
d. Failure of the owner, managing agent, or property agent of a multi-family dwelling to vacate all tenants from said property within sixty (60) days
after the license has been revoked.
e. Failure of the owner, managing agent, or property agent of a multi-family dwelling to maintain a multi-family dwelling in compliance with applicable
building, property maintenance and zoning ordinances.
f. For any person other than one authorized by the code official to remove or deface any notices which have been posted pursuant to this article.
C. License Suspension Or Revocation:
1. Suspension Procedures:
a. A license may be suspended by the code official when any violation of applicable village ordinances has been identified by the community
development department and the owner, managing agent, or property agent has been properly notified of the violation and given a period of time in
which to correct the violation, but has failed to do so. A license may also be suspended by the code official when any information provided in the
license application is determined by the code official to be false.
b. When a license is suspended, the code official shall send notice to the property owner, managing agent, or property agent and the tenant at the
last address provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall
include the following:
(1) Description of the multi-family dwelling sufficient for identification;
(2) A statement of the reasons for the suspension;
(3) An explanation of the owner's right to appeal the suspension to the village administrator; and
(4) If the owner changes his/her/its address or changes the managing agent or property agent and fails to notify the community development
department, such notice shall be sufficient if sent by certified mail to the owner's, managing agent's or property agent's last address provided on
the last license application.
c. An owner whose license has been suspended may request a reinspection prior to revocation. If, upon reinspection, the community development
department finds that the multi-family dwelling, in connection with the notice which was issued, is now in compliance with this article, then the code
official may reinstate the suspended license upon payment of a seventy five dollar ($75.00) reinstatement fee. The request for a reinspection shall
not stay the revocation of the license.
d. Any owner whose license has been suspended shall be entitled to appeal said suspension to the village administrator by filing a written petition
within twenty (20) days after the date of suspension. The code official shall transmit to the village administrator copies of all records and notices
upon which the suspension is based. A hearing shall be scheduled as soon as practical upon receipt of a timely petition. The village administrator,
in considering any such petition, may immediately revoke the license or continue the suspension to a definite compliance date. The penalty for
noncompliance shall be revocation by the village administrator and/or prosecution of violations in the circuit court or administrative hearings and
any fines and penalties imposed by said court or administrative hearing officer. The village administrator may dismiss the charges and reinstate the
suspended license upon proof of compliance or lack of evidence of noncompliance. A seventy five dollar ($75.00) reinstatement fee may be
imposed after proof of compliance is shown.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 387/618
2. Revocation Procedures:
a. A license may be revoked by the village administrator when a petition for appeal has not been filed within twenty (20) days following the date of
issuance of an order of suspension. A license may be revoked by the code official when, in the opinion of the code official, emergency conditions
exist in a multi-family dwelling that require the immediate vacating of a structure as specified in the international property maintenance code.
b. A license which has been properly revoked as herein provided shall not be reinstated. The owner may, however, obtain a new license after all
violations have been corrected and by following the procedures for obtaining a new license and payment of appropriate fees as set forth in this
article.
c. If a license is revoked without having the opportunity of a suspension hearing, the owner has the right to appeal that revocation. Said appeal shall
conform to subsection C1d of this section. Such an appeal shall not operate as a stay of revocation until such time as the village administrator
renders a decision on the appeal, unless the code official grants a request for a stay upon a showing of good cause by the owner.
d. Whenever a license is revoked, the code official shall send notice to the owner, managing agent, or property agent at the last address provided on
the most recent license application. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The code official shall also notify all
tenants of the multi-family dwelling by posting a notice on all entrances to the multi-family dwelling. The notice to the tenants shall include the
following:
1. You are hereby notified that the license for this multi-family dwelling has been revoked pursuant to Title 10, Chapter 14, Article B of the
Village Code.
2. You must vacate this multi-family dwelling within sixty (60) days of the date of this notice, except if said revocation is pursuant to a declaration of
emergency condition by the Code Official. If emergency conditions exist, the notice to tenants shall provide for the immediate vacation of the multifamily
dwelling.
3. If you fail to vacate this multi-family dwelling, you will be in violation of Title 10, Chapter 14, Article B of the Village Code and subject to a minimum
fine of $100.00 and a maximum fine of $1,000.00 for each day you remain in the multi-family dwelling in violation of this article.
D. Enforcement Costs: If any court of competent jurisdiction finds that the owner, managing agent, or property agent has violated any provision(s) of this
article, such court shall award to the village all of the village costs related to the enforcement of this article, including, but not limited to, court costs,
attorney fees, building inspection costs, and administrative costs. (Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
10-14B-7: PENALTY:
A. Fines: Any person, firm, or corporation in violation of the provisions of this article, in addition to other legal and equitable remedies available to the
village shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to fines not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each violation. Each day during which a violation of this article continues or is permitted to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
B. Exemptions: This article shall not apply to the following properties:
1. Single-family dwellings which are owner occupied;
2. Properties which are vacant and which are not intended to be rented;
3. Townhouse and condominium owner occupied units;
4. Hotels, motels, and other structures which rent rooms to occupants if such occupancy is transient only; and
5. Properties and uses licensed and inspected by the state of Illinois, including, but not limited to, nursing homes, retirement communities and rest
homes.
C. Village Rights Retained: This article shall not be construed to impede in any way the right of the village to inspect any property pursuant to any other
provisions of this code or to seek penalties for violations of other provisions of this code. (Ord. 2016-66, 11-17-2016)
ARTICLE C. TRANSFER OF REAL ESTATE INSPECTIONS
10-14C-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
OWNER OCCUPIED SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING: A building or portion thereof zoned for single-family residential use and used by the
owner thereof as the principal residence for himself and his immediate family.
PERSON: Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture,
club, company, joint stock company, business trust, municipal corporation, political subdivision of the state of Illinois, domestic or foreign corporation,
association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise. Whenever the
term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term, as applied to associations, shall mean the owners or part owners
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. (Ord. 2003-65, 9-18-2003)
10-14C-2: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 388/618
It shall be unlawful for any person owning legal title to or the beneficial interest of a land trust of real estate located within the village to offer such real
estate for sale or other transfer without complying with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 2003-65, 9-18-2003)
10-14C-3: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer title to real estate or assign the beneficial interest in any land trust of real estate located within the village
without presenting to the purchaser thereof a certificate of compliance.
B. No person shall take possession of any real estate located within the village unless he has obtained from the seller or transferor thereof a certificate of
compliance.
C. The village clerk shall not issue any real estate transfer tax stamps unless he verifies that a certificate of compliance has been obtained for the real
estate in question. (Ord. 2003-65, 9-18-2003)
10-14C-4: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE; FEES:
Any person owning real estate located within the village shall, at the time of offering the real estate for sale or transfer, but not less than twenty one (21)
days prior to any proposed sale, assignment, or other transfer of any legal or beneficial interest of said real estate, file an application for a certificate of
compliance, together with a copy of a current (dated within 1 year of the date of the application) plat of survey, with the community development
department. Every person applying for a certificate of compliance, except for those exempted by the provisions of section 10-14C-8 of this article, shall,
simultaneously with presenting the application for a certificate of compliance to the community development department, pay a fee in accordance with the
following schedule: (Ord. 2003-65, 9-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2011-40, 6-16-2011)
Vacant land:
Less than 1 acre $ 25.00
1 to 5 acres 50.00
Over 5 acres 100.00
Single-family dwelling unit 100.00
Multi-family, up to 6 units 200.00 plus $10.00 for each unit over 6 units per building
Commercial and industrial:
Up to 10,000 square feet 150.00
10,001 to 30,000 square feet 175.00
30,001 to 50,000 square feet 200.00
Over 50,000 square feet 250.00
(Ord. 2011-87, 10-20-2011)
10-14C-5: INSPECTIONS:
A. Upon receipt of an application for inspection for a certificate of compliance, and upon payment of the application fee, the community development
department shall, within fourteen (14) days of such application, cause an inspection to be made of the real estate; and the community development
department shall, if such premises is found to be in compliance with the inspection checklist contained in section 10-14C-6 of this article, issue a
certificate of compliance.
B. If the property is found not to be in compliance with the inspection checklist contained in section 10-14C-6 of this article, the community development
department shall, as soon as practicable, but not later than five (5) working days following such inspection, provide the applicant with a report
("inspection report") of the violations to be corrected. The person in title, beneficiary of the land trust, or purchaser of the real estate shall then be given
a reasonable time prior to closing in which to correct such violations. The person making the corrections shall secure building permits when applicable.
A certificate of compliance shall be issued upon proper correction of the noted violations.
C. In the event the purchaser of such real estate is to undertake the required corrections, he or she shall first enter into an agreement with the community
development department, duly sworn before a notary public, that he or she is aware of said violations and is willing to take title subject to the same, and
shall make the necessary corrections within a specified period of time, but in no event shall such corrections take more than one year. The purchaser
shall deposit an amount equal to one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the reasonable cost, as determined by the village, to correct the noted
violations in escrow ("compliance escrow") with the village to guarantee the completion of such corrections. The village shall maintain all compliance
escrows in segregated accounts and shall not commingle any compliance escrows with any other funds or escrows. Upon satisfactory execution of the
above agreement and deposit of the compliance escrow, the community development department shall issue a certificate of compliance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 389/618
D. Prior to the expiration of the period of time granted to come into compliance with the inspection report, the purchaser shall schedule an inspection with
the community development department to verify that all corrections have been made. When, and only when, all corrections have been verified to be
complete, shall the village release the compliance escrow to the purchaser.
E. In the event the required corrections are not made within the time specified by the community development department, it shall be the duty of the
community development department to notify the village administrator who shall direct the village attorney to file suit against the person in title and all
other parties in interest in the appropriate court for the purpose of enforcing full compliance with the applicable ordinances of the village. The
compliance escrow shall be used to cover all costs and attorney fees associated with obtaining compliance with the agreement and all applicable
ordinances of the village. (Ord. 2007-79, 9-4-2007)
10-14C-6: INSPECTION CHECKLIST; ZONING VIOLATIONS:
A. Single-Family Residential Dwellings: All single-family residential dwellings shall be inspected for compliance with the following: (Ord. 2003-65, 9-18-
2003)
1. International residential code/2006, national electrical code/2008, Illinois state plumbing code/2004, international plumbing code/2006 and
international property maintenance code/2006, as promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc. If the provisions of the Illinois plumbing
code/2004 and the international plumbing code/2006 are in conflict, the more restrictive provision shall control.
2. The village zoning ordinance.
B. Other Structures: All structures other than single-family residential dwellings shall be inspected for compliance with this code. (Ord. 2003-65, 9-18-2003;
amd. 2011 Code)
C. Zoning Violations: When zoning violations are found to exist, such violations shall be eliminated in whole or in part to the extent the community
development department determines physically and economically feasible, particularly where such violations or nonconformities can be reduced or
eliminated without the relocation of principal building structures, garages, acquisition of additional land, or an expenditure disproportionate to the value
of the real estate. (Ord. 2003-65, 9-18-2003)
10-14C-7: VILLAGE DISCLAIMERS:
A. The village does not warrant the condition of any property inspected and shall not be responsible for any claims arising out of the property or the
condition thereof. The village does not warrant that all deficiencies are listed in the certificate of compliance and does not warrant anything as the
condition of the property or the liability thereof.
B. The issuance of a certificate of compliance shall not operate as a waiver of any right of the village to prosecute an owner or occupant of any real estate
for any violation of any village ordinance. (Ord. 2003-65, 9-18-2003)
10-14C-8: EXEMPTIONS:
The following transfers are exempt from the provisions of this article:
A. Transfers of real property made prior to the effective date hereof, where the deed was recorded after the effective date hereof, or assignments of
beneficial interest in real property dated prior to the effective date hereof, where the assignment was delivered on or after said effective date.
B. Transfers involving real property acquired by or from any governmental body.
C. Transfers in which the deed, assignment, or other instrument of transfer secures debt or other obligations, and no new or additional parties take
possession of the property.
D. Transfers in which the deed, assignment, or other instrument of transfer, without additional consideration, confirms, corrects, modifies, or supplements a
deed, assignment, or other instrument of transfer previously recorded or delivered.
E. Transfers in which the deed is a tax deed.
F. Transfers in which the deed, assignment, or other instrument of transfer releases property which secures debt or other obligations.
G. Transfers in which the deed is otherwise pursuant to a court decree.
H. Transfers between a subsidiary corporation and its parent or between subsidiary corporations of a common parent either pursuant to a plan of merger
or consolidation or pursuant to a plan of reorganization providing for the sale of substantially all of the seller's assets.
I. Transfers from a subsidiary corporation to its parent for no consideration other than the cancellation or surrender of the subsidiary's stock and transfers
from a parent corporation to its subsidiary for no consideration other than the issuance or delivery to the parent of the subsidiary's stock.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 390/618
J. Transfers made pursuant to a confirmed plan of reorganization as provided under section 1146(c) of chapter 11 of the United States bankruptcy code of
1978, as amended.
K. Transfers in which the deed or other instrument of transfer is issued to the mortgagee or secured creditor pursuant to a mortgage or security interest
foreclosure proceeding or sale or pursuant to a transfer in lieu of foreclosure.
L. Transfers in which an additional party is added to title and the existing or prior titleholder remains in title and continues to reside at the property.
M. Transfers by an executor or administrator to a legatee, heir, or distributee where the transfer is being made pursuant to will or by intestacy.
N. Transfers from a decedent to an executor or administrator.
O. Transfers from an incompetent to a conservator or similar legal representative, or from a conservator or similar legal representative to a former
incompetent upon removal of disability.
P. Transfers from a bankrupt or person in receivership due to insolvency to the trustee in bankruptcy or receiver, from such receiver to such trustee, or
from such trustee to such receiver, or upon redelivery or retransfer by any such transferee or successor thereto.
Q. Transfers from a trustee to surviving, substitute, succeeding, or additional trustees of the same trust.
R. Transfers upon the death of a joint tenant or tenant by the entirety to the survivor.
S. Transfers into or out of a land trust for no additional consideration and where the titleholder or beneficial owner retains possession and continues to
reside at the property. (Ord. 2003-65, 9-18-2003)
T. Upon the issuance of an occupancy permit to the owner of a newly constructed building or structure which has not been previously occupied, the
community development department shall also issue to said owner a certificate of compliance. (Ord. 2003-65, 9-18-2003; amd. 2011 Code)
10-14C-9: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying or opposing the enforcement of any other provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each day the violation is permitted to exist shall constitute
a separate offense. (Ord. 2003-65, 9-18-2003; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 15
FENCES
10-15-1: APPLICATION TO HEDGES AND OTHER VEGETATION:
For purposes of this chapter, hedges and other closely spaced plants over two feet (2') in height shall be considered a fence and shall comply with this
chapter. (1978 Code § 4-8-1)
10-15-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Term: No person shall erect any fence within the village limits without first obtaining a permit therefor, which permit shall expire, in the
absence of an extension being first obtained from the director of community development, six (6) months from the date of issuance of such permit.
(1978 Code § 4-8-2; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Permit Fee: The fee for a permit required by this chapter shall be as provided in subsection 10-1-8-1W of this title, which shall be paid at the time of
making the application and which shall be nonrefundable. (1978 Code § 4-8-3; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Application For Permit: Before erecting a fence, application for a permit to do so shall be made by submitting, in duplicate, a sketch or plot plan of the
property to be fenced, showing the building, if any, and the extent of the fence to be erected. (1978 Code § 4-8-2)
10-15-3: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
All fences shall be of permanent construction with fence posts set into the ground at least one-third (1/3) of their length. The height and location of fences
shall be as prescribed in the village zoning ordinance. (1978 Code § 4-8-4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 391/618
All fences shall have the finished face directed outward. Fences may only be painted or stained a shade of white, black, gray, brown, or redwood. If a
fence is painted or stained, it must be painted or stained the same solid color on all sides. (Ord. 2011-65, 9-1-2011)
10-15-4: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, or the owner, lessee or agent of any land or building, to erect or maintain, or to permit to be erected or maintained,
anywhere in the village, any railing, fence, guard or other protection of any kind composed in whole or in part of barbed wire, except as provided in
subsection 11-4-8C1b of this code, spikes or any similar device, or upon which railing, fence, guard or other protection shall be affixed or placed, or in any
manner attached, any spike, nail, glass or other sharp pointed contrivance of any kind or description, or which harbors or is designed to harbor any electric
charge sufficient to cause shock. (1978 Code § 4-8-5; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 16
MOVING BUILDINGS
10-16-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No building or other structure shall be moved into, over, across or along any street, alley or other public place in the village without
there first having been secured a permit therefor from the village administrator. (1978 Code § 8-6-1)
B. Application For Permit: Application for a permit to move a building or other structure shall be made on forms furnished by the village administrator. Such
application shall give complete details as to the size and weight of the structure, the proposed route and proposed schedule for moving. (1978 Code
§ 8-6-2)
C. Permit Fee: The fee for a permit required by this chapter shall be as provided in subsection 10-1-8-1M of this title. (1978 Code § 8-6-3; amd. 2011
Code)
D. Bond And Insurance Required:
1. Bond: Before any permit is issued granting authority to move any house or other building, the person engaged in the work of moving the same shall
file with the village administrator a bond in the amount provided in section 4-4-2 of this code to indemnify the village against any loss, cost, damage
or expense of any kind whatsoever which the village may suffer by reason of or on account of anything done other than by virtue of any permit
granted for such moving operations.
2. Insurance: In addition, said person shall file with the village administrator a certificate of insurance giving evidence of adequate liability and property
damage insurance to indemnify the village in case of any accidents or damage occurring in conjunction with or as a result of such moving operations.
Limits of liability shall be in the minimum amounts of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury to any person, one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for any one occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for damage to property. This coverage shall be specified to include
broad form property damage. (1978 Code § 8-6-4; amd. 2011 Code)
10-16-2: PROCEDURES FOR MOVING BUILDINGS:
A. Damage To Property Prohibited:
1. No damage or injury shall be done to any public or private property on account of any moving for which a permit has been issued under the
provisions of this chapter. (1978 Code § 8-6-5)
2. The granting of the permit required by this chapter does not relieve the grantee of the obligation for any and all damage he might cause to public or
private property by reason of the work done under such permit. (1978 Code § 8-6-6)
B. Permission From Utility Companies Required: Written permission shall be obtained from each telegraph, telephone, electric light and power or railroad
company which might be affected by the moving of any building or structure. If the moving necessitates the cutting or moving of any wires, permission
shall be obtained not less than ten (10) days prior to the time of the scheduled moving and prior to the issuance of the moving permit by the village.
(1978 Code § 8-6-7)
C. Permission To Trim Trees Required: Permission must be obtained from the parks, recreation and facilities department if the moving of any building or
structure necessitates the trimming of any tree limbs. All such work shall be done under the supervision of the public works department with all costs
being borne by the mover. (1978 Code § 8-6-8; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
D. Buildings Standing In Street Restricted: No building in the process of being moved shall be allowed to stand in any street for more than two (2) hours at
any one time, except in cases of unavoidable delay due to accident. (1978 Code § 8-6-9)
E. Warning Lights Displayed At Night: Warning lights shall be displayed at night so as to properly warn passersby of danger due to any building in the
process of being moved. (1978 Code § 8-6-10)
F. Littering Public Ways Prohibited: No material, tools or moving equipment shall be allowed to litter the streets when moving is in progress. (1978 Code
§ 8-6-11)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 392/618
Chapter 17
VACANT BUILDINGS
10-17-1: TITLE:
This chapter, including any regulations adopted hereunder, shall hereafter be known, cited, and referred to as the GLENDALE HEIGHTS VACANT
BUILDING REGISTRY. (Ord. 2018-80, 12-13-2018)
10-17-2: PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by enactment of this chapter which:
1. Establishes a program for identification, registration, and regulation of buildings which are or become vacant on and after the effective date hereof.
2. Determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings.
3. Provides for administration, enforcement, including abatement of public nuisances, and imposition of penalties.
B. This chapter shall be construed liberally to effect its purposes. (Ord. 2018-80, 12-13-2018)
10-17-3: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION:
A. This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations which prescribe
standards other than those provided herein.
B. This chapter shall prevail over all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith. (Ord. 2018-80, 12-13-2018)
10-17-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by the context, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings
indicated in this section:
BOARDED BUILDING: A building which has had, in a manner intended to be temporary or permanent, any or all openings, which openings are windows
or doors which were present for the purpose of light, ventilation or egress, some material, whether opaque, solid or transparent, affixed to such openings
from the interior or exterior of the building for the purpose of securing or preventing access or damage to the building or its components.
BUILDING: Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy.
DIRECTOR: The Director of Community Development or his or her designee.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
State, County or Village as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person,
and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON: Includes a corporation, a partnership, or other entity as well as an individual.
PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE: Includes the following:
A. The physical condition or uses of any building regarded as a public nuisance at common law, under the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or under this
Code; or
B. Any physical condition, use or occupancy, of any building or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences or structures; or
C. Any building which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities; or
D. Any building designated by the Director as unsafe for human habitation or use; or
E. Any building which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or manifestly unsafe or insecure as to endanger life, limb or property; or
F. Any building or premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
G. Any building that is dangerous; in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; contains faulty construction; is open or vacant and the doors,
windows, or other openings are boarded up or secured by any means other than conventional methods used in the design of the building or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 393/618
permitted for new construction of similar type; is damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter; and is in danger of collapse or failure and
dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
UNOCCUPIED BUILDING: A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises,
including buildings ordered vacated by the Director pursuant to authority granted to him by this Code. In determining whether a building is "unoccupied",
the Director may consider these factors, among others:
A. A building at which substantially all lawful residential or business activity has ceased.
B. The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied units shall be
considered.
C. The building is substantially devoid of contents. The condition and value of fixtures or personal property in the building are relevant to this
determination.
D. The building lacks utility services, i.e., water, sewer, electric or natural gas.
E. The building is the subject of a foreclosure action.
F. The building is not actively for sale as part of a contractual agreement to sell the building; the building lacks "for sale", "for rent", or similar signage.
G. There is the presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations.
H. A unit within a building that is substantially devoid of contents or residential or business activity has ceased.
VACANT BUILDING: A building or portion of a building which is:
A. Unoccupied and unsecured; or
B. Unoccupied and secured by boarding or similar means; or
C. Unoccupied and condemned by the Director pursuant to applicable provisions of this Code; or
D. Unoccupied and has multiple code violations; or
E. Unoccupied and the building or its premises has been the site of unlawful criminal or quasi-criminal activity within the previous six (6) months; or
F. Condemned by the Director and unlawfully occupied; or
G. Unoccupied for over thirty (30) days, and during which time, the Director has issued an order to correct public nuisance conditions and same have
not been corrected in a code compliant manner; or
H. Unoccupied for over ninety (90) days.
But not including unoccupied buildings which are undergoing construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with all applicable
ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations, and for which construction, renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding in an orderly fashion to completion.
(Ord. 2018-80, 12-13-2018)
10-17-5: DETERMINATION OF VACANT BUILDING:
A. Evaluation And Determination: Within sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof, the Director shall evaluate all buildings in the Village he believes to
be unoccupied and make a determination for each as to whether the building is a "vacant building" within the meaning of section 10-17-4 of this
chapter. The Director may determine that a building which meets any of the criteria set forth in section 10-17-4, definition of "vacant building", of this
chapter is not to be regulated under this chapter for a stated period if, upon consideration of reliable, substantiated and sufficient evidence, he or she
determines that regulation of the building under this chapter would not serve the public health, welfare, and safety and makes written findings in
support of his or her decision. The determination shall be in writing and shall state the factual basis for the determination.
B. Notice Requirements:
1. For buildings the Director determines to be vacant buildings, he shall, within seven (7) days of making that determination, send notice of his written
determination with the factual findings to the last taxpayer of record listed on the most recent County tax roll. Said notice of determination shall be
sent first class United States mail, with proper postage prepaid. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a person from complying with this chapter. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 394/618
Director may personally serve or cause personal service of the notice of determination. Any person making service shall execute an affidavit
attesting to the facts of service. The Director shall maintain an affidavit of service for each notice of determination sent.
2. The notice shall specify a date and time on which the owner shall allow for a code compliance inspection of the interior and exterior of the vacant
building to determine the extent of compliance with Village Property, Building, Health, Fire, Water, Sewer, and Zoning Codes. The owner shall pay a
required inspection fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for residential premises and a required five hundred dollar ($500.00) inspection fee for
other premises to the Village within thirty (30) days of the inspection. An unpaid fee shall be a lien upon the premises.
3. The notice shall contain a statement of the obligations of the owner of a building determined to be a vacant building, a copy of the registration form
the owner is required to file pursuant to section 10-17-7 of this chapter, and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the Director's determination. (Ord.
2018-80, 12-13-2018)
10-17-6: APPEAL OF DETERMINATION:
A. An owner of a building determined by the Director to be a vacant building, as provided in this chapter, may appeal that determination to the Village
Administrative Hearing Officer. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Director within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the
notice of determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner's obligation to register his building as required by section 10-17-7 of this chapter. The
appeal shall contain a complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes the Director's determination, shall set forth specific facts in support
thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the appeal. The Village Administrative Hearing Officer shall decide the appeal
on the basis of facts presented by the owner in his or her written appeal and the Director's written determination.
B. The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to persuade the Village Administrative Hearing Officer that had the evidence been known to
the Director at the time the Director made the determination, the Director would more likely than not have determined that the subject building was not
a vacant building within the meaning of this chapter.
C. The Village Administrative Hearing Officer shall send written notice of his or her decision to the owner within ten (10) days of his or her receipt of the
appeal. The Village Administrative Hearing Officer may, but is not required to, seek additional information from the owner. The Village Administrative
Hearing Officer may, upon written notice thereof to the owner, take up to ten (10) additional days to decide the appeal if he or she determines that such
additional time is required for consideration of the appeal.
D. An owner who wishes to challenge the applicability of this chapter to his/her building without the Director's determination having been made shall set
forth specific facts to support non-applicability in writing to the Director. In the event the Director determines that the subject building is a vacant
building, the owner shall have the right to appeal the Director's determination to the Village Administrative Hearing Officer as provided herein. (Ord.
2018-80, 12-13-2018)
10-17-7: REGISTRATION AND PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
A. Time For Compliance: The owner of a building who knows, or from all the facts and circumstances should know, that his or her building is or has
become a "vacant building" within the meaning of this chapter, the owner of a building which the Director determines at any time to be a "vacant
building", or the owner of a building whose appeal from the Director's determination has been denied by the Administrative Hearing Officer shall take
the action provided in this section within fifteen (15) days after either the date of the Director's notice of determination or occurrence of the facts which
would cause a reasonable person to believe that the building was a "vacant building", or denial of an appeal of the Director's determination, whichever
is applicable. Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances, including this chapter, nor does it
preclude any of the actions the Village is authorized to take pursuant to this chapter, this Code, or any other statutes.
B. Registration Required; Renewal And Amended Registrations: The procedures of this subsection shall be followed:
1. Register the building with the Director of Community Development, on a form provided by the Director, and pay a one hundred dollar ($100.00)
annual nonprorated vacant building registration fee. The form shall include, as a minimum, the name, street address, and telephone number of the
owner; the case name and number of any pending litigation which concerns or affects the premises, including bankruptcy cases; and the names,
street addresses, and telephone numbers of all persons with any legal interest in the premises. The form shall require the owner to identify a natural
person twenty one (21) years of age or older who maintains a permanent address in the County to accept service on behalf of the owner with respect
to any notices the Director or Administrative Hearing Officer send pursuant to this chapter or service of process in any proceeding commenced to
enforce any provision of this chapter. The owner shall list the name, address, and telephone number of said person. A street address is required as a
post office box number will not be acceptable. The form shall state that the owner, by affixing his or her signature, is advised that the Village will not
issue Real Estate Transfer Tax stamps without Village inspectors having first conducted an interior and exterior inspection for code compliance;
2. Renew the vacant building registration each year on or before January 1 and pay the required one hundred dollar ($100.00) annual fee; and
3. File an amended registration within fifteen (15) days of any change in the information contained in the annual registration. A new registration is
required for any change in ownership whatsoever.
C. Owner's Acceptance Of Notice By Posting; Inspections:
1. The form shall require the owner to indicate his or her "acceptance of notice by posting". As a result, the owner is consenting to service of notices
which are required to be sent pursuant to this chapter, by posting on the premises if the owner fails to renew the registration or fails to provide the
Director with accurate and current information with respect to the person designated as the individual to accept notices and service of processes.
2. The owners shall allow for a code compliance inspection of the interior and exterior of the vacant building and premises, and shall pay a required fee
of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for residential premises and a required five hundred dollar ($500.00) fee prior to the inspection. Such inspection
will determine the extent of compliance with Village Property, Building, Health, Fire, Water, Sewer, and Zoning Codes. The Village shall send the
inspection report to the owner within thirty (30) days.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 395/618
D. Insurance Requirements: The owner shall obtain liability insurance and maintain such insurance for as long as the building is vacant, and file evidence
of such insurance with the Director. The insurance requirements are as follows: five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for a vacant residential
building of one to three (3) units, seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000.00) for a vacant residential building of four (4) to eleven (11) units, one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for a vacant residential building of twelve (12) to forty eight (48) units, two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for a vacant
residential building of more than forty eight (48) units, and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for a vacant manufacturing, industrial, storage, or
nonresidential commercial building.
E. Vacant Building Plan:
1. Plan Required; Contents: At the time a building is registered as required herein, the owner shall submit a vacant building plan if required by the
Director. The Director may prescribe a form for the plan. If the owner fails to submit the plan as provided by this chapter, the Director may determine
the plan. The plan shall contain the following as a minimum:
a. A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction of similar type. The proposed repair shall result in
openings being secured by conventional methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted for new construction of similar type.
Boarding shall be accomplished with materials and methods described by the Director. The owner shall maintain the building in an enclosed and
secure state until the building is reoccupied or made available for immediate occupancy. If the owner demonstrates that securing of the building
will provide adequate protection to the public, the Director may waive the requirement of enclosure.
b. For buildings and premises thereof which are determined by the Director as being or containing public nuisances, as defined in section 10-17-4 of
this chapter, then the vacant building plan shall contain a plan of action to remedy such public nuisances.
c. A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and nuisance
identified by the Director.
d. If the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
e. A plan of action to maintain the premises in conformance with this chapter.
f. A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the date the building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or sale. The time
schedule shall include date(s) of commencement and completion of all actions required to achieve habitability. No plan which provides for
compliance with this chapter or which will not, as determined by the Director, achieve such compliance within three (3) months, in the case of a
vacant boarded building, and one year, in the case of vacant, unboarded and code compliant building, will be approved.
g. A plan of action to maintain the premises in compliance with this Code.
h. A plan of action to maintain exterior lighting in accordance with standards established by the Director.
2. Approval Of Plan:
a. The Director shall review the proposed vacant building plan in accordance with the standards of subsection E2b of this section. The Director shall
send notice to the owner of the vacant building of his determination.
b. In considering the appropriateness of a vacant building plan, the Director shall include the following in his or her consideration and shall make
written findings as to each:
(1) The purposes of this chapter and intent of the Village Board to minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise vacant.
(2) The effect of the building and the proposed plan on adjoining property.
(3) The length of time the building has been vacant.
(4) The presence of any public nuisances on the property.
(5) The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will prevent or ameliorate the condition it is designed to address.
3. Authority To Modify Plan: The Director shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner, have the right to modify the vacant building plan by modifying
the dates of performance, the proposed methods of action, or by imposing additional requirements consistent with this chapter if he or she deems it
necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.
4. Failure To Provide Or Comply With Plan: Failure to have an approved plan within thirty (30) days of filing the registration form or failure to comply
with the approved plan shall constitute a violation of this chapter subjecting the owner of the building to penalties provided in this chapter and to any
remedies the Village may avail itself of as provided for herein and elsewhere in this Code or other statutes, including, but not limited to, an action to
compel correction of property maintenance violations.
F. Security Guard Service Required: On written notice of the Director, the owner shall provide a bonded, licensed, and insured security guard service at the
building between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Such service is to remain in place until the Director gives written
notice that the service is no longer required. Such service shall be required when the Director makes a written determination that the vacant building
constitutes a fire hazard, is otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, involves illegal or improper uses, occupancies, or maintenance,
and for which boarding and securing the building are insufficient to prevent the actual or threatened harm.
G. Sign Posted; Required Information: The owner shall affix a code compliant sign which is at least one foot by one foot (1' x 1') to any building which is
registered under this chapter. The sign shall contain the following information: the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, and in addition,
for buildings which are the subject of a foreclosure action, the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the plaintiff and the plaintiff's attorney, if
any, in the foreclosure action. The sign must be placed so that its message is legible from the public way.
H. Other Enforcement: The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the Village to demolish or to take other action against the building
pursuant to other provisions of this chapter, this Code, or other applicable legislation. (Ord. 2018-80, 12-13-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 396/618
10-17-8: UNPAID INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION FEES:
A premises upon which is situated a vacant building for which inspection fees or registration fees imposed pursuant to this chapter have not been paid in
full is not eligible for Village Real Estate Transfer Tax stamps. Unpaid fees shall be a lien upon the premises. (Ord. 2018-80, 12-13-2018)
10-17-9: OCCUPANCY OF VACANT BUILDINGS:
A certificate of code compliance for vacant buildings issued by the Community Development Department and payment in full of all fees imposed pursuant
to this chapter are required prior to any occupancy of a vacant building. (Ord. 2018-80, 12-13-2018)
10-17-10: BOARDING BUILDINGS:
A. It is the policy of the Village that boarding is a temporary solution to prevent unauthorized entry into a vacant building and that boarded buildings are a
public nuisance. A vacant building may not remain boarded longer than three (3) months unless an extension of that time is part of a plan approved by
the Director.
B. A vacant building which is unboarded and code compliant and for which boarding is determined by the Director on the basis of police reports, citizen
complaints, and other information of other type considered reliable by reasonable persons may not remain vacant for more than one year without an
approved plan for occupancy, sale, demolition, or other disposition of the premises to avoid the imposition of boarding by the Director. (Ord. 2018-80,
12-13-2018)
10-17-11: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day per violation
to a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation, in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to the Village.
Such other remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief, application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition, or
condemnation, contracting for the repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosure of any lien the Village may have thereon. A separate and distinct
offense shall be committed each day on which such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Village may enforce this chapter in its administrative adjudication system or through the court system.
C. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the Village from immediately condemning a building as provided in this Code or other statutes or taking other
immediate action upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or poses an imminent danger to the occupants of the building or the public
health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2018-80, 12-13-2018)
Chapter 18
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
10-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PLAN COMMISSION: The plan commission of the village.
SCHOOL DISTRICT: Any district created or operated under the provisions of "the school code", approved May 1, 1945, as amended, and any portion of
which is located within the village.
TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle or similar portable structure used or so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets or highways and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place, or any vehicle or similar portable structure designed to
be transported after fabrication on a flatbed or on another trailer or on detachable wheels to a site where it is to be used as a dwelling ready for occupancy,
except for minor or incidental unpacking and assembly operations.
TRAILER COACH PARK OR PARK: An area of land upon which three (3) or more occupied trailer coaches are harbored, either free of charge or for
revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such trailer
coach park. The term "trailer coach park" shall not be construed to include buildings, tents or other structures maintained by any individual or company on
their own premises and used exclusively to house their own farm labor, or any real estate owned by the United States or of this state wherein a trailer
coach may be located or harbored, or the area or premises on any farm upon which are harbored trailer coaches occupied by persons employed upon
such farm for not more than ninety (90) days in any calendar year in the production, harvesting or processing of agricultural or horticultural products
produced on such farm.
TRAILER COACH SPACE OR TRAILER COACH SITE: Any portion of a trailer coach park designed for the use or occupancy of one trailer coach.
TRAILER COACH STAND: That part of an individual lot reserved for the placement of a trailer coach. (1978 Code § 4-7-1-1; amd. 2011 Code)
10-18-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 397/618
A. Enforcement Powers; Right Of Entry: The director of community development shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, and said director of
community development or his deputies shall inspect, at least once each year, each trailer coach park and all the accommodations and facilities
therewith. The director of community development or his deputies shall inspect, at least once each year, each trailer coach park and all the
accommodations and facilities therewith. The director of community development and his deputies are hereby granted the power and authority to enter
upon the premises of such trailer coach parks at any time for the purposes set forth in this chapter.
B. Power To Issue Rules And Regulations: The director of community development may issue rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this
chapter. (1978 Code § 4-7-1-2; amd. 2011 Code)
10-18-3: APPLICATION OF BUILDING CODE AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
The provisions of the building code adopted by the village and the provisions of title 12 of this code, being the subdivision regulations of the village, shall
apply to trailers and trailer coach parks, except when in conflict with this chapter or when they can have no application. (1978 Code § 4-7-1-4)
10-18-4: CONSTRUCTION OF MOBILE HOMES:
A. Plumbing, Heating And Electrical Standards:
1. Each trailer coach occupied as a dwelling unit in the village after December 22, 1970, shall meet the minimum standards for plumbing, heating and
electrical systems as defined by the American Standards Association project A119.1, approved March 12, 1963, as revised periodically. Trailer
coaches that display the official seal and register number of the Mobile Home Manufacturers Association and the Trailer Coach Association will be
considered to comply with the American Standards Association project A119.1. The minimum standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems,
as defined by said American Standards Association project A119.1, as amended and revised periodically, are hereby made a part of and
incorporated by reference into this chapter. (1978 Code § 4-7-1-5)
2. Trailer coaches that do not meet the minimum standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems established under subsection A1 of this
section will not be issued a certificate of use and occupancy by the director of community development. (1978 Code § 4-7-1-5; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Self-Contained Lavatory And Bath Facilities: Trailer coaches which do not have a toilet and bath or shower facilities shall not be allowed within any
trailer coach park located in the village.
C. Additions To Trailer Coaches And Accessory Structures: No permanent or semipermanent structure shall be affixed to any trailer coach as an addition
to such trailer coach, nor shall any accessory structure be permitted on any trailer coach lot, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. The
prohibition herein against any addition or accessory to a trailer coach shall not apply to a canopy or awning designed for use with a trailer coach, nor to
any expansion unit or accessory structure specifically manufactured for trailer coaches. (1978 Code § 4-7-1-5)
10-18-5: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
10-18-5-1: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED:
No trailer coach park shall be occupied until a certificate of use and occupancy shall have been issued by the director of community development to the
effect that the trailer coach park, or the portion thereof for which such certificate is required, is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(1978 Code § 4-7-1-3; amd. 2011 Code)
10-18-5-2: LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Forms: The director of community development shall draft and supply all forms and blanks and specify the number and detail necessary to obtain
permits to establish or construct or make alterations upon trailer coach parks and for a license to operate and maintain such park according to this
chapter.
B. Distribution Of Applications: When the plan commission has approved an application for a permit to construct or make alterations upon a trailer coach
park or the appurtenances thereto or a license to operate and maintain the same, it shall retain the original and forward one copy to the applicant and
one copy to the director of community development. (1978 Code § 4-7-4-1; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Licensing Requirements:
1. License Required: No person shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate a trailer coach park without first obtaining a license therefor from the
director of community development. (1978 Code § 4-7-4-3; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Application For License: An applicant for a license required by this chapter shall file with the director of community development a written application
therefor setting forth:
a. The full name and address of the applicant, or the names and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the names and
addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the present or last occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the
application.
b. The location and legal description of the tract of land, certified on a plat of a survey by an Illinois registered land surveyor, drawn to scale of one
inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 398/618
c. The proposed and existing facilities in the park for water supply, sewerage, garbage and waste disposal, fire protection and for a sanitary
community building which will include a description of toilets, urinals, sinks, washbasins, stop sinks, showers, drains and laundry facilities, the
proposed alterations therein and the maintenance thereof.
d. The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which the park is to be located.
e. All corners and points of tangency are to be marked by galvanized or wrought iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least eighteen inches (18") in length
and not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter. The top of the pipe or bar is to be set level with the established grade or ground.
f. The plot plans of the park drawn on a scale of one hundred feet to an inch (1" = 100') or larger, building plans and specifications for existing
buildings and facilities, and the plans and specifications for new buildings and facilities or the proposed alterations in existing facilities, all showing
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The plot plans shall be drawn on a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') or larger
and shall contain, among other things, the following:
(1) The date on which such plot plans were prepared.
(2) An arrow indicating north point.
(3) All trailer coach sites shall be properly numbered on the plot plans.
(4) Complete information regarding storm sewers.
(5) Stormwater runoff shall be shown on a separate plat.
(6) Contour lines at one foot (1') intervals shall be shown on a separate plat, and United States geological survey data shall be used for the
preparation of such plat.
(7) Grades of driveways and all ditches shall be shown on a separate plat.
g. A statement of the firefighting facilities, public or private, which are available to the trailer coach park.
h. An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters contained in the application shall be attached thereto. (1978 Code § 4-7-4-4)
3. Fees:
a. Application Fee: Each application for an original license required by this subsection shall be accompanied by an application fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) for each ten (10) acres of land, or fraction thereof, proposed to be used as a trailer coach park. Each application fee shall be paid to the
director of community development by certified check or United States money order in the amount of the application fee only, and the application
fee, once paid to the director of community development, shall not be refunded.
b. License Fee:
(1) The annual fee for a license required by this chapter shall be as provided in section 4-2-2 of this code. All fees shall be made payable to the
director of community development.
(2) Any applicant for an original license to operate a new trailer coach park constructed under a permit by the director of community development
shall only be required to pay one-fourth (1/4) of the annual fee if such park begins operating after January 31 and before April 30 of such license
year, or one-half (1/2) of the annual fee if such trailer coach park begins operation after October 31 and before February 1 of such license year,
or three-fourths (3/4) of the annual fee if such park begins operation after July 31 and before November 1 of such license year. (1978 Code § 4-
7-4-5; amd. 2011 Code)
4. Examination Of Application; Approval Or Denial Of License: The plan commission shall examine the application for a license to operate and maintain
a trailer coach park, and the director of community development shall, if the park is completed in conformity with this chapter as determined by the
plan commission, issue a license. If the application for a license to operate and maintain a trailer coach park is declined, the plan commission shall
give the reasons therefor in writing to the applicant, and if the objections can be corrected, the applicant may amend his application and resubmit it
for approval. (1978 Code § 4-7-4-6; amd. 2011 Code)
5. Issuance Of License: If a permit to construct a trailer coach park has been issued, the applicant shall, upon completion thereof, notify the director of
community development. The director of community development shall then inspect the park and, if completed in accordance with the accepted
application, he shall issue a license to operate and maintain the park. (1978 Code § 4-7-4-7; amd. 2011 Code)
6. Compliance With Zoning Regulations: No license to operate and maintain a trailer coach park shall be issued if such park is in violation of the village
zoning ordinance. (1978 Code § 4-7-4-8)
7. Term Of License: A license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be for one year and shall expire on April 30 of each year, and the license shall be
renewed from year to year upon payment of the annual license fee. (1978 Code § 4-7-4-9)
8. Transfer Of License: Licenses issued pursuant to this subsection apply only to the premises described in the application and in the license issued
therefor, and only one location shall be so described in each license. A license which has been issued to a person may not be transferred to any
other person without the written consent of the director of community development; however, the director of community development may not
withhold his consent where the provisions of this chapter have been met. A license which has been issued for a particular premises may not be
removed to any other premises. (1978 Code § 4-7-4-10; amd. 2011 Code)
9. Display Of License: Each license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be prominently displayed in the office of the trailer coach park for which it
was issued. (1978 Code § 4-7-4-11)
10. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: Any license granted pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the village
president and board of trustees. However, the director of community development shall first serve or cause to be served upon the licensee a written
notice in which shall be specified the way or ways in which the licensee has failed to comply with this chapter. The notice shall require the licensee to
remove or abate such nuisance, unsanitary or objectionable condition specified in such notice within a reasonable time. If the licensee fails to comply
with the terms and conditions of such notice within a reasonable time, the village president and board of trustees may revoke or suspend such
license. (1978 Code § 4-7-4-12; amd. 2011 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 399/618
D. Construction Permit Requirements:
1. Permit Required:
a. No person shall construct a trailer coach park in the village without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this subsection. (1978 Code § 4-
7-5-1)
b. No change in any sanitary facilities, methods of water supply, sewerage, drainage, or garbage or waste disposal and no change in the plot plan
shall be made without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director of community development. (1978 Code § 4-7-5-1; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Application For Permit:
a. Application for a permit required by this subsection shall be in the same form and shall be accompanied by such supporting documents as are
required by this section for license applications.
b. Where a permit required by this subsection, as well as an original license to operate a trailer coach park, is sought by the applicant, request
therefor shall be made in the same application. (1978 Code § 4-7-5-2)
3. Application Fees:
a. Each application for a permit to construct a trailer coach park shall be accompanied by an application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for
each ten (10) acres of land, or fraction thereof, proposed to be used as a trailer coach park. Each application fee shall be paid to the director of
community development by certified check or United States money order in the amount of the application fee only, and the application fee, once
paid to the director of community development, shall not be refunded.
b. An application to alter a trailer coach park shall be accompanied by an application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each ten (10) acres, or fraction
thereof, used to harbor trailer coaches therein; however, no application fee shall be required to accompany an application for a permit to alter a
park where such alteration involves only a reduction in the number of trailer coach spaces to a number less than that for which the park is currently
licensed. (1978 Code § 4-7-5-3; amd. 2011 Code)
4. Examination Of Application; Issuance Or Denial Of Permit: The plan commission shall examine the application for a permit to establish or construct a
trailer coach park, and the director of community development shall, if the park will be in conformity with this chapter as determined by the plan
commission, issue a permit to construct the park. If the application for a permit to construct the park is declined, the plan commission shall give the
reasons therefor in writing to the applicant, and if the objections can be corrected, the applicant may amend his application and resubmit it for
approval. (1978 Code § 4-7-5-4; amd. 2011 Code)
5. Nontransferability Of Permit: No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. (1978 Code § 4-7-5-6)
6. Display Of Permit: Each permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall be prominently displayed in the office of the trailer coach park for which it
was issued. (1978 Code § 4-7-5-5)
7. Issuance Not Exclusive: Issuance of a permit pursuant to this subsection shall not relieve the applicant from securing permits or from the payment of
all connection or tap-on charges or from complying with any other applicable ordinances of the village. (1978 Code § 4-7-5-7)
E. Appeals From Denial Of License Or Permit:
1. Any person refused a permit to construct or alter a trailer coach park or a license to operate a trailer coach park shall have the right to a hearing
before the plan commission, which shall have full power to conduct such hearing, issue subpoenas, administer oaths and affirmations and exercise
all other powers necessary to such hearing, and to issue written findings and recommendations thereon to the village president and board of
trustees.
2. No hearing shall be held before the plan commission until notice of the time and place of the hearing has been published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date, such notice to contain the particular location of the trailer coach park and a
brief statement as to the reason the hearing is being held.
3. All hearings before the plan commission shall be open to the public.
4. The plan commission shall keep minutes of the proceedings showing their determination and shall also keep records of their official actions.
5. In the performance of its duties under the provisions of this subsection, the plan commission may incur such expenditures as shall be authorized by
the village president and board of trustees.
6. The plan commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this subsection. (1978 Code § 4-7-4-2)
10-18-5-3: DESIGN AND LAYOUT:
A. Area And Lot Requirements:
1. Minimum Area; Minimum Number Of Spaces: The minimum area for each trailer coach park shall be ten (10) acres. The minimum number of spaces
completed and ready for occupancy before first occupancy is permitted shall be fifty (50). This subsection shall not apply to any state licensed trailer
coach park in existence on December 12, 1970.
2. Maximum Density Per Acre: The total density of any trailer coach park shall not exceed seven (7) units per net acre.
3. Minimum Area Per Space; One Trailer Per Lot: The minimum area for each individual trailer coach space shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet.
Not more than one trailer coach shall be placed on a trailer coach lot.
4. Maximum Lot Coverage: The lot coverage of a trailer coach, together with any expansion or accessory structure permitted by this chapter, shall not
exceed forty percent (40%) of the total trailer coach lot area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 400/618
5. Minimum Width Of Trailer Coach Lots: The minimum average width for each trailer coach lot shall be forty feet (40'); except, that for any trailer coach
unit greater than twelve feet (12') in width, the minimum average lot width shall be forty five feet (45'). This average shall be maintained between
points of ten feet (10') in front of the trailer coach stand and five feet (5') to the rear of the stand.
6. Minimum Distance Between Trailer Coaches: No trailer coach shall be placed within fifteen feet (15') of another, and in no case shall the trailer coach
be located closer than seven and one-half feet (71/2') to the side or rear lot line of the trailer coach lot. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-1)
B. Trailer Coach Stands: Each trailer coach stand shall conform to the following standards:
1. Placement: The trailer coach stand shall be so placed as to provide for the practical placement on the lot of both the trailer coach and its appurtenant
structures and the retention of the trailer coach on the lot in a stable condition and in satisfactory relationship to its surroundings.
2. Size: The size of the trailer coach stand shall be suitable for the general market to be served by the individual park and suitable to fit dimensions of
trailer coaches anticipated, including trailer coach appurtenant structures or appendages.
3. Location: The location of each trailer coach stand shall be at such elevation, distance and angle in relation to the access street and the trailer coach
lot driveway that placement and removal of the trailer coach is practical.
4. Construction: Concrete slab or concrete runways shall be used.
5. Gradient: There shall be a minimum of two percent (2%) longitudinal and adequate crown or cross gradient and surface drainage.
6. Base Enclosure: All trailer coaches which are placed on foundations or piers shall have the entire perimeter enclosed. The enclosure shall be of a
material approved by the village. Panels manufactured specifically for trailer coach enclosures shall be considered to meet these requirements.
(1978 Code § 4-7-3-2)
C. Yards Abutting Common Areas:
1. The distance from the line or corner of the trailer coach stand to a private street, common driveway, common parking area, common walk or other
common area shall be fifteen feet (15') minimum. Patios, trailer coach appurtenances, carports and individual storage facilities shall not be included
in the determination of yard width.
2. The trailer coach park shall have front, side and rear yards having a depth or width of not less than thirty feet (30') and containing no obstructions
except trees and shrubs. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-4)
D. Lots Marked And Numbered: Every trailer coach lot shall be clearly defined on the ground by permanent markers. There shall be posted and
maintained in a conspicuous place on each lot a number corresponding to the number of each lot as shown on the plot plan submitted as required by
this chapter, so that each lot may be easily identified. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-5)
E. Patio Required: Each trailer coach lot shall have provided thereon a patio providing appropriate outdoor living space to supplement the interior living
space of a trailer coach. Each patio shall conform to the following specifications:
1. Size: The minimum size of each trailer coach lot patio shall be one hundred eighty (180) square feet.
2. Location: Every patio location shall be convenient to the entrance of the trailer coach, appropriately related to open areas of the lot and other
facilities, fitted to terrain and natural features and related to anticipated trailer coach models.
3. Elevation: Where practical, the patio shall be at an elevation at least as high as the elevation of its trailer coach stand. Where topographical
conditions permit, the patio and adjoining yard areas on the entry side of the trailer coach stand may be as much as two feet (2') higher than the
trailer coach stand in order that the level of the patio and outdoor living area will be close to the floor level of an in place trailer coach. The grade
difference between the patio and the stand may be taken up by a retaining wall or cribbing or by an earth slope. Where the patio is higher than the
trailer coach stand, adequate surface drainage of the trailer coach stand shall be provided across the other side or ends of the stand.
4. Construction: Any subgrading shall be well drained, uniformly graded and compacted. Construction shall provide a useful outdoor surface
constructed or formed either monolithically or in movable units with weather resistant materials placed sufficiently close together to create a paved
area. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-6)
F. Tenant Storage Facilities: Storage facilities shall be provided on or conveniently near each trailer coach lot for the active storage of outdoor equipment,
furniture or tools, and for the inactive storage of such materials as are used only seasonally or infrequently by the typical tenant and which cannot be
conveniently stored in a typical trailer coach. There shall be a minimum of ninety (90) cubic feet provided for general storage for each trailer coach lot.
Storage facilities shall be provided on the lot or in compounds located within a reasonable distance but not more than five hundred feet (500') from
each trailer coach stand serviced and located no closer to private or public streets than the trailer coach itself. Storage facilities shall be designed in a
manner that will enhance the appearance of the court and shall be constructed of a suitable weather resistant material appropriate for the use and
maintenance contemplated. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-7)
G. Streets And Walkways:
1. Public Streets And Walks: All publicly dedicated streets and walks shall conform to the requirements of the village pertaining thereto.
2. Private Streets: Where private streets are provided within any trailer coach park, a right of way of fifty feet (50') shall be required. A minimum of
twenty four feet (24') in width of pavement back to back of curbs shall be provided in the center of such right of way. All private streets shall have
unobstructed access to a public street or highway.
3. Design, Layout And Location: All private and public streets constructed in connection with a trailer coach park shall be designed and laid out in
accordance with the provisions of the village subdivision ordinance except as may be modified by this chapter. The location of all streets, public or
private, within any trailer coach park shall be subject to the approval of the village plan commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 401/618
4. Walks: Walks shall be provided in all trailer coach parks for safe, convenient, all season pedestrian access. The walks shall be of adequate width for
their intended use, shall be durable and convenient to maintain and shall be designed and laid out in accordance with the village subdivision
requirements, except as may be modified by this chapter. All walks shall comply with the following:
a. There shall be individual walks to each trailer coach stand from a paved street or from a paved driveway or parking space connecting to a paved
street.
b. There shall be common walks in such locations required by the village subdivision regulations and in locations where pedestrian traffic is
concentrated; for example, at the court entrance and to the court office and other important facilities. The location of all walks shall be subject to
the approval of the plan commission.
c. The width, alignment and gradient of walks shall be appropriate for safety, convenience and appearance and shall be suitable for use by both
pedestrians and for the circulation of small wheeled vehicles, such as baby carriages and service carts.
d. Walks shall be constructed of concrete in accordance with the specifications of the village subdivision regulations, as modified by this chapter.
Widths shall be at least three feet (3') for individual walks and at least four feet (4') for common walks. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient
shall be avoided. Required walks are not to be used as drainageways. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-8)
H. Parking Spaces: Parking spaces shall be provided for not less than one and one-half (11/2) cars per trailer coach lot. Required parking spaces shall
include one car space on each trailer coach lot and, in addition, shall include a sufficient number of parking spaces in conveniently located parking
bays to bring the total number of parking spaces up to the required one and one-half (11/2) car spaces per trailer coach lot. Each such parking space
shall be not less than ten feet (10') wide and twenty feet (20') deep, shall be surfaced for its entire area with durable hard material and suitable for all
weather use. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-9)
I. Park Drainage: No trailer coach park shall be located in a floodplain area or so located that the drainage of the park area will endanger any water supply.
All such parks shall be well drained and shall be located in areas free from ponds, swamps and similar places in which mosquitoes may breed. No
wastewater from trailer coaches shall be deposited on the surface of the ground. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-10)
J. Recreation Areas: A recreation area shall be provided in every trailer coach park of a size not less than eight percent (8%) of the gross site area. The
playground shall generally be provided in a central location, including suitable landscaping, fencing and benches. In larger parks, decentralization will
be allowed. Recreation areas shall include space of community buildings and community use facilities such as adult recreation, child playgrounds and
natural open space. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-15)
K. Permitted Obstructions: For the purpose of this chapter, the following shall not be considered as obstructions when located in the yards indicated:
1. Chimneys, overhanging roof eaves, open terraces and awnings adjoining the trailer coach if they do not exceed ten percent (10%) of the depth of the
yard, ornamental light standards and flagpoles, fences, trees and shrubs; except, that on corner lots, fences, trees and shrubs shall not be higher
than thirty inches (30") above the centerline grade of the intersecting street if located in that portion of a required front or side yard situated within
twenty feet (20') of the lot corner formed by the intersection of any two (2) street lines.
2. No other obstruction, other than those enumerated in subsection K1 of this section shall be permitted. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-16)
L. Plants, Shrubbery And Screening:
1. Plants and shrubbery shall be hardy and appropriate for their use and location and shall be planted so as to thrive with normal maintenance.
2. There shall be provided plants and shrubbery adequate to screen views to laundry drying yards, garbage and trash collection stations, nonresidential
uses and yards of all adjacent property. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-17)
10-18-5-4: UTILITIES, FACILITIES AND SERVICES:
A. Safe And Sanitary Facilities: The management of every trailer coach park shall assume full responsibility for maintaining in good repair and condition all
sanitary and safety appliances located in the park, and shall promptly bring such action as is necessary to prosecute or eject from the park any person
who wilfully or maliciously damages such appliances or any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (1978 Code § 4-7-2-5)
B. Water Supply:
1. An adequate supply of water of a safe, sanitary quality, approved by the plan commission, shall be furnished at each trailer coach park, and each
such water supply shall comply with the standards of the state department of public health. Each such water supply shall be connected to the village
water system. At least one cold water supply outlet shall be provided within three hundred feet (300') of every dependent trailer site. Each trailer site
shall be provided with a cold water tap at least four inches (4") above the ground. Each such tap shall be located within or at the edge of the trailer
site which it supplies, and each such tap shall have at least twenty five (25) pounds of pressure at all times.
2. An adequate water supply shall be provided at all times for the operation of all water closets in service buildings, and an adequate supply of hot and
cold water shall be provided at all times in the service buildings for all bathing, washing, cleansing and laundry facilities. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-11)
C. Sewage Disposal:
1. All sewage and other water carried wastes shall be disposed of into the village sewerage system. Each trailer coach site shall be provided with a
sewer connection for the combined liquid waste outlet or outlets of each trailer coach. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of the trailer coach
park to provide an approved type of watertight and odortight connection from the trailer water drainage to the sewer connection, and it shall be the
duty of the owner or operator to make such connection and keep all occupied trailer coaches connected to the sewer while located in a trailer coach
park.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 402/618
2. Sewer connections in unoccupied trailer coach sites shall be so closed that they will emit no odor nor cause a breeding place for flies.
3. No water or waste shall be allowed to fall on the ground from a trailer coach. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-12)
D. Lighting And Electrical Requirements:
1. All entrances, exits and driveways of every trailer coach park shall be lighted during the period of sunset to sunrise by either a minimum of one
hundred (100) watt lamps placed not more than one hundred feet (100') apart or a minimum of seventy five (75) to eighty (80) candlepower gas
lamps at fifty (50) foot-candles.
2. At least one receptacle outlet for each trailer coach space shall be provided. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-13)
3. The receptacle and other electric wiring shall conform to the electrical code of the village. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-13; amd. 2011 Code)
4. Street lighting on public streets shall conform to the requirements of the village.
5. All electrical distribution wiring shall be underground. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-13)
E. Garbage Storage And Removal:
1. A sufficient number of adequate flyproof and watertight containers shall be supplied for the storage of garbage in each trailer coach park.
2. Garbage containers shall be emptied at least twice weekly and shall not be filled to overflowing or allowed to become foul smelling or a breeding
place for flies. (1978 Code § 4-7-2-7)
3. Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a manner which creates neither a nuisance nor a menace to health and which is approved by the
director of community development. (1978 Code § 4-7-2-7; amd. 2011 Code)
F. Insect And Rodent Control: Adequate insect and rodent control measures shall be employed. All buildings shall be flyproof and rodentproof, and rodent
harborages shall not be permitted to exist in any trailer coach park. (1978 Code § 4-7-2-7)
G. Laundry Facilities: A laundry room or building shall be provided in each trailer coach park containing laundry trays to accommodate the patrons of the
park. No laundry trays shall be located in bathrooms. Each laundry room or building shall contain, as a minimum, the following fixtures and facilities:
1. One automatic clothes washer and one automatic dryer for every twenty (20) trailer coach sites.
2. One electric outlet for ironing for every twenty (20) trailer coach sites. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-18)
10-18-5-5: BUILDINGS WITHIN PARKS:
Except as otherwise specifically provided, all service buildings in trailer coach parks, including any living quarters and the office for the attendant, shall be
constructed in accordance with the provisions of the building code of the village. (1978 Code § 4-7-2-8)
10-18-5-6: STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS:
No individual storage facilities for gasoline, oil, gas, liquefied petroleum or other fuels shall be permitted within any trailer coach park. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-
14)
10-18-5-7: MAINTENANCE OF STREETS AND DRIVEWAYS:
All streets and driveways in every trailer coach park must be maintained in a passable and reasonably dustproof condition at all times. (1978 Code § 4-7-
2-6)
10-18-5-8: INSTALLATION OF TRAILERS WITHIN PARKS:
All trailer coaches located in any trailer coach park shall have the wheels, tongue and hitch removed and the trailer coach affixed in whole on a permanent
foundation or on piers. (1978 Code § 4-7-3-3)
10-18-5-9: ATTENDANT REQUIRED:
Every trailer coach park shall be in the charge of a responsible attendant or caretaker at all times, whose duties shall be to maintain the park, its facilities
and equipment, in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and to be answerable with the licensee for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. (1978
Code § 4-7-2-1)
10-18-5-10: REPORT OF DISEASES REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every owner, operator or attendant of any trailer coach park to report to the village or the county health officer the full name, age and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 403/618
address of every person who is infected or suspected of being infected with any reportable or communicable disease. (1978 Code § 4-7-2-4; amd. 2011
Code)
10-18-5-11: REGISTRIES KEPT:
A. Trailers Entering Park: Each trailer coach park shall be provided with a custodian's office where each trailer coach entering such trailer coach park shall
be registered, assigned to a lot location and given a copy of the trailer coach park rules. The registration shall include the name and address of the
occupant of the trailer coach, the license number of the trailer coach, the state issuing the license and a statement indicating the exact location at which
the trailer coach was last parked, including the state, city, town or village where such parking occurred. (1978 Code § 4-7-2-2)
B. Schoolchildren:
1. The management of each trailer coach park shall keep a registry of all children of school age occupying trailer coaches in the trailer coach park. The
register shall be signed by an occupant of the trailer coach in which such children reside. Any person furnishing misinformation for purposes of
registration shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this code. The registration records shall be neatly and securely maintained, and no registration
records shall be destroyed until six (6) years have elapsed following the date of registration. The register shall be available at all times for inspection
by law enforcement officers.
2. The governing body of the school district in which any trailer coach park is located, by and through its officers, attendance officers and proper
employees, may inspect and visit any trailer coach park for the purposes of examining the register with reference to children of school age for the
purpose of enforcing attendance of schoolchildren housed in the trailer coach park. When a trailer coach park is located in two (2) or more school
districts, the school boards of such districts, acting jointly, are hereby authorized to proceed under the provisions of this subsection.
3. It shall be the duty of each person operating a trailer coach park in the village, on February 1 and September 1 of each year, to file with the school
board or boards of the school district or districts wherein the trailer coach park is located, a report giving the names and ages of all children of school
age living in the trailer coach park. (1978 Code § 4-7-2-3)
10-18-5-12: RECORDS KEPT BY VILLAGE:
The director of community development shall keep a record of all trailer coach parks. The records shall show the names and addresses of all trailer coach
parks, the names and addresses of all licensees, the number of trailer coach lots in each park, the system of garbage disposal and any other information
deemed essential by the director of community development. (1978 Code § 4-7-2-9; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 19
RAIN BARRELS
10-19-1: STANDARDS ADOPTED:
Every person, residential property owner, and residential property occupant shall comply with the following standards in regards to the use of rain barrels
within the village of Glendale Heights.
A. Type And Size:
1. The rain barrel unit or device, whether constructed or manufactured, may vary in style, but shall function as a collector of rooftop rainwater for reuse
purposes; and
2. The unit or device shall have a secure lid; and
3. The unit or device's opening shall be protected by a double screen; and
4. The capacity or volume of the unit or device shall not exceed sixty five (65) gallons; and
5. The unit or device shall have an overflow hose affixed to the upper portion of it to allow release of excess water; and
6. The exterior of the unit or device shall not be painted or decorated in such a manner that is inconsistent with the surrounding area or offensive to the
general senses of the neighboring properties.
B. Location:
1. The unit or device shall only be allowed upon properties zoned residential or upon properties whose use is consistent with that of a property zoned
residential; and
2. The unit or device shall only be located in an interior side yard or the rear yard of a property. A variance obtained pursuant to the provisions of the
Glendale Heights zoning ordinance is required to locate a unit or device in any other location upon a property.
C. General Requirements:
1. The unit's or device's overflow hose shall be directed safely away from it, and shall not obstruct or drain upon a neighboring property; and
2. The unit or device may be elevated by a concrete, wood, or brick paver platform, if required. The platform shall not exceed eight inches (8") to twelve
inches (12") in height; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 404/618
3. The unit or device shall not be connected directly to the gutter. A maximum five inch (5") air gap shall separate the gutter and the unit or device's lid
to provide easy access to clean the screening and to prevent ice damming in the event the unit or device is not properly winterized; and
4. Only one unit or device is permitted upon a property. A variance obtained pursuant to the provisions of the Glendale Heights zoning ordinance is
required for more than one unit or device. (Ord. 2011-80, 10-20-2011)
10-19-2: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. If any violation shall be of a
continuing nature, each day of violation shall be deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 2011-80, 10-20-2011)
Title 11
ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
ZONING TITLE, PURPOSE, APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be referred to as the VILLAGE OF GLENDALE HEIGHTS ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-1-2: PURPOSE:
This title is adopted for the purpose of improving and protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. To this end, this title seeks:
A. To further the implementation of the adopted official comprehensive plan for the village.
B. To zone all land in the village with a view to conserving property values and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the village.
C. To establish adequate standards for provision of light, air, and open spaces.
D. To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population, thereby preventing the development of blight and deterioration. (Ord. 99-
02, 1-7-1999)
E. To facilitate provision of adequate services and facilities such as transportation, water, sewerage and parks. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. Ord. 2014-15,
3-20-2014)
F. To provide for adequate drainage, control of erosion, reduction of flood damage, and destruction of sensitive or valuable environmental resources.
G. To foster a desirable pattern of relationships among residential, commercial, industrial, and other uses for the mutual benefit of all types of
development.
H. To isolate and control the location of unavoidable nuisance producing uses.
I. To establish reasonable standards to which buildings, structures, and other uses of land shall conform.
J. To prevent new construction or alteration or expansion of existing construction that does not comply with the restrictions herein.
K. To provide for the gradual elimination of existing uses that are incompatible with the character of the districts in which they are located.
L. To define the powers and duties of the officers and bodies charged with the enforcement of this title.
M. To prescribe penalties for any violation of the provisions hereof.
N. To protect against fire, explosions, noxious fumes and other dangers.
O. To protect the physical and mental health of the public by reducing or abating objectionable smoke, noise or other objectionable materials or influences
wherever possible.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 405/618
P. To establish setback lines along streets, trafficways, drives, parkways and stormwater and floodwater runoff channels or basins, and property lines and
to regulate the location of structures relative to such lines.
Q. To protect the character and maintain the stability of the existing residential, commercial, office and manufacturing areas in the village from the
encroachment of incompatible uses.
R. To encourage and enhance the preservation of natural resources, aesthetic amenities and natural features.
S. To protect existing public facilities and utilities from being overloaded due to excess development.
T. To protect and enhance a pattern of interconnected streets and highways that is unified, integrated, safe, effective and efficient.
U. To regulate uses along regional arterial streets and highways to protect their through traffic function and capacity.
V. To protect residential streets from degradation by nonresidential traffic.
W. To reduce congestion and promote safety on streets and highways by limiting traffic generation through the control of land use intensity.
X. To establish procedures and standards for the efficient and effective use of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-1-3: APPLICATION AND SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
A. General Scope:
1. Territorial Application: This title shall apply to land, structures, and uses within the corporate limits of the village.
2. General Application: All structures erected hereafter, all uses of land or structures established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocations of
existing structures occurring hereafter, and all enlargements and extensions of, additions to, changes in and relocations of existing uses occurring
hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this title applicable to the zoning districts in which such land, structures or uses are located. Existing
structures and uses that do not comply with the regulations of this title shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 7 of this title relating to
nonconformities.
3. General Prohibition: No structure, no use of any structure or land, and no lot of record or zoning lot, now or hereafter existing, shall hereafter be
established, enlarged, extended, altered, moved, divided or maintained in any manner except as authorized by the provisions of this title and except
in compliance with the regulations of this title. Without limiting the foregoing, any such activity that would cause any existing structure not to comply
with this title or that would create any parcel of land that could not be developed in compliance with this title shall be prohibited.
4. Multiple Uses On Same Zoning Lot: Except when authorized as part of a planned development approved pursuant to chapter 13 of this title or as a
conditional use permit in the public and institutional buildings district pursuant to chapter 12, article B of this title, no zoning lot in the village shall be
used for more than one principal structure. No structural group containing two (2) or more upward projections shall be considered a single structure
unless all such upward projections are joined by an element that:
a. Is at least half as high as the tallest upward projection; and
b. Is something other than a fence, canopy, freestanding wall or other nonfunctional connection. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
5. Private Agreements: This title is not intended to abrogate, annul or otherwise interfere with any platted building line, easement, covenant or other
private agreement or legal relationship; provided, however, that where the regulations of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such platted building line, easement, covenant or other private agreement or legal relationship, the regulations of this title shall
govern. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Application To Variations And Conditional Uses:
1. Existing Variations And Conditional Use Permits: Any variation or conditional use lawfully issued prior to the effective date hereof, or any amendment
hereto, shall be deemed to be and continue to be valid after such effective date, subject to any conditions placed thereon at the time of issuance.
Any structure or use lawfully authorized by any such variation or conditional use permit that could not be so issued after the effective date hereof
shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 7 of this title dealing with nonconformities.
2. Existing Uses And Structures Newly Requiring Conditional Use Permits: Any use or structure lawfully existing on the effective date hereof, or any
amendment hereto, that did not, prior to such effective date, require a conditional use permit but which, after such effective date, does require a
conditional use permit, may secure such a permit only pursuant to the standards and procedures made applicable to conditional use permits by
chapter 3, article C of this title. Unless and until such a permit is so secured, such use shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 7 of this title
dealing with nonconformities.
C. Existing Building Permits:
1. Except as provided in subsections C2 and C3 of this section, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued following the effective date hereof, or any
amendment hereto, unless the work, structure or use for which the certificate of occupancy is sought is made to fully comply with the applicable
provisions of this title, or such amendment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 406/618
2. Nothing in this title, or any amendment hereto, shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of any structure
in the event that:
a. A building permit for such structure was lawfully issued prior to the effective date hereof, or any such amendment hereto, or such a permit is
issued after such effective date based upon a complete and proper application for such permit filed prior to such effective date; and
b. Such permit had not, by its own terms, expired prior to such effective date; and
c. Such permit was lawfully and properly issued in accordance with the law prior to such effective date; and
d. Construction pursuant to such permit is commenced prior to the expiration of such permit and within one hundred eighty (180) days of such
effective date and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
3. Upon completion pursuant to subsection C2 of this section, such structure may be occupied by, and a certificate of occupancy shall be issued for, the
use designated on such permit, subject thereafter, to the extent applicable, to the provisions of chapter 7 of this title relating to nonconformities.
D. Pending Applications:
1. This title and any amendment hereto shall apply to any application pending on the effective date hereof or such amendment in the same manner as
though such application were filed after such effective date.
2. Within twenty (20) days following the effective date hereof, or any amendment hereto, any village official, department, board or commission then
having pending before it any application to which this title, or any amendment hereto, applies pursuant to subsection D1 of this section shall transmit
a copy of such application to the zoning administrator.
3. Within thirty (30) days following the effective date hereof, or any amendment hereto, the zoning administrator shall inform each applicant named on
each application referred to him pursuant to subsection D2 of this section that said application is subject to the provisions of this title, as amended,
and will be processed in accordance therewith; that the applicant may, within thirty (30) days following the mailing of such notice, refile, without
additional fee, its application on the basis of this title, as amended; and that if the applicant does not so refile, its application may be denied for
noncompliance with the provisions of this title, as amended.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections D2 and D3 of this section, it shall be the responsibility of each applicant having an application pending
on the effective date hereof, or any amendment hereto, to modify such application in accordance with the terms and provisions of this title, as
amended, and the failure to do so may, whether or not the procedures of said subsections have been followed, result in denial of such application for
failure to comply with this title, as amended. Any modification or refiling of an application pending on such effective date in order to comply with the
provisions of this title, as amended, shall be permitted at any time prior to the final disposition of such application and shall be permitted without
payment of any additional fee.
5. Upon the refiling of any pending application as herein provided, or upon notification from the applicant that it will not refile or modify its application, or
upon the expiration of sixty (60) days following the effective date hereof, or any amendment hereto, whichever occurs first, such pending application
shall be processed in accordance with the terms of this title, as amended; provided, however, that the application requirements, hearing
requirements and procedural requirements set forth in this title shall not apply to any such pending application, and each such application shall be
processed in accordance with the application, hearing and procedural requirements that were in effect on the date such application was filed.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subsection, the zoning administrator shall have the authority to request additional data, information or
documentation for pending applications when, in his or her judgment, such additional data, information or documentation is necessary or appropriate
to a full and proper consideration and disposition of such pending application. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-1-4: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Minimum Requirements: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general welfare, as set forth in the provisions hereof establishing the intent and purpose of this title in
general and its various sections in particular.
B. Most Restrictive Provisions Apply: When the provisions of this title impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation,
the provisions of this title shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this
title, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
C. Cumulative Provisions: The provisions of this title shall be interpreted to be a cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other codes,
laws and ordinances in existence or which may be passed governing any subject matter of this title. The several provisions of this title shall also be
interpreted to be cumulative of each other. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this title shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in
conflict with, the provisions of such other codes, laws and ordinances, and each other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest
application.
D. Provisions Not A Consent, License Or Permit: The provisions of this title shall not be interpreted to be, or to grant, a consent, license or permit to use
any property or to establish, locate, construct or maintain any structure or use, or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation or activity.
E. Unlawful Uses And Structures Not Validated: This title shall not be interpreted to validate or make lawful any unlawful use or structure existing upon the
effective date hereof. Any such unlawful use or structure shall remain unlawful to the extent that said use or structure is in conflict with the provisions of
this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-1-5: SEVERABILITY:
A. The several provisions of this title shall be severable in accordance with the following rules:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 407/618
1. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this
title.
2. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this title to a particular parcel of land, a particular
structure or a particular use, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other land, structure or use.
B. Whenever the provisions of this title are declared invalid in their application to any particular parcel of land, the zoning map shall continue to show such
parcel in the zoning district applicable thereto pursuant to this title unless and until such district is changed by an amendment adopted by the board of
trustees; provided, however, that the parcel in question shall also be marked with a star or other distinctive marking to direct attention to the court
decree affecting said parcel. The zoning administrator shall maintain a file of any such decrees. The provisions of any such decree shall be deemed to
modify the otherwise applicable provisions of this title as they apply to said parcel to the extent provided in said decree, but said parcel shall otherwise
remain subject to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
Chapter 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
11-2-1: RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms are defined as indicated in this chapter. These definitions and all other provisions of this title are subject to the
following rules of interpretation:
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future tense the present.
B. The singular number includes the plural number and vice versa.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory.
D. The word "building" includes the word "structure".
E. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
F. All measured quantities shall be to the nearest integral unit of measure, and if a fraction is one-half (1/2) or greater, the next highest integral unit shall be
used.
G. Any term not herein defined shall be as defined elsewhere in this code or, if not defined elsewhere in the code, as defined in Webster's New
International Dictionary, most recent edition.
H. The time within which any act required by this code is to be performed shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless
the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a holiday declared by the United States congress or the Illinois general assembly, in which event, it shall also
be excluded.
I. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships, joint ventures, trusts, trustees, estates, corporations, associations and any other similar
entities.
J. The phrase "used for" shall include intended for, designed for, occupied for, maintained for, and arranged to be used or occupied for, whenever that
interpretation would result in the regulation being more restrictive in its application to any use or structure.
K. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this code and any caption, illustration or table, the text shall control.
L. The word "village" means the village of Glendale Heights, Illinois.
M. The word "county" means the county of DuPage, Illinois. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this code, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them in this section:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: See definition of Building, Accessory.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: See definition of Structure, Accessory.
ACCESSORY USE: See definition of Use, Accessory.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 408/618
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having ten percent (10%) or more of its stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals, photographs,
films, motion pictures, computer software, audiotapes, videotapes, laser disks or other electronic or magnetic media which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages on the premises, which
features live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas", for observation by patrons therein including, but not limited to, topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers,
male or female impersonators or similar entertainers.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT THEATER: A public or private establishment which features live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", for observation by patrons therein including, but
not limited to, topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building, with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons, used for presenting motion picture films,
slides, videocassettes, cable television, computer generated displays, or any other such visual media distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building, with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, used for presenting motion picture films, slides,
videocassettes, cable television, computer generated displays, or any other such visual media distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT REGULATED USE: Any use of land, a building or structure which contains any one or more of the following:
A. Adult bookstore.
B. Adult entertainment cabaret.
C. Adult entertainment theater.
D. Adult mini-motion picture theaters.
E. Adult motion picture theaters.
F. Massage parlor.
G. Massage school.
H. Tattoo parlor.
AGENT: A person authorized to act for another person.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the
necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, and storing the produce but not including the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other
animals; provided, that the operation of accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities.
ALLEY: A public or private right-of-way not constituting a street used primarily for secondary vehicular access to property abutting on a street.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A building, or portion thereof, designed or used for the care, observation, and medical treatment of domestic animals.
ANTENNA HEIGHT: The height of an antenna measured from the ground level at the lowest grade level within three feet (3') of any part of the antenna.
AREA, GROSS: The total land area included in a parcel that is subject to an application filed pursuant to this title, excluding only property located in public
rights-of-way or private easements of access or egress at the time of application.
AREA, NET: The gross area of a parcel less land required or proposed to be publicly dedicated or land to be devoted to private easements of access or
egress. Land not so publicly dedicated or devoted shall be included in the calculation of net area.
ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE OR ACTIVITY: Any pennant, flag, banner, pole cover, streamer, beacon, balloon or similar device or activity designated
for the purpose of attracting attention, promoting or advertising.
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE: An automated device that performs banking or financial functions at a location remote from the controlling financial
institution.
AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP: A business establishment where collision service such as body, frame, or fender straightening or repair, painting of more
than ten percent (10%) of the surface of a vehicle, or upholstering is conducted wholly within an enclosed building.
AUTOMOBILE DETAIL SHOP: A business establishment where the exterior and interior of automobiles, vans, sport utility vehicles and small trucks are
intensively cleaned and refurbished, including sealants, self-adhesive pinstriping and tint and overspray removal, wholly within enclosed buildings and
primarily by handheld mechanical equipment (such as buffing machines and vacuums), with a minimal use of water (less than 50 gallons per day).
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A permanent commercial facility where motor vehicles are washed, by hand, by mechanical devices, or both, excluding
temporary car washes organized for civic or charitable purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 409/618
AUTOMOBILE MINIMART: An automobile service station which offers or includes as an accessory use, the retail sale of merchandise or services not
related to the maintenance, service or repair of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOP: A premises for the commercial repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts thereof, wholly within
enclosed buildings, including "major vehicle repairs" as defined in this section, and including transmission shops, muffler shops, brake shops, rustproofing
shops, auto glass shops, and the like, but excluding automobile service stations.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A facility or premises used for retail sale of fuels or oils for automobiles, trucks, or boats having pumps and storage
tanks, which may include retail sale of tires, batteries, and similar accessories and/or the making of repairs to motor vehicles excluding "major vehicle
repairs" as defined in this section.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: See definition of Wrecking Yard.
AWNING: A rooflike cover projecting on a temporary or noncontinuous basis from the wall of a building but not overhanging a public right of way.
BANNER SIGN: See definition of Sign, Banner.
BASEMENT: That portion of a structure located partly underground but having less than half its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
BEACON: A stationary or revolving light (also known as "searchlight") which flashes or projects illumination, single color or multicolor, in any manner which
is intended to attract or divert attention. This term is not intended, however, to include any kind of lighting device which is required or necessary under the
safety regulations described by the federal aviation agency or similar agencies.
BENEFICIARY: Any person, corporation, or other entity having a beneficial interest in a land trust.
BERM: An earthen mound that acts as a visual barrier and landscaping element.
BILLBOARD: See definition of Sign, Outdoor Advertising.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one or more streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, bulkhead lines
or shorelines of waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: See definition of Village Board.
BUFFER PLANTING STRIP: A strip of land adjoining a piece of property or right of way on which trees, shrubbery, hedges, or other plantings are planted
close enough together to prohibit the passage of persons or vehicles and that is used exclusively for screening purposes.
BUFFERING: Any means of protecting a parcel from the visual or auditory effects of an adjacent use. Buffering may include, but is not limited to, berming,
fencing, landscaping, setbacks, and open spaces.
BUILDING: Any structure permanently affixed to the land and constructed or used for the shelter, enclosure, or protection of persons, animals, or property.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building, and which is located on the same lot as
the principal building.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space or from other buildings or structures by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls having only windows and normal entrance or exit doors, or by party walls.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A principal building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: The linear length of the front wall of a building, excluding walls that abut loading areas and service drives exclusively.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the established "curb level" as defined in this section to the highest point of the underside of the
ceiling beams in the case of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean level of the underside of rafters between the eaves and the ridge
of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. Chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks, and similar projections, other than signs, shall not be included in
calculating building height.
BUILDING, NONCONFORMING: A building or structure, or portion thereof, lawfully existing at the effective date hereof, or any amendment hereto, but
which does not conform to all the regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL: A building designed for residential occupancy.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: A building that is established for a period of less than one year and is removed within that time period.
BUSINESS FLAG: A flag which is designed by or for a particular business enterprise including a business trademark or symbol. A "business flag" shall not
include flags for the primary purpose of solicitation.
BUSINESS PARK: A special or exclusive type of planned business area designed and equipped to accommodate a community of manufacturing,
warehousing, research, or similar industrial uses, together with substantial office development related thereto.
BUSINESS SIGN: See definition of Sign, Business.
CAMPER: See definition of Truck Camper.
CAMPING TRAILER: See definition of Trailer, Camping.
CANOPY: A rooflike structure that projects permanently and continuously from the exterior wall of a building or from a freestanding support and that does
not overhang any required yard or public right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 410/618
CELLAR: That portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and having more than half of its clear floor to ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
CHANGING SIGN: See definition of Sign, Changing.
CLINIC: A place for the care, diagnosis, and treatment by doctors of various specialties of persons needing medical, dental, or surgical attention but where
inpatient care is not provided.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying dues which owns or leases premises, the use of
which is restricted to members and their guests.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: See definition of Vehicle, Commercial.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: See definition of Open Space, Common.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis in a familylike environment by a group of unrelated persons
with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a twenty four (24) hour basis, or
present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the dwelling; and which complies with the zoning regulations for the district in which the site is
located. Community residence does not include a residence which serves persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons
whose primary reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse or for treatment of a communicable disease.
CONDITIONAL USE: See definition of Use, Conditional.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: See definition of Permit, Conditional Use.
CONGREGATE HOUSING FACILITY: A building or use housing more than one family, with or without separate dwelling units for each family, which
provides coordinated social and support services to residents (such as meals, housekeeping, laundry, recreation, education, and transportation).
CONTRACT PURCHASER: A person having the right to purchase real estate upon compliance with conditions named in a contract.
CORPORATION: A body of persons authorized by law to act together as a single person and, for the purpose of this title, includes any association, joint
stock company, syndicate or partnership.
COUNTY: County of DuPage, Illinois.
CURB LEVEL: The height of the established street curb abutting a lot line measured at the midpoint of such lot line. Where no curb has been established,
the curb level shall be considered to be the established level of the surface of the street abutting the lot line measured along the street centerline at the
midpoint of the lot line.
CURIE: A unit of radioactivity equal to 3.7 x 1010 disintegrations per second.
DAY SPA: An establishment offering a variety of personal health and beauty related services, including weight reduction and hairstyling, but expressly
excluding any adult regulated uses.
DAYCARE CENTER, CHILD: A facility that receives more than eight (8) children for daytime care that provides personal care, protection, supervision,
training, and other programs. Child daycare centers exclude kindergartens and other programs run by public or private schools or churches; centers
conducted on federal, state, or local government premises; facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or other facility where children are
cared for while their parents or custodians are in the vicinity and readily available; and special activities conducted periodically by civic, charitable, and
government organizations.
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity or loudness of sound.
DENSITY, GROSS: The total number of dwelling units divided by the gross area of the development.
DENSITY, NET: The total number of dwelling units divided by the net area of the development.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change, other than maintenance of existing structures, paved areas or utilities, to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, without limitation, the construction or installation of new, or enlargement of existing, structures, streets or utilities; dredging, filling, drilling,
mining, grading, paving or excavating operations; and open storage of materials.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: See definition of Sign, Directional.
DISABILITY: A physical, mental or intellectual impairment, or a combination of physical, mental or intellectual impairments, which is likely to continue for a
significant amount of time or indefinitely, and which results in functional limitations in three (3) or more of the following areas of major life activities:
A. Self-care;
B. Receptive or expressive language;
C. Learning;
D. Mobility;
E. Self-direction;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 411/618
F. Capacity for independent living;
G. Economic self-sufficiency;
and which reflects the person's need for a combination and sequence of special interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other services which
are of a lifelong or extended duration; but such term does not include current use of, or addiction to, alcohol or a controlled substance.
DISPLAY BOARD: See definition of Sign, Display Board.
DOG KENNEL: See definition of Kennel.
DOG RUN, ENCLOSED: An outdoor area, enclosed on all sides by a fence, for the exclusive purpose of continuous or occasional confinement of one or
more domestic animals.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment at which patrons may avail themselves of the services, goods, or facilities offered without leaving their
motor vehicle. Any restaurant, bank, dry cleaning establishment, or other business having driveup or curb service facilities shall be considered a drive-in
establishment.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: See definition of Restaurant, Drive-In.
DRY CLEANING PLANT: An industrial dry cleaning establishment which receives dry cleaning to be processed from other retail establishments located
elsewhere.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, designed or used as a residence, excluding boarding or lodging houses, nursing homes, motels, hotels, tourist
homes, cabins, tents, or recreational vehicles.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED: A dwelling unit, other than a mobile home, constructed largely of one or more finished modular building sections
produced in a factory and assembled on a building site.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building, other than a townhouse, containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building consisting of a single dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A single-family dwelling attached to one or more other single-family dwellings by one or more common vertical
walls with each dwelling located on a separate lot.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A single-family dwelling separated from other dwelling units by open space.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: A dwelling composed of a row of two (2) or more, but not more than six (6), adjoining dwelling units, each situated on a
separate subdivision lot and that has an individual private ground level entrance or being a separate condominium unit capable of individual sale and each
of which is separated from the others by one or more unpierced walls extending from ground to roof.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building consisting of two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and complete
single kitchen facilities, permanently installed to serve the entire family, shall always be included within each "dwelling unit".
EASEMENT: A grant by property owners for the use of a portion of the owners' land by the general public, a corporation, a certain person or persons or
other legal entity for a specific purpose or purposes.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of just one principal room, together with bathroom, kitchen, hallways, closets, and/or dining alcove.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A terminal at which electrical energy is received from the transmission system and is delivered only to the
distribution system.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the transmission system and is delivered to other elements of the
transmission system and, generally, to the local distribution system.
EMBELLISHMENT: See definition of Sign Embellishment.
ENTERTAINER: Any person who performs or presents entertainment for a wage, tip, fee compensation or other remuneration, or whose appearance is
otherwise arranged or provided for by a business establishment, whether as an employee or an independent contractor of the business establishment, for
the observation of guests, customers or members of the business establishment.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, manually place, suspend, or affix, including the initial painting of all signs.
FACING: See definition of Sign Facing.
FAMILY: Any number of persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage, or up to three (3) persons not so related, living together in one dwelling unit as a
single household, together with their household employees.
FENCE HEIGHT: The height of a fence, hedge, or wall measured from the ground level at the lowest grade level within three feet (3') of either side thereof.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence, including entrance and exit gates, designed and constructed so that the surface area of any segment of such fence contains at
least seventy percent (70%) open spaces and thirty percent (30%) or less solid materials.
FENCE, ORNAMENTAL: An open fence, other than a chainlink fence, that is erected for decorative purposes only and is not intended to be used, either by
itself or together with wire or other material, as an enclosure, barrier, or means of protection or confinement.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 412/618
FENCE, SOLID: A fence that is not an open fence.
FESTOONS: A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, or pinwheels.
FIFTH WHEEL TRAVEL TRAILER: See definition of Trailer, Fifth Wheel Travel.
FIREPROOF CONTAINER: An enclosure designed to prevent the release of radioactive materials that is made of steel or concrete or similar materials but
not of lead or other low melting metals or alloys unless completely encased in steel or concrete.
FLASHING SIGN: See definition of Sign, Flashing.
FLEA MARKET: An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or structure where individual stalls or spaces are provided on a short term basis for
vendors to display, buy, sell, exchange, or deal in new and used goods.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of a floodplain that excludes the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN: The land consisting of the floodway and the flood fringe that is subject to inundation by a 100-year flood.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain, including the channel, that is reasonably required to discharge the bulk of the waters from a 100-year flood.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal area of space contained on all floors measured in square feet from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
of each building, or from the centerline of party walls separating two (2) buildings.
Floor area includes space in accessory buildings; all cellar, basement, and attic space; and space for stairs, elevators, maintenance areas, and
equipment areas except as provided in the definitions of "floor area, gross" and "floor area, net" of this section. For structures devoted to bulk storage
of materials, every ten feet (10') of building height shall be considered as one floor for purposes of calculating floor area.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Floor Area Ratio): The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors, including also the basement floor of a
building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the centerlines of walls separating two (2) buildings. The "floor area" shall also
include the horizontal areas on each floor devoted to: a) elevator shafts and stairwells; b) mechanical equipment, except if located on the roof, when either
open or enclosed, i.e., bulkheads, water tanks, and cooling towers; c) habitable attic space as permitted by the building code of the village of Glendale
Heights; d) interior balconies and mezzanines; e) enclosed porches; and f) accessory uses. The "floor area" of structures used for bulk storage of
materials, i.e., petroleum tanks, shall also be included in the "floor area", and such "floor area" shall be determined on the basis of the height of such
structures with one floor for each ten feet (10') of structure height, and if such structure measures less than ten feet (10') but not more than five feet (5')
over such floor height intervals, it shall be construed to have an additional floor.
The horizontal area in each floor of a building to off street parking and off street loading facilities and the horizontal area of a cellar floor shall not be
included in the "floor area".
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading Requirements): "Floor area", when prescribed as the basis of measurement for
off street parking spaces and off street loading spaces for any use, shall be the sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of the building,
excluding areas used for accessory off street parking facilities and the horizontal areas of the basement and cellar floors that are devoted exclusively to
uses accessory to the operation of the entire building. All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior of the walls.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: A measure of "floor area", as defined in this section, used for purposes of calculating floor area ratio, conversions of existing
structures, and maximum size of business establishments. Gross floor area is floor area excluding only:
A. Areas devoted to off street parking or off street loading, including aisles, ramps, and maneuvering space.
B. Attic or half story space having headroom of seven feet nine inches (7'9") or less.
C. Exterior balconies.
D. Space on the roof used for mechanical equipment.
FLOOR AREA, NET: A measure of "floor area", as defined in this section, used for purposes of calculating off street parking and off street loading
requirements. Net floor area is floor area excluding only:
A. Areas devoted to off street parking or off street loading, including aisles, ramps, and maneuvering space.
B. Areas devoted primarily to storage and not located within selling or working spaces, except for facilities such as warehouses where the principal use
is storage.
C. Basement or cellar areas not devoted to retailing activities, offices, or production or processing of goods.
D. Elevator shafts, stairs, and stairwells.
E. Maintenance shafts and rooms.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 413/618
F. Washrooms.
G. Display windows.
H. Fitting rooms.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The total "floor area", as defined in this section, of all buildings on a lot divided by the net area of the lot.
FREESTANDING SIGN: See definition of Sign, Freestanding.
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave; a measure of the pitch of the resulting sound.
FRONT SETBACK: See definition of Yard, Front.
FRONT WALL: See definition of Wall, Front.
FRONTAGE: The width of a lot abutting a public street measured along the street line.
FUNERAL HOME: See definition of Mortuary.
GAME ROOM: Any premises where there are available to the public more than twenty (20) coin operated amusement devices, excluding vending
machines that do not incorporate gaming or amusement features and excluding coin operated musical devices.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building or premises, other than a "wrecking yard" as defined in this section, where motor vehicles are stored for compensation.
GARAGE, STORAGE: A building or premises used only for the housing of motor vehicles pursuant to previous arrangements and not by transients, and
where no equipment or parts are sold, and vehicles are not rebuilt, serviced, repaired, hired, or sold; except, that fuel, grease, or oil may be dispensed
within the building to vehicles stored therein.
GARAGE/YARD SALE: A private sale of personal property used to dispose of personal household possessions; not for the use of any commercial
ventures.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building more than five feet (5') from a street line. For
buildings closer than five feet (5') to a street line, the grade is the sidewalk elevation at the center of the building. Where there is no sidewalk, the grade
shall be established by the village engineer.
GROUND FLOOR AREA: The lot area covered by a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls, but excluding open porches, patios,
terraces, garages, or carports.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA: The horizontal area of all floors of a dwelling unit above the finished grade, measured from the inside surfaces of all perimeter
walls enclosing the dwelling unit. Habitable floor area shall not include cellar, basement, garage, attic, porches, patios, atriums, or similar areas which are
accessory to a dwelling unit; except, that finished recreation rooms in a basement will be counted as habitable floor area up to ten percent (10%) of the
total habitable floor area requirements.
HALFWAY HOUSE: A temporary living arrangement for more than three (3) persons not related by blood, marriage, or adoption who are receiving therapy
or counseling from support staff who are present at all times residents are present. A halfway house includes rehabilitation housing for released mental
patients, recovering alcoholics or abusers of controlled substances, or others needing social or psychological rehabilitation; where medical treatment is not
provided and no longer deemed necessary; and who do not have a history of violent behavior. A halfway house does include community residences,
hospitals, clinics, mental healthcare centers, or similar institutions defined in this section.
HEDGE: Planted vegetation, including trees, shrubs, or other natural vegetation, that is planted in close proximity or clustered together and that has a
surface area that obstructs the view.
HEIGHT, FENCE: See definition of Fence Height.
HEIGHT OF SIGN: See definition of Sign Height.
HOME OCCUPATION: A gainful pursuit conducted by one or more members of a family within their place of residence and subject to the provisions of this
title concerning home occupations.
HOSPITAL: An establishment that provides accommodations, facilities, and services over a continuous period of twenty four (24) hours or more for
observation, diagnosis, and care of two (2) or more individuals not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the operator, who are suffering from illness,
injury, deformity, or abnormality, or from any condition requiring obstetrical, medical, or surgical services.
HOTEL: A building containing lodging rooms, a general kitchen and dining room, a common entrance lobby, halls and stairways; and where each lodging
room does not have a doorway opening directly to the outdoors except for emergencies; and where more than fifty percent (50%) of the lodging rooms are
for rent to transient guests for a continuous period of less than thirty (30) days.
HOTEL, APARTMENT: An establishment having the character of a hotel but in which at least fifty percent (50%) of the accommodations are for occupancy
by guests staying thirty (30) consecutive days or more.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: See definition of Sign, Identification.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: See definition of Sign, Illuminated.
INDUSTRIAL PARK: A special or exclusive type of planned industrial area designed and equipped to accommodate a community of industries.
INSTITUTION, EDUCATIONAL: A public or private school, college, university, seminary, museum, library, or similar educational or cultural establishment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 414/618
INSTITUTION, RECREATIONAL: A public or private facility for group recreational or social activity, including private clubs, lodges, recreation buildings,
and community centers.
INSTITUTION, RELIGIOUS: A church, synagogue, temple, convent, monastery, or other premises devoted to religious or church connected activities.
KENNEL: Any lot or dwelling unit on which four (4) or more dogs more than four (4) months of age are bred, groomed, boarded, trained, or sold.
KIOSK: A single, freestanding building, with not more than fifty (50) square feet of area, on the same lot as all or a portion of a shopping center, and used
for any use in its district.
LAND TRUST: An express agreement whereby the legal and equitable title to real estate is held by a trustee for the benefit of beneficiaries who have the
exclusive right to manage and control said real estate.
LARGE COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis in a familylike environment by a group of nine (9) to
fifteen (15) unrelated persons with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a
twenty four (24) hour basis, or present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the dwelling; and which complies with the zoning regulations for
the district in which the site is located. Large community residence does not include a residence which serves as an alternative to incarceration for a
criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse or for treatment of a communicable disease.
LAUNDRY, COMMERCIAL: A dry cleaning or laundry establishment, other than "laundry, retail", where the cleaning process is done on the premises by
the operator of the establishment, except dry cleaning plants as defined in this section.
LAUNDRY, RETAIL: Dry cleaning or laundry establishments where the cleaning process is self-service or is done on the premises by the operator in
equipment units of thirty (30) pounds or less capacity or is received for processing off the premises.
LESSEE: One who has an interest in real estate by virtue of a lease.
LIGHTING DEFINITIONS:
Candlepower: The amount of light that will illuminate a surface one foot (1') distant from a light source to an intensity of one foot-candle. Maximum
(peak) candlepower is the largest amount of candlepower emitted by a light source.
Cut Off: The point at which all light rays emitted by a light source are completely eliminated (cut off) at a specific angle above the ground.
Cutoff Angle: The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the light
source, above which no light is emitted.
Cutoff Type Light Source: A light source with elements such as shields, reflectors, or refractor panels which direct and cut off the light at a cutoff
angle that is less than ninety degrees (90°).
Foot-Candle: A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one foot (1') from a uniform point source of one candle.
Glare: The brightness of a light source which causes eye discomfort.
Light Source: A complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp and all necessary mechanical, electrical, and decorative parts.
Maximum Permitted Illumination: The maximum illumination measured in foot-candles at the interior buffer yard line at ground level.
LINE, STREET: The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and the right of way of a contiguous street.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT: The performance of any dance, show, theatrical performance, play, magical act, musical song or athletic event by one or more
entertainers for observation by guests, customers or members of the business establishment.
LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: A completely off street space or berth on the same lot for the loading or unloading of freight carriers, having adequate
ingress and egress to a public street or alley.
LODGING ROOM: A room rented as sleeping or living quarters, but without cooking facilities, and with or without an individual bathroom. In the case of a
suite of rooms, each room shall be counted as one lodging room.
LOT: A parcel of land under unified ownership or control (whether legally so described or subdivided as 1 or more lots or parts of lots), located within a
single block, occupied by or intended for occupancy by one principal building or principal use, and having its principal frontage upon a dedicated public
street.
LOT AREA: The area of a lot within its front, rear, and side lot lines.
LOT AREA, GROSS: The total land and water area included in a parcel that is the subject of an application filed pursuant to this code, excluding only
property located in the public rights of way or private easements of access or egress at the time of application.
LOT AREA, NET: The gross area of a parcel, less land and water areas, required or proposed to be publicly dedicated, or land to be devoted to private
easements of access or egress. Both land and water areas not so publicly dedicated or devoted shall be included in the calculation of net area.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, or a lot located at the point where the alignment of a single street curves or
changes; provided, that an interior angle of not more than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°) is created by the right of way lines of the abutting street
or streets or, in the case of a curving right of way, by straight lines projected tangent to the curve from the points of intersection between the curve and the
lot lines.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A through lot abutting only two (2) streets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 415/618
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership; except, that where any portion of a lot extends into an abutting street
or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be established at the existing street or alley line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: That lot line which is along an existing or dedicated public street or which is established as the front lot line on a plat of record. Where
a lot is a corner lot, as defined in this section, the front lot line shall be the shortest lot boundary line along a street, unless designated otherwise on a plat
of dedication or plat of subdivision.
LOT LINE, REAR: That lot line which is most distant from and is, or is approximately, parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet (10')
in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot, parallel to and at the
maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING: A building lot lawfully existing at the effective date hereof, or any amendment hereto, but which does not conform to all the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is situated.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which was recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds, or a parcel of land, the
deed to which was recorded in the office of said recorder, prior to the effective date hereof.
LOT OF RECORD, LEGAL NONCONFORMING: A nonconforming lot of record that:
A. Was created by a plat or deed, recorded and coming into ownership separate from adjoining tracts of land, at a time when the creation of a lot of
such size, shape, depth and width at such location would not have been prohibited by any ordinance or other regulation; and
B. Has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire time that the creation of such a lot
has been prohibited by any applicable ordinance or other regulation.
LOT, THROUGH: An interior lot with frontage on more than one street. All street lines on a through lot shall be considered front lot lines, but two (2) or
more contiguous through lots shall have a common front lot line on a single street.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot at the setback line established by the applicable front yard requirement of this title.
LOT, ZONING: A tract of land consisting of one or more lots of record, or parts thereof, under single fee simple title ownership or control, located entirely
within a block and occupied by, or designated by, its owner or developer at the time of filing for any zoning approval or building permit as a tract to be
developed for a principal building and its accessory buildings, or a principal use, together with such open spaces and yards as are designed and arranged,
or required under this title, to be used with such building or use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, sale of individual lots of record underlying individual
dwelling units in a townhouse or two-family detached dwelling or three-family detached dwelling, following issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such
dwelling, shall not prevent treatment of the tract of land underlying such dwelling as a zoning lot, and all applicable bulk, space and yard requirements
shall be applied with respect to such dwelling and such zoning lot rather than with respect to individually owned dwelling units and lots of record.
MAJOR VEHICLE REPAIRS: Clutch, transmission, differential, axle, suspension, and frame repairs; major overhauling of engines requiring the removal of
the cylinder head or crankcase pan; repair of radiators requiring removal thereof; and complete recapping or retreading of tires.
MARQUEE: See definition of Canopy.
MARQUEE SIGN: See definition of Sign, Canopy.
MASSAGE: The performance of manipulative exercises upon the human body of another by rubbing, kneading, stroking or tapping with the hand or hands,
or with any mechanical or bathing device with or without supplementary aids.
MASSAGE PARLOR: Any place or establishment where, for any form of consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment,
or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical practitioner,
chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist, osteopath or similar professional person licensed by the state of Illinois. This definition does not include a
physical fitness center or state licensed cosmetology or barber establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an
incidental or accessory service.
MASSAGE SCHOOL: Any place or establishment or facility which provides instruction in the theory, method and practice of massage, unless such
instruction is provided by a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist, osteopath or similar professional person licensed by the
state of Illinois or offered as part of a curriculum of a public or other school licensed by the state of Illinois.
MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the department of agriculture to
perform necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations with usable medical cannabis.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the department of financial
and professional regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or
related supplies and education materials to registered qualifying patients.
MENTAL HEALTH CENTER: Any institution providing inpatient or outpatient care or therapy for the mentally ill, developmentally disabled, alcoholics,
abusers of controlled substances, or others needing social or psychological therapy but which does not serve as a residence for such individuals.
MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling unit designed and used exclusively for long term residential occupancy with plumbing and electrical
connections for attachment to outside systems but designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels or on flatbed trailers and to be ready for
occupancy at its site, except for minor and incidental unpacking, assembly, and connection operations.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any site or tract of land under single ownership, other than a mobile home subdivision or mobile home sales or storage lot, upon
which three (3) or more mobile homes used for long term habitation are located.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 416/618
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended for long term residential use exclusively by mobile homes on permanent foundations
with wheels, tongue, lug bolts, and hitch permanently removed and wherein each lot is owned by the owner of the mobile home situated thereupon.
MONEYLENDER: A person, partnership, association, limited liability company, corporation or other business combination or entity which engages in the
business of making loans which are typically secured by a postdated check or title to a motor vehicle; however, this definition does not include any
financial institution or business entity which accepts secured deposits.
MORTUARY: An undertaking establishment or funeral parlor which may include a single residence as an accessory use.
MOTEL: A building containing lodging rooms having adjoining individual bathrooms designed primarily for transient automobile travelers with a parking
space on the lot for each lodging unit and where more than fifty percent (50%) of the lodging rooms are for rent for a continuous period of less than thirty
(30) days.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or premises in which freight is received or dispatched by motor vehicles.
MOTOR HOME: A vehicular unit designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or travel use built on or permanently attached to a
self-propelled motor vehicle chassis or on a chassis cab or van that is an integral part of the completed vehicle. Motor homes are of three (3) basic types:
Type A: A raw chassis upon which is built a driver's compartment and an entire body that provides temporary living quarters for use as defined
above.
Type B: A completed van type vehicle that has been altered to provide temporary living quarters for use as defined above.
Type C: An incomplete vehicle upon which is permanently attached a body designed to provide temporary living quarters for use as defined above.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any self-propelled wheeled vehicle designed primarily for transportation of persons or goods along public streets.
MOVING SIGN: See definition of Sign, Moving.
NAMEPLATE: See definition of Sign, Nameplate.
NET LOT AREA: See definition of Lot Area, Net.
NOMINEE: One designated to act for another with limited authority.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: See definition of Building, Nonconforming.
NONCONFORMING LOT: See definition of Lot, Nonconforming.
NONCONFORMING USE: See definition of Use, Nonconforming.
NONCONFORMITY: See section 11-7-2 of this title.
NONCONFORMITY, ACTIVITIES: See section 11-7-2 of this title.
NONCONFORMITY, DESIGN: See section 11-7-2 of this title.
NONCONFORMITY, STANDARDS: See section 11-7-2 of this title.
NONCONFORMITY, USE: See section 11-7-2 of this title.
NOXIOUS MATTER: Material capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or of detrimentally affecting the physical or economic well
being of individuals.
NURSING HOME: An establishment providing full time convalescent or chronic care, or both, for three (3) or more individuals not related by blood,
adoption, or marriage to the operator and which does not provide care for surgical or medical cases commonly treated in hospitals.
OBSTRUCTION: Any building or structure, or part thereof, in the way of any open area required by this title, excluding trees and shrubs.
OCTAVE BAND: All the frequencies between a given frequency and double that frequency.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electrical frequency analyzer designed according to standards formulated by the American Standards Association and used in
conjunction with a sound level meter to take measurements in specific octave intervals.
ODOR THRESHOLD VALUE: The minimum concentration of odorous material in air that can be detected by the normal human nose as determined by a
qualified laboratory.
OFF STREET LOADING SPACE: See definition of Loading Space, Off Street.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: See definition of Parking Space, Off Street.
OFF TRACK BETTING FACILITY: An intertrack wagering facility or location licensed by the Illinois racing board whose physical premises, structure, and
equipment are utilized for the legal wager on the outcome of simultaneously televised horseraces taking place at an Illinois racetrack or a racetrack outside
of Illinois as prescribed in the Illinois horse racing act of 1975, as amended. Off track betting (OTB) facilities shall only be permitted when it is an accessory
use to an eat in restaurant, serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and the OTB component of eat in restaurants shall be no more
than forty five percent (45%) of the gross total floor area.
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The officially adopted plan for the physical development, conservation, redevelopment and use of the land in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 417/618
village.
OPEN FENCE: See definition of Fence, Open.
OPEN SALES LOT: Open land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling merchandise, passenger cars, trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles,
boats, or monuments, or for the storing of same prior to sale.
OPEN SPACE: Uncovered area open to the sky on the same lot with a building.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Gross site area not covered by buildings or pavement that is permanently set aside for the common use and enjoyment of the
residents or businesses within a development or for the community at large and the preservation and perpetual maintenance of which is assured by
dedication to the village or other satisfactory legal arrangement. Common open space shall not include street rights of way, off street parking or loading
areas, or detention or retention areas.
OPTION HOLDER: A person having the right to purchase real estate pursuant to an agreement with the fee owner.
OUTLOT: A parcel of land which is a separate lot within a main shopping center under unified control authorized as a planned unit development and
intended for occupancy by a use permitted on the main tract having its sole means of vehicular access connected to an internal transportation network on
the main tract. No outlot shall be occupied by more than two (2) users in a single building, unless subject to the conditional use provisions of chapter 3,
article C of this title or the planned unit development provisions of chapter 13 of this title and subject to the following conditions:
A. Both uses shall be compatible with each other (e.g., both retail, both office) and in character with the main tract as a whole.
B. The architecture, landscaping and signage of the building shall be integrated so that the building and its signage present a unified appearance.
PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET: An area outside of any public street or alley right-of-way that is adequate for parking an automobile with room for
opening doors on both sides, together with maneuvering room and properly related access to a public street or alley.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material, other than steam or water vapor, suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in finely divided form as a liquid or
solid at atmospheric pressure and temperature.
PARTY WALL: A wall starting from the foundation and extending continuously through all stories to or above the roof that separates one building from
another and that is in joint use by each building.
PATRON DANCING: Dancing that is performed by guests, customers or members of a business establishment as distinguished from dancing performed
by one or more entertainers for the observation of guests, customers or members of a business establishment.
PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in a series, designed to move in the wind.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, glare, heat, or other
effects generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PERMIT, CONDITIONAL USE: A permit required for the use of land, water, or building as a conditional use received only after approval by the Village of
an application for a conditional use.
PERMITTEE: Any person, firm, or corporation holding a permit pursuant to this title.
PHYSICAL FITNESS CENTER: An establishment offering instruction, training or assistance in athletic sports, bodybuilding, exercising, weight reducing,
martial arts, or self-defense training.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: See chapter 13 of this title.
POLE BANNER: Banners attached to light poles or other structural supports of a building or sign.
POLE SIGN: See definition of sign, pole.
PORCH: A covered shelter or uncovered landing projecting outward from the front of the entrance of a building or dwelling. A porch can be constructed of
concrete, wood, or brick pavers.
PREMISES: Any improved or unimproved property.
PROJECTING SIGN: See definition of sign, projecting.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts entered into between private parties and constitute a restriction on the use of all private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of property owners; and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair
stability of values.
PUBLIC HEARING: A meeting conducted pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act at which members of the general public must be
permitted to give testimony, evidence or opinions relevant to the subject matter.
PUBLIC MEETING: A meeting conducted pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois open meetings act where members of the general public, as opposed to
members of the board or commission and as opposed to the applicant for relief, have no right (but may be given the opportunity) to offer testimony,
evidence or opinions.
PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA: Land which has been designated for leisure, recreational or artistic activities under the operation, management
or control of the village or a park district having jurisdiction within the village boundaries, including, but not limited to, a playground, swimming pool, sports
complex, athletic field, basketball or tennis court or similar public land but excluding golf courses and forest preserves.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 418/618
RADIATION HAZARDS: The harmful effects of all radiations capable of producing ions in their passage through matter, including electromagnetic
radiations such as X-rays and gamma rays and particulate radiations such as electrons or beta particles, protons, neutrons, and alpha particles.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: See definition of Sign, Real Estate.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or travel use which either has its
own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, including travel trailers, fifth wheel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, boats on or
off a trailer, motor homes, or any other vehicle with state RV, RT, or TA license plates.
REFUSE: All waste products resulting from human habitation except sewage.
REM: A quantity of ionizing radiation that, when imparted to a biological system, has the same effect as an absorbed dose of one roentgen of X-rays per
gram of living matter.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or buildings housing facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation but not primarily
housing facilities for the manufacture or sale of products.
REST HOME: See definition of Nursing Home.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: A restaurant that is a "drive-in establishment" as defined in this section.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land used for passage of motor vehicles, railroads, or pedestrians or for the location of utility lines. An access easement shall
not be considered a right of way.
RIGHT OF WAY, PUBLIC: A "right of way", as defined in this section, dedicated to or owned by a public body. In the case of public streets, the right of way
normally includes the curbs, lawn strips, and lighting and drainage facilities and may include special features such as grade separation, landscaped areas,
viaducts, and bridges.
RINGELMANN CHART: A chart described in the U.S. bureau of mines circular 6888 or its successors upon which are illustrated graduated shades of gray
for use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke or its equivalent.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area of the Ringelmann chart that coincides most nearly with the light obscuring capacity of the emission of
smoke observed.
ROOF SIGN: See definition of Sign, Roof.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building or part thereof that is not a hotel or motel and that provides lodging rooms for compensation to three (3) or more persons
who are not members of the keeper's family.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE: An institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required
by the Illinois school code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education and including all adjacent land owned and
used by such institution for the education or recreation of its students. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior
high school, senior high school or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the state board of education, but it does not include a
commercial, vocational or professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college or university.
SCHOOL ROUTE: The right of way of Glen Ellyn Road from Army Trail Road to Illinois Route 64, also known as North Avenue.
SCREENING: A structure erected or vegetation planted to conceal the area behind it.
SETBACK, BUILDING: The minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and the nearest wall of a building or structure.
SETBACK, PARKING LOT: The minimum horizontal distance between a lot line and the back of the curb of a parking lot or the edge of pavement or other
required surface where there is no curb.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of three (3) or more commercial uses characterized by any one or more of the following:
A. Uses are designed as a single commercial group, whether or not located on the same lot.
B. Contiguous uses occupy premises that are under common ownership or management.
C. Uses are connected by party walls, partitions, canopies, or other structural members to form one continuous structure.
D. Uses are located in separate buildings but are interconnected by walkways or accessways designed to facilitate customer interchange between the
uses.
E. Uses share a common parking area.
F. Uses otherwise present the appearance of a single continuous commercial development.
SHOPPING CENTER, INTEGRATED: A development devoted principally to retail sale and/or service businesses and having common or coordinated
signage, ingress and egress and parking. It may consist of one or more principal buildings and may contain one or more lots not having access to the
public right of way devoted to separate uses that are owned by different entities. An integrated shopping center may be developed in phases and shall
initially be under unified control or ownership.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 419/618
Lots which are part of the integrated shopping center but not having access to a public right of way are subject to the conditional use provisions of
chapter 3, article C of this title and/or planned unit development provisions of chapter 13 of this title. Also see definition of Outlot.
SIGN: Any device designed to inform or attract attention and which is visible from outside the building or structure in which, upon which, or attached to
which it is located.
SIGN, BANNER: A temporary sign composed of a lightweight material either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame and secured or mounted to a
building wall or canopy.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign directing attention to a business, profession, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered upon the same
lot.
SIGN, CANOPY: A sign, other than an under canopy sign, attached to or constructed in or on a canopy.
SIGN, CHANGING: A sign with a message copy or other display that is produced and periodically changed electronically or electrically such as a public
service time and temperature sign.
SIGN CLEARANCE: The distance to grade from the lowest edge of a sign excluding the pole or support structure.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION: A nonilluminated sign displayed during construction and removed thereafter that identifies a building under construction,
together with such information as the owner, the manager, the contractor and subcontractors, the architect and engineer, the source of financing, the
projected date of completion, and related information.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign that serves solely to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic or parking within a premises or to provide related instructions or
facility information but that contains no advertising other than the name and logo of the business on the premises.
SIGN, DIRECTORY: A listing of the names of businesses located within a complex.
SIGN, DISPLAY BOARD: A sign, other than a changing sign, on which letters are changeable and that is attached to another sign, to the support structure
thereof, or to a wall for the purpose of displaying advertising or other notices.
SIGN EMBELLISHMENT: Any framing or trim attached to or superimposed upon a sign.
SIGN FACING: The surface of a sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated.
SIGN, FEATHER: A freestanding type of attention getting device made of fabric or nylon affixed to a lightweight pole used for attracting attention,
promotion, or advertising. May also be called a "teardrop sign".
SIGN, FLASHING: A sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of
animation or an externally mounted intermittent light source. Changing signs, as defined in this section, are not considered flashing signs.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign supported by one or more poles, uprights, pylons, or braces on the ground and not attached to a building.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign, but excluding any
supporting structure that does not form part of the sign message.
SIGN, GROUND: A freestanding sign with a sign height of less than eight feet (8').
SIGN HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the "curb level", as defined in this section, of the closest public street to a sign to the highest point of
the sign. Where a sign is equally close to more than one public street, the mean average of the curb levels of each street shall be used to determine sign
height.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A nonilluminated sign indicating the name or trademark of a permitted use, the address of a building or occupants, and the name
of the management of the establishment on which the sign is located.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign illuminated by a source of artificial light having the principal purpose of furnishing illumination for the sign, whether or not said
source is part of the structure of the sign.
SIGN, INFLATABLE: Any air or gas filled balloon, animal figure, or similar figure.
SIGN, MARQUEE: See definition of Sign, Canopy.
SIGN, MENU BOARD: A sign used to display a selection of goods or services offered at a business establishment for the convenience of drive up or walk
up customers, such as at a drive-in restaurant.
SIGN, MOVING: A sign that has one or more visible parts that move.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE: A nonilluminated sign that states only the names, addresses, and professions of the businesses or occupants of the lot where the
sign is placed, including directory signs.
SIGN, NONDURABLE: A sign made of paper, cloth, or other nondurable material, or any sign not affixed to a building or to the ground.
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: A sign that directs attention to a business profession, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered
elsewhere than on the lot on which the sign is located, and only incidentally, if at all, on such lot.
SIGN, POLE: A freestanding sign with a sign height of eight feet (8') or greater.
SIGN, PORTABLE: Any sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the ground. These signs primarily include, but are not limited to,
signs attached to wood or metal frames, designed to be self-supporting such as a sandwich or A-frame sign, and paper, cardboard, plastic, or canvas
signs wrapped around supporting poles.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 420/618
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign attached to the wall of a building having a face that is not parallel to such wall or that extends more than twelve inches (12")
from the face of the wall or higher than the roofline.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A nonilluminated sign used to offer for sale, lease, or rent the property upon which or within which the sign is placed or to indicate
that the property has been sold.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign erected or maintained upon or over a roof with its principal support on the roof structure. A sign that is erected or maintained upon
but projects no more than twelve inches (12") from the face of that portion of a mansard roof that is vertical or approximately vertical and that does not
extend above the highest point of the vertical portion of the roof shall be considered a wall sign and not a roof sign.
SIGN, SNIPE: A temporary sign of paper, cardboard, wood, cloth, plastic, or similar material affixed on public property.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign intended to be displayed for a limited length of time.
SIGN, TRAILER MOUNTED: A single or double sided illuminated or nonilluminated sign mounted on a trailer or on wheels.
SIGN, UNDER CANOPY: A sign projecting from and beneath a canopy.
SIGN, VEHICLE: Any advertising sign or business sign not permanently painted on or within parked motor vehicles, including lettering on trucks or other
commercial vehicles to attract or direct attention to a business, profession, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered upon the
same lot or elsewhere than on said lot.
SIGN, WALL: A sign erected upon or parallel to an outside building wall which does not extend more than twelve inches (12") from the face of the wall or
higher than the lowest point of the roof.
SIGN, WINDOW, PERMANENT: A sign placed inside or upon a window and visible from outside a building with the purpose of identifying, for a period of
thirty (30) days or more, the proprietor or name of a business.
SIGN, WINDOW, TEMPORARY: A sign placed inside or upon a window and visible from outside a building with the purpose of attracting attention for a
period of less than thirty (30) days.
SITE AREA, NET: The acreage of land excluding the rights of way of streets and private easements of ingress or egress within and bordering a
development.
SKATEBOARD RAMPS: Any structure on private residential property which is used for the purposes of riding or propelling a skateboard, in-line skates,
bicycles, or scooters.
SMALL COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis in a familylike environment by a group of no more
than eight (8) unrelated persons with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a
twenty four (24) hour basis or present whenever the residents with disabilities are present at the dwelling; and which complies with the zoning regulations
for the district in which the site is located. Small community residence does not include a residence which serves as an alternative to incarceration for a
criminal offense, or persons whose primary reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse or for treatment of a communicable disease.
SMOKE UNITS, NUMBER OF: The number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in Ringelmann numbers by the time of emission in minutes. For the
purpose of this calculation, a Ringelmann density reading is made at least once every minute during the period of observation, each reading is multiplied
by the time in minutes during which the emission is observed, and the various products are summed to give the total number of smoke units during the
period of observation.
SOLID FENCE: See definition of Fence, Solid.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American Standards Association for measurement of the intensity of sound.
SPA: See definition of Day Spa.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
1. Human genitals, pubic region;
2. Buttock; or
3. Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, oral copulation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, actual or simulated.
C. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttock, anus or female breast.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the top surface of any floor and the top surface of the floor next above or, if there is no floor above,
the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a story, but a cellar shall not be counted as a story.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 421/618
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof where the line of intersection of roof decking and wall is not more than three feet (3') above the top floor level
and, in which space, not more than sixty percent (60%) of the floor area is completed for principal or accessory use.
STREET: A public right of way, as defined in this section, that affords a primary means of motor vehicle access to abutting property and/or provides for the
movement of traffic.
STREET LINE: See definition of Line, Street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the supporting members or any partition therein of a building or structure such
as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having such a
location. An outdoor advertising or business sign or other advertising device, if detached or projecting, shall be construed to be a separate structure.
Structures also include buildings, mobile homes, walls, and fences.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY: A structure that is an accessory use.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY: A structure that is established for a period of less than one year and is removed within that period.
TATTOO: Any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin by the aid of needles or other
instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin.
TATTOO PARLOR: An adult regulated use where individuals go to get a tattoo as defined in this section.
TEMPORARY BUILDING: See definition of building, temporary.
TEMPORARY SIGN: See definition of sign, temporary.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: See definition of structure, temporary.
TEMPORARY USE: See definition of use, temporary.
THROUGH LOT: See definition of lot, through.
TOWNHOUSE: See definition of dwelling, townhouse.
TOXIC MATERIAL: A liquid, solid, or gaseous substance which, by reason of an inherent deleterious property, tends to destroy life or impair health.
TRAILER: Any portable structure or vehicle designed for highway travel and used on a short term or interim basis for living, sleeping, or commercial
purposes.
TRAILER, CAMPING: A travel trailer built with collapsible partial side walls that fold for towing and unfold at the campsite.
TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL TRAVEL: A travel trailer designed to be towed using a connecting device known as a fifth wheel.
TRAILER PARK: Any site or tract of land under single ownership or control other than a sales lot or wrecking yard on which three (3) or more trailers or
recreational vehicles are located.
TRAILER, TRAVEL: A recreational vehicle mounted on wheels with an overall width of not more than eight feet (8') in the travel mode that is built to be
drawn by another vehicle.
TRUCK CAMPER: A recreational vehicle not more than eight feet (8') wide in the travel mode consisting of a roof, floor, and sides designed to be loaded
onto the bed of a pickup truck.
UNIT GROUPING: A single detached building consisting of multiple dwelling units.
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or structures thereon are designed, arranged, or intended, or for which they are occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: A subordinate land use located on the same lot or parcel as a principal use (except for such off street parking or off street loading
facilities as may be permitted to be located on a separate lot) and serving a purpose customarily incidental to that of the principal use.
USE, CONDITIONAL: A use that, because of its special character, cannot be allowable generally in a particular zoning district but which may be allowed
under special conditions and which is, therefore, subject to the prior approval of a conditional use permit by the Village. The term conditional use is the
same as special use as discussed in various statutory sections of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
USE, NONCONFORMING: A principal or accessory use lawfully existing at the effective date hereof, or any amendment hereto, but which does not
conform to all of the requirements of the zoning district in which it is situated.
USE, PERMITTED: A use allowable generally within a zoning district without a conditional use permit.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of a property as distinguished from an accessory use.
USE, PUBLIC SERVICE: A. The use of property by a public utility, railroad, or governmental body for the provision of public utilities or services, including
sewerage, water supply, electricity, gas, rail transport, public safety, government administration, public transportation, and communications.
B. Public service uses shall include power plants or substations; water or sewage treatment plants, reservoirs, or pumping stations; railroad and utility
lines, rights-of-way, and related buildings; police and fire stations, Municipal buildings and local government offices; and public transportation
facilities, including shelters, garages, terminals, parking and turnaround areas, and service buildings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 422/618
C. Municipal public utility uses shall include any land or building for Municipal public purposes, including, but not limited to, public works facilities,
Village Hall and pumping station sites.
USE, TEMPORARY: A principal or accessory use that is established for a fixed period of time and is discontinued within that time period.
UTILITIES: Services provided by public or quasi-public agencies, including, but not limited to, telephone communication, electrical power, heating gas,
cable television signals, steam, transportation, etc.
VARIANCE: A modification of the provisions of this title in accordance with the provisions herein concerning variances in cases where strict enforcement
would cause undue hardship as a result of special circumstances affecting an individual property that do not generally affect other properties in the same
zoning district.
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL: Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons on property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise,
for hire or not for hire, having a gross weight in excess of eight thousand (8,000) pounds, and construction equipment; not including, however, a commuter
van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement or a recreational vehicle not being used commercially.
VILLAGE: The Village of Glendale Heights, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Glendale Heights.
VILLAGE CLERK: The Village Clerk of the Village of Glendale Heights, Illinois.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The Village Engineer of the Village of Glendale Heights, Illinois.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The Village President of the Village of Glendale Heights, Illinois.
VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE: A triangular area located at the grade intersection of streets, railroads, or both, formed by the right-of-way lines
between their intersection and points thirty feet (30') from their intersection along each line, and by a straight line connecting these two (2) points.
Overhanging objects shall be permitted within this triangle only if all parts thereof are higher than eight feet (8') above the level of the pavement of the
street where the centerlines intersect.
WALL, FRONT: The wall of a building nearest the front lot line that is parallel to or most nearly parallel to said line.
WALL SIGN: See definition of sign, wall.
WINDOW SIGN: See definition of sign, window, permanent and sign, window, temporary.
WRECKING YARD: Any place where three (3) or more motor vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, boats, and farm implements, or trailers or mobile
homes, which are not in operating condition and not being restored to operation, are stored, or where parts thereof are stored, in the open, including any
building or structure used for the wrecking or storing of such vehicles or parts.
YARD: An open space on a lot other than a court that is required to remain unoccupied and unobstructed above ground by any structure or part or
projection thereof from its lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in this title.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A yard extending between a side lot line abutting a street and a line drawn parallel thereto at a distance therefrom equal to that
established by the corner side yard requirements of this title and also extending the full depth of the lot but excluding any area included in a front yard.
Yard requirements are measured horizontally irrespective of the slope of the land.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending the full width of a lot between the front lot line and a line drawn parallel thereto at a distance therefrom equal to that
established by the front yard requirements of this title. Yard requirements are measured horizontally, irrespective of the slope of the land.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A side yard that is not a corner side yard.
YARD, PERIMETER: A yard within, and abutting the boundary of, a planned development.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending the full width of a lot between the rear lot line and a line drawn parallel thereto at a distance therefrom equal to that
established by the rear yard requirements of this title but excluding any portion of a corner side yard. Yard requirements are measured horizontally,
irrespective of the slope of the land.
YARD, REQUIRED: The minimum yard depth designated in the regulations of this title establishing minimum front, corner side, side and rear yard
requirements for various uses, structures and districts.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending between a side lot line and a line drawn parallel thereto at a distance therefrom equal to that established by the side yard
requirements of this title and also extending the full depth of the lot but excluding any area included in a front or rear yard. Yard requirements are
measured horizontally irrespective of the slope of the land.
YARD, TRANSITIONAL: A strip of land that separates adjoining land uses that is used exclusively for the purpose of providing open green space, berming,
and landscaping. Paved areas, specifically off street parking and loading areas, are prohibited in the transitional yard.
ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT: A development of single-family detached residences, other than a planned unit development, in which one interior side
yard may be lawfully reduced to zero (0) on any lot for the purpose of creating larger, more usable, and more easily maintained yard spaces, particularly
on smaller lots. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. Ord. 2000-30, 5-4-2000; Ord. 2004-93, 12-2-2004; 2011 Code; Ord. 2011-97, 11-17-2011; Ord. 2013-04, 1-17-
2013; Ord. 2014-62, 10-16-2014; Ord. 2016-31, 6-2-2016; Ord. 2018-98, 12-13-2018)
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 423/618
11-3-1: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
A. Enforcement Authority:
1. The zoning administrator, or his deputy, is hereby authorized to enforce this title. In discharging this responsibility, the zoning administrator shall:
a. Receive and, if necessary, forward to the plan commission, as appropriate, the applications and notices required by this title.
b. Issue permits or certificates provided for herein.
c. Maintain records of applications filed, permits and certificates issued, inspections made, reports rendered, and notices or orders issued under the
provisions of this title.
d. Conduct inspections of structures and uses to determine compliance with this title.
e. Notify in writing the owner of record and/or any party believed to be responsible for violation of any provision of this title and order action to correct
the violation.
f. Provide clerical or technical assistance to the plan commission.
g. Request the assistance and cooperation of other village officials, departments, boards, or commissions, or other agencies as necessary in the
discharge of his or her duties.
h. Procure such engineering, planning, or legal assistance from technical experts outside the village government as may be necessary to discharge
his or her duties and as is authorized by the village board.
i. Review all applications for certificates of zoning compliance and certificates of occupancy and approve or disapprove such applications and issue
or refuse to issue such certificates based on compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this title.
2. The director of community development shall serve as zoning administrator.
B. Variance Hearings:
1. The zoning administrator is hereby vested with the authority to conduct hearings and make recommendations to the village board of trustees on all
variances in accordance with the provisions of this title and to hear all other matters referred to the zoning administrator.
2. All variance hearings conducted by the zoning administrator shall be held at the call of the zoning administrator at such times as the zoning
administrator may determine and shall be open to the public.
3. All testimony by witnesses at any variance hearing provided in this title shall be given under oath. The zoning administrator may compel the
attendance of witnesses and may administer oaths.
4. The zoning administrator shall keep minutes of its proceedings. The minutes shall show the findings upon which his or her recommendations and
decisions are based.
C. Deputy Zoning Administrator: In the event the zoning administrator is unavailable or unable to perform his duties, the village administrator may
designate a deputy zoning administrator to perform the duties of the zoning administrator on a temporary basis. (Ord. 2016-32, 6-2-2016)
11-3-2: PLAN COMMISSION:
A. Interpretation Of Term: The plan commission of the village is the plan commission referred to in this title.
B. Powers:
1. The plan commission is hereby vested with the power to conduct hearings and make recommendations to the village board of trustees on all
amendments to this title, all conditional uses, all planned developments, and all other matters referred thereto by the village board or on which it is
required to act under this title.
2. The plan commission is also empowered to initiate, direct, and review studies of the provisions of this title and to make recommendations to the
village thereupon at least once a year. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3-3: BUILDING PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Building Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to commence the construction, alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of any structure in the village
without obtaining a building permit from the village.
B. Certificate Of Occupancy:
1. Required: It shall also be unlawful to occupy or use any structure in the village, in whole or in part, without obtaining a certificate of occupancy from
the village. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
2. Time For Issuance Or Denial: The zoning administrator shall either issue or deny a certificate of occupancy within ten (10) days of application
therefor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 424/618
C. Compliance Required For Issuance: The zoning administrator shall not issue a building permit or certificate of occupancy unless he or she has certified
that the property for which the permit or certificate is sought complies with all applicable provisions of this title and with other applicable codes and
ordinances of the village. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-3-4: CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE:
A. Certificate Required; Exemptions:
1. Except where expressly waived by another provision of this title, a certificate of zoning compliance shall be obtained from the zoning administrator in
the following situations:
a. The construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or moving of any structure;
b. The use of land, vacant on the effective date hereof, for any purpose except the raising of crops;
c. The grading, excavation or improvement of land preliminary to any construction on or use of such land;
d. The issuance of building or other permits pertaining to the construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or moving of any structure or the use
of any land or structure; and
e. The use of a residence for a home occupation.
2. In any case where a certificate of zoning compliance is not required under this title, the zoning administrator shall, on written request, issue a
certificate of such fact. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
B. Application For Certificate:
1. No application for a zoning variation, a conditional use permit, or an amendment, or for approval of a planned unit development concept plan shall be
processed unless an application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued, or denied solely on one or more grounds that form the
basis for the applications referenced above. It is the intent of this section that no application, as referenced above, shall be processed until the
zoning administrator is satisfied that the proposed use or development complies with the provisions of this title in all respects except those within the
scope of such application. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
2. All applications for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be filed with the office of the zoning administrator or with such other village official or body
as the zoning administrator may, by administrative order, designate.
3. Every application for a certificate of zoning compliance shall provide the following information, if applicable:
a. A description or graphic representation of any development or construction that will occur or any use that will be established or maintained if the
requested relief is granted.
b. A table showing the following, as applicable:
(1) The total lot area of the subject property, in both acres and in square feet;
(2) The total existing and proposed lot area, expressed in acres, in square feet and as a percent of the total development area, devoted to
residential uses, by type of structure, commercial uses, office uses, industrial uses and institutional uses, open space, rights of way, streets, and
off street parking and loading areas; and
(3) The existing and proposed:
(A) Number of dwelling units, by number of bedrooms and dwelling unit gross floor area; and
(B) Gross and net floor area devoted to residential uses, commercial uses, office uses, industrial uses, institutional uses and recreational uses.
c. A table listing all bulk, space and yard requirements, all parking requirements, and all loading requirements applicable to any proposed
development or construction and showing the compliance of such proposed development or construction with each such requirement. Where any
lack of compliance is shown, the reason therefor shall be stated, and an explanation of the village authority, if any, to approve the application
despite such lack of compliance shall be set forth.
d. The certificate of a registered architect or civil engineer licensed by the state of Illinois, or of an owner-designer, that any proposed use,
construction or development complies with all the provisions of this title and other village ordinances or complies with such provisions except in the
manner and to the extent specifically set forth in said certificate.
C. Review Of Application: Within ten (10) days following receipt of a completed application for a certificate of zoning compliance, the zoning administrator
shall cause the application and related submissions to be reviewed for compliance with this title and shall inform the applicant whether the application
has been granted or denied.
D. Approval And Issuance Of Certificate: In any case where an application is granted, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of zoning
compliance, which shall state on its face, in bold type, that:
THIS CERTIFICATE DOES NOT SIGNIFY BUILDING CODE REVIEW OR APPROVAL AND IS NOT AUTHORIZATION TO UNDERTAKE ANY
WORK WITHOUT SUCH REVIEW AND APPROVAL WHERE EITHER IS REQUIRED. SEE OF THE GLENDALE HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL CODE
FOR DETAILS.
BEFORE ANY STRUCTURE TO WHICH THIS CERTIFICATE IS APPLICABLE MAY BE OCCUPIED OR USED FOR ANY PURPOSE, A
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY MUST BE OBTAINED. SEE SECTION AND SECTION OF THE GLENDALE HEIGHTS MUNICIPAL
CODE FOR DETAILS.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 425/618
E. Denial Of Certificate:
1. In any case where an application is denied, the zoning administrator shall state specific reasons therefor and shall cite the specific provisions of this
title upon which such denial is based. If relief from such demand would be available pursuant to a companion application filed in connection with the
application for a certificate of zoning compliance, the zoning administrator shall so inform the applicant and shall promptly process such companion
application. If such application is approved, the administrator shall issue the requested certificate of zoning compliance in accordance with the terms
and conditions of such approval.
2. If relief from the zoning administrator's denial of a certificate of zoning compliance would be available by variation, conditional use permit or other
review, but no application therefor has been filed, the zoning administrator shall so state and shall refer the applicant to the appropriate provisions of
this title.
F. Contents Of Certificate: Each certificate of zoning compliance issued pursuant to this section shall state the specific use of the subject property for which
it is issued; shall identify the specific plans, if any, pursuant to which it is issued; and shall set forth any conditions imposed in connection with any
approval granted pursuant to this title.
G. Public Record Of Certificates: Every certificate issued pursuant to this section shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be a
public record open to inspection in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois freedom of information act.
H. Scope Of Certificate Restricted: The issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance shall not authorize the establishment, expansion or extension of any
use nor the development, construction, relocation, alteration or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and
processing of applications for any additional permits and approvals that may be required by the codes and ordinances of the village, including, but not
limited to, a building permit, a certificate of occupancy and subdivision approval.
I. Expiration Of Certificate: Subject to an extension of time granted by the zoning administrator, a certificate of zoning compliance shall become null and
void six (6) months after the date on which it was issued unless, within such period, construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or moving of a
structure is commenced or a use is commenced.
J. Voiding Certificate: Any certificate of zoning compliance issued in violation of the provisions of this title, whether intentionally, negligently or innocently,
shall be deemed void ab initio and shall give rise to no rights whatsoever. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3-5: REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL APPLICATIONS:
The requirements of this section shall apply to all applications submitted under the provisions of this title, including applications for variances and zoning
amendments. (Ord. 2014-62, 10-16-2014)
A. Optional Prefiling Conference:
1. Prior to filing an application, an applicant may request a prefiling conference with the plan commission. An application for the conference, together
with the filing fee, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator.
2. At the conference, the applicant may outline his proposed project and submit preliminary information such as a concept plan. The plan commission
shall advise the applicant concerning in what respects his proposal conforms to applicable village plans and ordinances and to desired standards of
design.
3. In the event an application for an amendment or a variance is subsequently filed, the conference filing fee will be credited toward the application
filing fee.
B. Disclosure Of Interest:
1. The party signing the application shall be considered the applicant.
2. An applicant must be the fee owner, trustee, beneficiary, contract purchaser, lessee, or option holder of the affected property or his or her agent or
nominee.
a. Applicant Not Fee Owner: If the applicant is not the fee owner of the affected property, the application shall disclose the full names, addresses,
and telephone numbers of all owners.
In addition, an affidavit of the fee owner or owners shall be filed with the application stating that the applicant has authority to make the application.
b. Applicant Or Fee Owner Is Corporation: If either the applicant or the fee owner is a corporation, the application shall disclose the names and
addresses of the corporation's officers, directors, registered agents, and those shareholders owning in excess of five percent (5%) of the
outstanding stock or interest in the corporation.
c. Applicant Is Trustee: If the applicant is a trustee, the full name, address, telephone number, and extent of interest of each beneficiary must be
disclosed in the application.
d. Applicant Is Beneficiary, Agent Or Nominee: If the applicant is a beneficiary, agent, or nominee, the application must disclose the names,
addresses, and telephone numbers of those parties on whose behalf he or she is acting.
e. Applicant Is Option Holder Or Contract Purchaser: If the applicant is an option holder or contract purchaser, a valid (unexpired, fully executed,
enforceable), noncontingent (except for zoning and financing approval) contract or option to purchase the premises for which the application is
being filed shall be submitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 426/618
3. Disclosure of present ownership interests shall be accompanied by a certified statement of proposed ownership of all land.
C. Public Notice:
1. An applicant for any zoning action that requires a public hearing must provide notice of such hearing to owners of surrounding property. (Ord. 99-02,
1-7-1999)
2. The required notice shall consist of the following actions:
a. Sign Display:
(1) The applicant shall post a sign in the front yard of the affected property, facing a public street and no further than thirty feet (30') therefrom. In
the case where the Village is the applicant and the property owner does not consent to the erection of the sign, the sign shall be posted on
public property adjacent to the property.
(2) The sign shall state "Notice of Public Hearing" and "contact information for the zoning action requested".
(3) The sign shall be erected no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing and remain continuously in place until
the public hearing is concluded but no more than ten (10) days thereafter. (Ord. 2018-99, 12-13-2018)
b. Written Notification:
(1) The applicant shall also provide written notice of the public hearing to the owners of record of each parcel of real estate within two hundred fifty
feet (250') in all directions from the boundaries of the property affected by the application.
(2) All public rights-of-way shall be excluded in calculating the two hundred fifty foot (250') notice area.
(3) The owners of record, for this purpose, shall be considered those appearing on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds or those who paid
Property Taxes for the most recent year according to the records of the Township Assessor.
(4) The written notice shall be delivered not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing.
(5) The written notice shall be substantially in the form of notice provided by the Village Clerk. It shall contain:
(A) The name and address of the applicant.
(B) The street address and legal description of the property affected by the application.
(C) The type of zoning action requested.
(D) The date, time, and location of the public hearing thereupon.
(6) The notice shall be delivered in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. In either case, the signatures of those receiving the notice,
in the form of postal return receipts or otherwise, shall be obtained and filed with the Zoning Administrator prior to the public hearing.
(7) In addition, the applicant shall file an affidavit stating that he or she has complied with all notice requirements, together with a copy of the
written notice sent and a list of the names and addresses of all property owners within the two hundred fifty foot (250') notice area.
c. Newspaper Publication: The Zoning Administrator shall publish a notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village at
least fifteen (15) days but no more than thirty (30) days before the scheduled date of the hearing.
D. Fees:
1. Fee Established; Liability For Fee; Lien:
a. Every application filed pursuant to this title shall be subject to a nonrefundable application and filing fee in the amount established from time to
time by the village board, plus the actual cost, as hereinafter defined, incurred by the village in processing such application.
b. The owner of the property which is the subject of the application and, if different, the applicant, shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment
of said fee. By signing the application, owner shall be deemed to have agreed to pay such fee and to consent to the filing and foreclosure of a lien
on the subject property to ensure collection of any such fee, plus the costs of collection, which has not been paid within thirty (30) days following
the mailing of a written demand for such payment to the owner at the address shown on the application. Any lien filed pursuant to this subsection
D1b may be foreclosed in the manner provided by statute for mortgages or mechanics' liens.
2. Recoverable Costs: For purposes of calculating the fee due pursuant to subsection D1 of this section, the actual costs incurred by the village in
processing an application shall be deemed to consist of the following items of direct and indirect expense:
a. Legal publication (direct cost).
b. Recording secretarial services (direct cost).
c. Court reporter (direct cost).
d. Administrative preparation and review (hourly salary times a multiplier to be established from time to time by the zoning administrator at a level
sufficient to recover 100 percent of the direct and indirect cost of such service).
e. Document preparation and review (hourly salary times a multiplier to be established from time to time by the zoning administrator at a level
sufficient to recover 100 percent of the direct and indirect cost of such service).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 427/618
f. Professional and technical consultant services (direct cost).
g. Legal review, consultation and advice (direct cost).
h. Copy reproduction (direct cost).
i. Document recordation (direct cost).
3. Payment Of Fee And Escrow:
a. Initial Payment And Escrow: Every application filed pursuant to this title shall be accompanied by the required fee, plus an additional amount for
recoverable costs as provided in subsection D2 of this section, as fixed from time to time by administrative order of the zoning administrator, to be
deposited in an application fee escrow. No interest shall be payable on any such escrow.
b. Charges Against Escrow: From the date of filing of any application pursuant to this title, the village shall maintain an accurate record of the actual
costs, as hereinabove defined, of processing such application. The zoning administrator shall, from time to time, draw funds from the escrow
account established for such application to pay such costs and shall transfer such funds to the appropriate village accounts. The administrator
shall maintain an accurate record of all such drawings.
c. Additional Escrow Deposits: Should the zoning administrator, at any time, determine that the escrow account established in connection with any
application is, or is likely to become, insufficient to pay the actual costs of processing such application, the administrator shall inform the applicant
of that fact and demand an additional deposit in an amount deemed by him to be sufficient to cover foreseeable additional costs. Unless and until
such additional amount is deposited by the applicant, the zoning administrator may direct that processing of the application shall be suspended or
terminated.
d. Final Settlement:
(1) As soon as reasonably feasible following final action on an application, the zoning administrator shall cause a final accounting to be made of
the escrow deposits made in connection with such application and the actual cost of processing such application and shall make a final charge
of such costs against such escrow deposits. A copy of the accounting shall be provided to the owner and the applicant.
(2) If the amount in the escrow account is insufficient to pay the total actual costs, a written demand for payment of the balance due shall be
mailed to the owner and the applicant. If unused balance remains in the escrow account after paying the total actual costs, it shall be returned to
the applicant.
4. Condition Of All Applications, Approvals And Permits; Time Periods:
a. No application filed pursuant to this title shall be considered complete unless and until all fees and deposits due pursuant to this subsection have
been paid. Every approval granted and every permit issued pursuant to this title shall, whether or not expressly so conditioned, be deemed to be
conditioned upon payment of fees as required by this subsection. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
b. Where this title provides that the passage of time without decision or action shall be deemed an approval or a recommendation for approval, time
periods shall not be tolled during any period of nonpayment, but shall otherwise continue to run. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
c. The failure to fully pay any such fee or deposit when due shall be grounds for refusing to process an application and for denying or revoking any
permit or approval sought or issued with respect to the land or development to which the unpaid fee or deposit relates.
5. Exemptions: The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to, and no fee shall be required of, any public body or agency deriving the majority of
its revenues from taxes levied within the village. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3-6: APPEALS:
A. Authority To Appeal: Any party aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement, decision, or determination made under this title by the zoning
administrator or other authorized administrative official may appeal to the village board. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Notice Requirements: A notice of appeal shall be filed with the zoning administrator within forty five (45) days of the order or decision being appealed.
The notice of appeal shall contain:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the party filing the appeal.
2. The location of the property affected by the decision being appealed.
3. Identification of the provision of this title governing the decision being appealed.
4. The reason given by the administrative official for the decision.
5. A brief summary of the factual evidence upon which the appeal is based.
6. A plot plan and verbal description of the use affected by the decision being appealed.
C. Information To Village Board: The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit the notice of appeal and the complete record of the decision to the village
board. The village board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing on the appeal and give a minimum of ten (10) days' notice to the party filing the
notice.
D. Village Board Action: After the hearing, the village board shall take final action on the appeal, subject only to judicial review in accordance with
applicable state statutes. A majority vote of all village board members shall be required for the village board to take action. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3-7: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 428/618
Any party that violates, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any provision of this title shall, upon conviction, be fined not
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
ARTICLE A. VARIANCES
11-3A-1: PURPOSE:
A variation recognizes that the same district regulations do not affect all properties equally and is intended to provide relief from the strict terms of this title
to property owners upon whom this title has imposed undue hardship or difficulty. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3A-2: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
A. Optional Prefiling Conference:
1. Prior to filing an application for a variance, an applicant may request a prefiling conference with the zoning administrator. An application for the
conference, together with the filing fee, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator.
2. At the conference, the applicant may outline his proposed variance and submit preliminary information. The zoning administrator shall advise the
applicant concerning in what respects his proposal conforms to applicable village plans and ordinances and to desired standards of design.
3. In the event an application for a variance is subsequently filed, the conference filing fee will be credited toward the application filing fee.
B. Contents Of Application: An application for a variance for any property shall be filed with the zoning administrator and shall contain the following
information:
1. The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
2. A complete disclosure of interests as provided under section 11-3-5 of this chapter.
3. A recent plat of survey (1 year or less) and legal description of the property, prepared by a registered land surveyor of Illinois, showing all
improvements thereon as it exists as of the date of application.
4. A typewritten list of all property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property.
5. A site plan showing the proposed locations of all proposed structures, parking and loading areas, open spaces, landscaping, yards, refuse and
service areas, utilities, signs, traffic accesses and circulation ways.
6. Architectural renderings or sketches illustrating the appearance of buildings or structures.
7. A narrative statement evaluating compliance with findings of fact for variances listed in this article.
8. Any other information the zoning administrator may require to determine if the variance meets the requirements herein. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
C. Fee And Deposit:
1. All applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee as set forth in title 1, chapter 15 of this code. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. Ord.
2014-63, 10-16-2014)
2. An applicant, other than one applying for a variance for an individual single-family residential lot, shall also pay a cash deposit as provided by the
village board from time to time to be applied against any additional costs incurred by the village necessary for the processing of the application, such
as consulting engineering services, consulting planning services, legal services, or court reporter services.
3. Any costs incurred in excess of the cash deposit shall be invoiced by the village to the applicant who shall be responsible for payment of the invoice
upon its receipt.
4. No application shall be processed until the applicant has first exhibited a receipt of the village clerk showing payment of the filing fee and cash
deposit.
D. Staff Review: The zoning administrator may, together with other departments and officials of the village, prepare a written overview of the application,
provided such review is completed.
E. Public Hearing: Upon receipt of a complete and accurate application, the zoning administrator shall set a date for a public hearing before the zoning
administrator.
F. Public Notice: There shall be compliance with the public notice requirements provided in section 11-3-5 of this chapter.
G. Zoning Administrator Action: The zoning administrator shall hold a public hearing on the application. Within sixty (60) days after the close thereof, the
zoning administrator shall submit to the village board findings of fact relating to the requirements for variances herein, a recommendation for action,
and any conditions or restrictions relating to the recommendation. All recommendations shall require a majority vote of all village board members.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 429/618
H. Village Board Action: The village board of trustees, upon receiving the recommendation from the zoning administrator, may, by ordinance, without
further public hearing, approve any variance or may refer it back to the zoning administrator for further consideration. Any variance which fails to
receive the approval of the zoning administrator shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the village board of trustees.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3A-3: FINDINGS OF FACT:
In making a recommendation to the board of trustees for approval or conditional approval of a variance, the zoning administrator shall transmit written
findings that all of the following facts apply:
A. For reasons fully set forth in the written findings, the strict application of the provisions of this title would result in practical difficulties or particular
hardship upon the applicant, as distinguished from mere inconvenience.
B. These special circumstances relate only to the land or building(s) for which a variance is sought and not to any business or activity the applicant carries
on, or seeks to carry on, therein, nor to the personal, business, or financial circumstances of the applicant or any other party with interest in the
property.
C. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the locality nor substantially impair environmental quality, property values, or public
safety or welfare in the vicinity. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
D. The granting of a variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title and of the official comprehensive plan of the village. (Ord.
99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
E. The variance recommended by the zoning administrator is the minimum required to provide the applicant with reasonable use and enjoyment of his
property. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3A-4: USE VARIANCES:
A. No variance shall be granted, in whole or in part, the effect of which would be substantially equivalent to a change in zoning district classification of a
property, or that would permit any use not otherwise permitted in the applicable district.
B. If the zoning administrator finds that an amendment to this title rather than a variance is necessary to grant the applicant relief, it shall so advise the
applicant and recommend to the plan commission that such action be taken. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3A-5: CONDITIONS ON VARIANCES:
The zoning administrator may recommend, and the board of trustees may require, any conditions or restrictions on a property that is to benefit from a
variance that either finds necessary to carry out the intent of these provisions. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3A-6: RIGHTS OF APPLICANTS AND PROPERTY OWNERS:
A. Applicants: Applicants for variances shall have the following rights, in addition to any others they may possess in law, at any hearing before the zoning
administrator:
1. To have subpoenas issued for persons to appear at the variance hearings and for the examination of documents by the person requesting the
subpoena, either before or at the variance hearings, in accordance with the provisions and limitations provided in state statute.
2. To cross examine all witnesses testifying.
3. To present witnesses on their behalf.
B. Property Owners: Property owners who object to the zoning application may, upon request, be granted one continuance for the purpose of presenting
evidence to rebut testimony given by the applicant. The date of such continued hearing shall be at the discretion of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 99-
02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE B. AMENDMENTS
11-3B-1: PURPOSE:
To adapt to changing development conditions and provide for the phased implementation of the village comprehensive plan, the village board may, from
time to time, amend the provisions of the text of this title or the zoning district map, as provided by Illinois statutes. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011
Code)
11-3B-2: INITIATION AND FILING OF AMENDMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 430/618
A. An amendment may be proposed by the village board, the plan commission, the zoning administrator, or the fee owner, lessee, option holder, contract
purchaser, trustee, or beneficiary of any property in the village, or his or her authorized agent, in accordance with the requirements of section 11-3-5 of
this chapter.
B. Except in the case of an amendment proposed by a board, commission, or official of the village, an application for zoning amendment shall be filed with
the zoning administrator to initiate any amendment. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3B-3: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
A. Contents Of Application: An application for amendment to this title shall contain the following information:
1. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant.
2. The location of the subject property intended to be affected by the proposed amendment.
3. A complete disclosure of interest, as provided in section 11-3-5 of this chapter.
4. A typewritten list of all owners of property within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the subject property, as determined in accordance with section 11-3-5
of this chapter.
5. Descriptions of the present and proposed uses of the subject property.
6. The zoning classifications of the subject property and of all other properties within two hundred fifty feet (250') thereof.
7. A recent (1 year or less) plat of survey and a legal description of the subject property, prepared by a registered land surveyor of Illinois, showing all
of the improvements thereon as it exists as of the date of application.
8. A description of the proposed amendment to this title.
9. A statement of evidence that the proposed amendment conforms to the criteria for zoning amendments herein.
10. A site plan, at a scale of not less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100'), that includes:
a. Lot lines and required yards.
b. Location, shape, size, and height of all existing and proposed buildings and structures, including decorative walls and other elements and entrance
features.
c. Existing and proposed landscaping.
d. Common open space and common recreation facilities, if any.
e. Locations of off street parking.
f. Phases of development.
g. Data indicating gross and net site acreage, lot dimensions and areas, building heights and number of stories, and acreage devoted to common
open space or recreation.
11. Architectural renderings showing the appearance of the proposed use, as required by the plan commission.
12. Any other information the plan commission may require to determine whether the proposed amendment meets the requirements of this title.
13. A nonrefundable filing fee as provided in section 11-3-5 of this chapter.
B. Public Notice: There shall be compliance with the requirements for public notice provided in section 11-3-5 of this chapter.
C. Staff Review: The zoning administrator may, together with other departments and officials of the village, prepare a written review of the application,
provided such review is completed and forwarded to the plan commission within ten (10) days of receipt of the application.
D. Public Hearing: Upon receipt of a complete and accurate application, the zoning administrator shall establish a date for a public hearing and transmit
the application to the plan commission.
E. Plan Commission Action: The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on the application. Within sixty (60) days after the close thereof, the
commission shall transmit to the village board written findings of fact pertaining to the criteria for zoning amendments herein, together with a
recommendation for action on the proposed amendment.
F. Village Board Action:
1. The village board shall not act upon any proposed amendment until either it has received a report thereupon from the plan commission or until sixty
(60) days have elapsed from the close of the public hearing.
2. The village board shall not approve an amendment unless it shall find that the amendment meets applicable criteria for zoning amendments herein.
G. Protest:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 431/618
1. A written protest may be filed with the village clerk against a proposed amendment that is signed by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of
the frontage of:
a. The property to be affected by the proposed amendment; or
b. The property immediately adjacent thereto or across an alley therefrom; or
c. The property having frontage directly opposite the frontage to be affected by the proposed amendment.
2. If such a protest is filed, the proposed amendment shall not be approved except by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the village trustees currently holding
office.
3. The protester shall serve a copy of the protest upon the applicant and upon his or her attorney, if any, by certified mail.
H. Repeal: If no development has taken place on the property affected by an amendment to the zoning district map within one year of the date of such
amendment, the plan commission may hold a public hearing, after giving public notice as provided under section 11-3-5 of this chapter, and
recommend to the village board that such amendment be repealed and that the map be amended to provide for a different zoning classification for the
property.
I. Resubmission:
1. No application for an amendment that has been denied by the village board shall be resubmitted within one year of the date of denial except on the
grounds of new factual evidence or a change in conditions found to be valid by the plan commission.
2. This restriction shall not, however, apply to a map amendment proposing a different zoning classification than that denied by the village board. Nor
shall this restriction apply to any amendment proposed by the village board or plan commission. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3B-4: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
The plan commission shall make the following findings on a proposed amendment before recommending adoption of the amendment to the village board:
A. The proposed use or the uses permitted under the proposed zoning classification are compatible with existing uses or existing zoning of the property to
which the amendment will apply and of property in the environs.
B. The trend of development in the general area since the original zoning of the affected property was established supports the proposed use or zoning
classification.
C. The proposed use or zoning classification is in harmony with the objectives of the comprehensive plan of the village.
D. The proposed use or zoning classification promotes the public interest and not solely the interest of the applicant. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3B-5: ENDANGERED SPECIES:
A. In addition to the requirements of section 11-3B-3 of this article, an application for amendment to this title for rezoning a parcel of real estate from an
agricultural classification to another classification shall include a completed agency action report on a form promulgated by the Illinois department of
natural resources.
B. The zoning administrator shall forward the completed agency action report to the Illinois department of natural resources to initiate a consultation
process. Action on the application for amendment shall not commence until the completion of the consultation process, except as otherwise provided
under subsection D of this section.
C. Upon receipt from the Illinois department of natural resources of notification that no known endangered species are known to be present and of
termination of the consultation process, action on the application shall commence.
D. Upon receipt from the Illinois department of natural resources of notification that an endangered species is identified, action on the application for
amendment shall commence and such information shall be entered of record at the public hearing before the plan commission for consideration in the
decision on the application or rezoning. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
E. If an endangered species is identified, the consultation process will not proceed until development of the parcel is under consideration. At that time, the
applicant shall submit to the village a completed detailed action report and continue the consultation process as defined in subsection F of this section.
F. The applicant shall complete the detailed action report and submit it to the village. Sufficient information must be provided about the proposed
development to determine the potential indirect, direct and cumulative adverse impacts to the endangered species present or its essential habitat.
1. The detailed action report shall include, but is not limited to, the following components:
a. Name and address of the village of Glendale Heights.
b. The name of the zoning administrator.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 432/618
c. A detailed map indicating the precise location of the proposed development.
d. A detailed description of the proposed development, including any direct or indirect alteration or destruction of the vegetation, changes anticipated
to air or water quality, alteration of the topography, or any other detail that might jeopardize the listed species or its essential habitat.
e. Starting and ending dates of the proposed project.
f. Discussion of alternatives which were considered.
2. Upon completing the portion of the detailed action report involving the proposed project, the applicant shall provide background information on the
endangered species present. The direct and indirect effects of the proposed development on the endangered species and its essential habitat
including cumulative effects shall be analyzed by the applicant. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
3. Upon completion, the village shall submit the detailed action report to the Illinois department of natural resources for the formulation of a biological
opinion as to whether the proposed development, taken with its cumulative effects, will jeopardize the endangered species present or have an
adverse impact on its essential habitat. The biological opinion shall result in one of the following conclusions: (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011
Code)
a. The development may promote the conservation of an endangered species or its essential habitat, in which case, the consultation process is
terminated;
b. The development is not likely to jeopardize an endangered species or its essential habitat, in which case, the consultation process is terminated;
or
c. The proposed development is likely to jeopardize an endangered species or its essential habitat, in which case, the consultation process shall
continue. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
4. If the biological opinion concludes that the proposed development is likely to have an adverse impact, recommendations to avoid these impacts shall
be provided to the applicant by the village upon receipt from the Illinois department of natural resources.
5. A meeting shall be scheduled with representatives of the applicant, the village and the Illinois department of natural resources to discuss practicable
alternative to the proposed development that would avoid, minimize, or compensate for the impacts.
6. After the consultation meetings have taken place to discuss practicable alternatives, the applicant shall notify the village in writing, stating its decision
to proceed, modify, or forgo the action, and which, if any, of the alternatives included in the detailed action report it is adopting. The village shall in
turn notify the Illinois department of natural resources. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
7. If the village disagrees with the applicant's decision, it shall notify the applicant in writing within twenty one (21) days.
G. The consultation process shall be initiated or a terminated consultation process shall be reopened if:
1. New information reveals effects of the identified development that may adversely affect an endangered species or its essential habitat in a manner
not previously considered; or
2. The proposed development is subsequently modified such that it may adversely affect a listed species or its essential habitat in a manner which was
not considered in the consultation process; or
3. Additional endangered species or their essential habitats are identified within the vicinity of the development. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE C. CONDITIONAL USES
11-3C-1: INTRODUCTION:
A. Certain uses cannot be allowable generally in a particular zoning district, or in any zoning district, because of the impact their special character creates
on surrounding areas.
B. Some such uses may, however, be allowed under special conditions. These uses are provided for in this title as conditional uses.
C. Because a conditional use is compatible with the applicable zoning district only under special conditions, a conditional use permit is required before any
use authorized herein as a conditional use may be established. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3C-2: APPLICATION OF OTHER REGULATIONS:
Except as specifically provided herein, all regulations of the applicable zoning district and all other applicable regulations of this title and other village
ordinances shall apply to conditional uses. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3C-3: EXISTING CONDITIONAL USES:
A. Conditional uses existing on the effective date hereof shall be considered lawful conditional uses without the need for approval of a conditional use
permit.
B. Any expansion of, addition to, or structural alteration of such a use shall, however, require the approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-
1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 433/618
11-3C-4: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
The following regulations apply to all conditional uses except planned unit developments for which separate provisions are set forth in this title.
A. Optional Prefiling Conference:
1. Prior to filing an application for a conditional use permit, an applicant may request a prefiling conference with the plan commission. An application for
the conference, together with the filing fee, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator.
2. At the conference, the applicant may outline his proposed project and submit preliminary information. The plan commission shall advise the applicant
concerning in what respects his proposal conforms to applicable village plans and ordinances and to desired standards of design.
3. In the event an application for a conditional use permit is subsequently filed, the conference filing fee will be credited toward the application filing fee.
B. Contents Of Application: An application for a conditional use permit for any property shall be filed with the zoning administrator and shall contain the
following information:
1. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant.
2. A complete disclosure of interests as provided under section 11-3-5 of this chapter.
3. A recent plat of survey (1 year or less) and legal description, prepared by a registered land surveyor of Illinois, showing all the improvements thereon
as it exists as of the date of application.
4. A typewritten list of all property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property.
5. The zoning district classifications of the property and of all other properties within two hundred fifty feet (250') thereof.
6. Descriptions of the existing use of the property and of the proposed conditional use.
7. A site plan showing the locations of all structures, parking and loading areas, open spaces, landscaping, yards, refuse and service areas, utilities,
signs, and traffic accesses and circulation ways.
8. Architectural renderings or sketches illustrating the appearance of the proposed use, as required by the plan commission.
9. A narrative statement evaluating:
a. The environmental and economic effects that noise, glare, odor, vibration, traffic generation, or other characteristics of the proposed use will have
on nearby properties.
b. The general compatibility of the proposed use with nearby properties. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
c. The compatibility of the proposed use with the village official comprehensive plan. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
10. Any other information the plan commission may require to determine if the proposed use meets the requirements herein. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
C. Fee And Deposit:
1. All applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in title 1, chapter 15 of this code. A schedule of current fees shall be made available
in the offices of the village clerk and the zoning administrator. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. Ord. 2014-63, 10-16-2014)
2. An applicant shall also pay a cash deposit determined from time to time by the village board to be applied against any additional costs necessary for
the processing of the application, such as consulting engineering services, consulting planning services, legal services, or court reporter services.
3. Any costs incurred in excess of the cash deposit shall be invoiced by the village to the applicant who shall be responsible for payment of the invoice
upon its receipt.
4. No application shall be processed until the applicant has first exhibited a receipt of the village clerk showing payment of the filing fee and cash
deposit. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
D. Staff Review: The zoning administrator may, together with other departments and officials of the village, prepare a written review of the application,
provided such review is completed and forwarded to the plan commission within ten (10) days of receipt of the application. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd.
2011 Code)
E. Public Hearing: Upon receipt of a complete and accurate application, the zoning administrator shall set a date for a public hearing before the plan
commission and shall transmit the application to the plan commission.
F. Public Notice:
1. Sign Display:
a. The applicant shall post a sign in the front yard of the affected property, facing a public street and no further than thirty feet (30') therefrom.
b. The sign shall plainly state the type of zoning action requested and the scheduled date, time, and location of the public hearing thereupon.
c. The sign shall have length and width dimensions of at least four feet (4') and eight feet (8').
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 434/618
d. The sign shall be erected no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing and remain continuously in place until the
public hearing is concluded, but no more than ten (10) days thereafter. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
2. Written Notification: The applicant shall, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, send written notice to the
property owners within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property, excluding rights of way, which notice shall contain:
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The street address and legal description of the property affected by the application.
c. The type of conditional use requested.
d. The date, time, and location of the public hearing thereupon. (Ord. 2014-62, 10-16-2014)
3. Newspaper Publication: The zoning administrator shall publish a notice of the public hearing in the newspaper of general circulation in the village at
least fifteen (15) days but no more than thirty (30) days before the scheduled date of the hearing.
G. Plan Commission Action: The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on the application. Within sixty (60) days after the close thereof, the
commission shall submit to the village board findings of fact relating to the conditional use criteria herein, a recommendation for action, and any
conditions or restrictions relating to the recommendation.
H. Village Board Action:
1. The village board shall not act upon any conditional use permit application until either it has received a report thereupon from the plan commission or
sixty (60) days have elapsed from the close of the public hearing. The village board shall not approve the permit application unless it finds that the
proposed use meets applicable conditional use criteria herein.
2. The board may make its approval of a conditional use subject to any conditions or restrictions it finds necessary to assure the use will be compatible
with its vicinity. The board may also set time limits within which there must be compliance with such conditions or restrictions.
I. Issuance Of Permit: The zoning administrator shall issue a conditional use permit directly after approval thereof by the village board unless the village
board, in approving the conditional use, has directed otherwise. Such permit shall specify any conditions, restrictions, and time limits to which the board
has made the permit subject.
J. Denial Of Permit; Resubmission: No application for a conditional use permit that has been denied by the village board shall be resubmitted within one
year of the date of that denial except on the grounds of new factual evidence or a change in conditions found to be valid by the plan commission.
K. Revocation Of Permit: A conditional use permit may be revoked by the village board:
1. If there is not compliance with any conditions or restrictions within the time limit specified on the permit.
2. If, after there is initial compliance, compliance with such conditions or restrictions is not maintained at any time.
3. If the conditional use is not established, or a required building permit is not obtained and building started, within one year of the date the permit is
issued.
4. If the conditional use shall cease for more than one year.
5. If, prior to the issuance of any required building permit, the conditional use permittee transfers his interest in the property to another party.
L. Expansion Or Alteration Of Conditional Use: Any expansion, enlargement, or structural alteration of a conditional use shall require an additional
conditional use permit. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-3C-5: APPROVAL CRITERIA:
A. Criteria For All Conditional Uses: In evaluating the suitability of a proposed conditional use, the village board shall examine the following characteristics
of the proposed use and its individual structures or components:
1. Location and orientation.
2. Lot size.
3. Size of facility, including floor area, structure height, design capacity, and anticipated employment.
4. Site design and arrangement.
5. Provisions affecting on and off site pedestrian and traffic movement, vehicle storage, and the passage of emergency vehicles.
6. Appearance.
7. Screening or landscaping.
8. On or off site buffering from incompatible uses with open spaces or transitional uses.
9. Operations factors, such as hours of use or environmental controls.
10. Other characteristics of the proposed use pertinent, in the judgment of the board, to an assessment of the impact of the use on the area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 435/618
B. Compatibility With Other Uses:
1. Before approving a conditional use, the board shall determine that, on the basis of the above characteristics or changes to the above characteristics
that the board shall require, the proposed use will be compatible with existing uses in the area, and with permitted uses in the zoning district, in the
following ways:
a. Traffic: Any adverse impact of types or volumes of traffic flow not otherwise typical in the zoning district has been minimized.
b. Environmental Nuisance: Any adverse effects of noise, glare, odor, dust, waste disposal, blockage of light or air, or other adverse environmental
effects of a type or degree not characteristic of permitted uses in the zoning district have been minimized.
c. Neighborhood Character: The proposed use will fit harmoniously with the existing natural or manmade character of its surroundings, and with
permitted uses in the zoning district. The use will not have undue deleterious effects on the environmental quality, property values, or
neighborhood character already existing in the area or normally associated with permitted uses in the district.
d. Services And Facilities: The proposed use will not require existing community facilities or services to a degree disproportionate to that normally
expected of permitted uses in the district, nor generate disproportionate demand for new services or facilities, in such a way as to place undue
burdens upon existing development in the area.
e. Public Safety And Health: The proposed use will not be detrimental to the safety or health of the employees, patrons, or visitors associated with
the use nor of the general public in the vicinity.
f. Other Factors: The proposed use is in harmony with any other elements of compatibility pertinent, in the judgment of the board, to the particular
conditional use or its particular location.
2. The plan commission may recommend, and the board may make its approval contingent upon, any modifications, conditions, or restrictions relating
to any of the above characteristics of the use to minimize its adverse impact in the location proposed.
3. The commission or the board may call upon technical experts or have studies performed to determine specific development standards or conditions
for any particular conditional use.
C. Criteria For Specified Conditional Uses: In addition to the foregoing general criteria, the following criteria shall apply to specified conditional uses:
1. Child Daycare Centers:
a. The location and design of child daycare centers in residence districts shall minimize the problems of traffic generation in residential areas and
minimize the nuisance to nearby residents of noise from outdoor play areas.
b. Child daycare centers in commercial and office districts shall be so located or protected from other business uses and the traffic they generate that
they provide a healthy and safe environment for children.
2. Mortuaries:
a. Arterial Street Location: A mortuary shall be located only on an arterial street as designated on the village comprehensive plan. Where possible, a
mortuary should be located on a corner lot for vehicular access and exit of the funeral procession.
b. Minimum Lot Area: Minimum lot area shall be three hundred percent (300%) of the gross floor area of the mortuary.
c. Off Street Parking:
(1) Aisle and other space within the off street parking area shall be adequate to allow funeral processions to be formed entirely therein without
hindering traffic on public streets.
(2) The number of off street parking spaces required shall be as provided in chapter 5 of this title.
d. Commercial Use Regulations Apply: All regulations of this title applying generally to uses permitted in commercial districts, including off street
parking and signs, shall apply to mortuaries, except as provided herein or as otherwise authorized by the village.
3. Taverns Or Restaurants Serving Alcohol Or With Live Entertainment Or Dancing: The location of taverns or restaurants serving alcohol or with live
entertainment or dancing is such that the problems of traffic generation and noise typically associated with such uses do not create a nuisance for
nearby residential or institutional uses.
4. Zero Lot Line Development:
a. Purpose: The purpose of the provisions herein governing zero lot line development are:
(1) To allow the development of single-family detached housing that makes more efficient use of land and provides more usable open space on the
lot, especially where lots are smaller.
(2) To assure that the design of such housing development provides a suitable environment both for its occupants and the neighborhood.
(3) To thereby encourage the provision of higher density affordable housing that is detached, that tends to be owner occupied, and that is thereby
more compatible with existing residential areas in the village.
b. Applicability:
(1) Zero lot line development of single-family detached homes may be permitted as a conditional use in the zoning districts specified in this title.
(2) When permitted, zero lot line development allows the width of one interior side yard to be reduced to zero for the purpose of creating more
usable open space on the remainder of a lot, particularly where lot areas are small.
(3) Zero lot line development shall be permitted only as part of an overall subdivision or planned unit development and not on isolated individual
building lots.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 436/618
c. General Provisions:
(1) Side Yards Only: Only a single side yard may be reduced to zero; no front or rear yard may be reduced to zero.
(2) Side Yards Must Alternate: No two (2) side yards on adjacent lots may both be reduced to zero if they abut the same side lot line.
(3) Width Of Remaining Side Yard: The side yard not reduced to zero shall have a minimum width of fifteen feet (15').
(4) Wall Maintenance Easement:
(A) A perpetual wall maintenance easement shall be provided in every yard that is adjacent to a zero side yard in an adjoining lot.
(B) The easement shall be four feet (4') in width, measured from that portion of the lot line that is adjacent to a building on the other lot.
(C) The easement shall be shown on the plat and incorporated into each deed transferring title to the property. Proof of recording of such
easement shall be submitted to the zoning administrator prior to issuance of a building permit.
(D) Obstructions otherwise permitted in interior side yards are allowed within the easement, provided they do not impede access to the wall on
the adjacent lot for painting, cleaning, maintenance, and repair.
(E) Roof overhangs may project up to two feet (2') into the easement on the adjacent lot, but the roof shall be so designed that water runoff onto
the other lot is confined to the easement area.
(5) Wall Openings: No windows, doors, air conditioning units, or other openings shall be permitted on the side of a building abutting a zero side
yard.
d. Site Plan:
(1) Contents: A site plan, at a scale of not less than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') shall be filed for every zero lot line development. The
site plan shall include:
(A) Lot lines and required yards.
(B) Location, shape, size, and height of all existing and proposed buildings, decorative walls and elements, and entrance features.
(C) Existing and proposed landscaping.
(D) Common open space and common recreation facilities, if any.
(E) Locations of off street parking.
(F) Phases of development.
(G) Data indicating gross and net site acreage, lot dimensions and areas, building heights and number of stories, and acreage devoted to
common open space or recreation.
(2) Criteria: In addition to any other criteria the plan commission shall consider appropriate, the commission may consider the following in
evaluating the suitability of the site plan for a zero lot line development:
(A) Orientation: Where possible, the building wall abutting the zero side yard faces north, allowing maximum use of the remaining yards for
outdoor activities at different times of the year.
(B) Varied Height And Setback: Where possible, front yard depth, building height, and rooflines are varied to avoid monotonous appearance,
which is more objectionable when homes are closer together and lots are smaller.
(C) Block Length: Shorter blocks and cul-de-sac streets are also used to reduce the monotony of site design.
(D) Open Space:
(i) Where possible, lots that are particularly small are located near public parks or, in larger developments, near common open space.
(ii) Any common areas provided shall meet requirements for ownership, maintenance, upkeep, covenants, and financial guarantees specified in
this title for common open space in planned unit developments. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
5. Off Track Betting (OTB) Facility: No conditional use for an OTB facility shall be granted unless evidence is presented that the OTB facility is located
more than five hundred feet (500') from any existing church, school or residence. The distance of five hundred feet (500') shall be measured from the
nearest part of the building housing the OTB to the nearest part of any building used for a school, worship services or residential purposes, and not
property boundaries. The criteria of five hundred feet (500') may be waived by following the proper procedures provided for under the Illinois horse
racing act of 1975. (Ord. 2011-97, 11-17-2011; amd. Ord. 2012-20, 4-19-2012)
6. Financial Institutions Located In Freestanding Buildings: A conditional use for a financial institution, including banks, savings and loan associations,
and commercial loan offices, with or without a drive-in or drive-through, located in a freestanding building shall only be granted if:
a. The financial institution is part of a larger commercial development such as a shopping center or an integrated shopping center, and complies with
the following:
(1) If the larger commercial development is less than three (3) acres in area, then the freestanding financial institution shall account for no more
than fifty percent (50%) of the total development;
(2) If the larger commercial development is more than three (3) acres in area, then the freestanding financial institution shall account for no more
than ten percent (10%) of the total development; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 437/618
b. The financial institution is not located at or near an intersection that contains two (2) or more existing financial institutions that are located at or
proximate to the same intersection. (Ord. 2012-27, 5-3-2012)
11-3C-6: RIGHTS OF APPLICANTS AND PROPERTY OWNERS:
A. Applicants: Applicants for conditional uses shall have the following rights, in addition to any others they may possess in law, at any hearing before the
plan commission:
1. To have subpoenas issued for persons to appear at the plan commission hearings and for the examination of documents by the person requesting
the subpoena either before or at the plan commission hearings in accordance with the provisions and limitations provided in state statute.
2. To cross examine all witnesses testifying.
3. To present witnesses on their behalf.
B. Property Owners: Property owners who object to the conditional use application may, upon request, be granted one continuance for the purpose of
presenting evidence to rebut testimony given by the applicant. The date of such continued hearing shall be at the discretion of the plan commission.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE D. ENTERTAINMENT PERMITS
11-3D-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall mean:
ANNUAL ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT: Those permits that are issued for entertainment activities or events scheduled within a calendar year period for a
single establishment or location.
ENTERTAINMENT: Means and includes, but is not limited to, any live show, theatrical performance, or other form of live entertainment, amusement rides,
animal shows, exhibits and/or demonstrations, bands, concerts, carnivals, circuses, dances, disc jockey/DJ performances, exhibitions, live or mechanically
produced music, musicals, pageants, personality and celebrity appearances, readings, recitals, shows, singing, zoos of any nature, and similar
performances of any nature. Entertainment, under this article, shall not mean or include: a) those forms of live entertainment which are specifically
regulated by another section of this title or another ordinance of the village of Glendale Heights; or b) those forms of live entertainment which are
performed at locations within the areas designated for adult regulated uses.
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY: Any state, federal, or local governmental entity created either by state or federal law. Any affiliates who are directly connected
to that same governmental entity or fundraising arm of that entity which are duly authorized and sanctioned by the governmental entity shall be considered
a governmental entity for purposes of this article.
PRIVATE ENTERTAINMENT EVENTS: Those events of a temporary nature, provided for an exclusive or invited group of a limited number of attendees,
without a fee, admission, or other charge assessed to attend, and not intended for the general public. It is held on a suitable premises and does not
exceed approved occupancy limits.
PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT EVENTS: Those events for which the general public is invited or has access and/or ability to attend.
SINGLE EVENT ENTERTAINMENT PERMITS: Those permits that are issued for a single entertainment activity or event scheduled for three (3) or less
consecutive days in duration within a calendar year period for a single establishment or location. (Ord. 2009-20, 3-19-2009)
11-3D-2: PERMIT AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any individual, association, group, institution, private entity, public entity, governmental entity, or nonprofit entity to use any land,
building or structure to conduct, offer, provide, procure, make available, allow, permit, manage, stage, operate or exhibit any public entertainment event
without having first complied with the terms of this article relating to the same, and having procured an annual or single event entertainment permit, as
applicable. Entertainment: 1) distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" regulated in other sections of this title; and 2) specifically regulated by another section of this title or another ordinance of
the village shall be permitted without having first secured an entertainment permit.
B. An applicant for an annual or single event entertainment permit shall comply with the requirements of this article in order to be granted an annual or
single event entertainment permit. (Ord. 2009-20, 3-19-2009)
11-3D-3: APPLICATION FEES:
A. All annual entertainment permit applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in title 1, chapter 15 of this code.
B. All single event entertainment permit applications shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in title 1, chapter 15 of this code.
C. No annual or single event entertainment permit application shall be processed until the applicant has first exhibited a receipt showing payment of the
filing fee. (Ord. 2014-62, 10-16-2014)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 438/618
11-3D-4: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
A. Application For Permit:
1. Applications for an entertainment permit shall comply with the following criteria:
a. An application for an entertainment permit shall be made through an application process as prescribed by the zoning administrator. If the applicant
is not the owner of the property, then the application shall contain the property owner's written consent for the entertainment events.
b. All requests for an entertainment permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator or his designee.
c. Applications shall be submitted forty five (45) days prior to the entertainment event. Applications that do not meet the time criteria will be reviewed
on a case by case basis, and will be subject to the approval of the village administrator or his or her designee. The village administrator or his or
her designee may deny the application if it is determined the village has insufficient time to review the application. Applications shall clearly specify
annual or single event permit.
2. Applications for entertainment permits shall include, but are not limited to, the following information:
a. The name, address, and phone number of the applicant.
b. The name of the owner of the property, if different than the applicant.
c. A complete disclosure of interests as provided under section 11-3-5 of this chapter.
d. Information necessary to accurately locate and portray the property, such as a survey or legal description of the property to be used, rented, or
leased for the entertainment event.
e. (1) Date(s) when the entertainment event is scheduled to occur, the hours of operation, and whether a fee and/or admission will be charged for
single event entertainment permits.
(2) Days of the week when the entertainment events are scheduled to occur, the hours of operation, and whether a fee and/or admission will be
charged for annual entertainment permits.
f. A description of the existing use of the property, and an explanation of the type of entertainment to be provided and/or type or proposed use of the
entertainment. A written description of the entertainment event and a detailed drawing/diagram of the proposed location shall be provided.
g. A detailed floor plan and, if applicable, traffic patterns, both within and outside the location.
h. An estimate of the maximum number of persons expected to observe the entertainment event.
i. A site plan showing the locations of all structures, parking and loading areas, open spaces, landscaping, yards, refuse and service areas, utilities,
signs, traffic access points, and circulation ways.
j. A listing of locations, dates, and times of other similar events where the entertainment was provided, both within and without the jurisdiction of the
village, the website address of the entertainment provider, and any other information the village determines is necessary to complete the
evaluation of the proposed event(s).
k. A narrative statement evaluating:
(1) The environmental and economic effects that the noise, glare, odor, vibration, traffic generation, and other characteristics the proposed use will
have on the nearby properties.
(2) The general compatibility of the proposed use with nearby properties.
(3) The compatibility of the proposed use with the village comprehensive plan.
l. A statement whether the applicant is seeking an annual or single event entertainment permit.
m. Information, in sufficient detail, regarding who is invited to attend the entertainment event and whether the general public is invited.
n. Information, in sufficient detail to the satisfaction of the village, regarding the location of, and what type of event advertising will be utilized.
o. Information, in sufficient detail to the satisfaction of the village, regarding past police activity at any prior entertainment in the village.
p. Information, in sufficient detail to the satisfaction of the village, regarding past police activity at any prior events in jurisdictions outside of the
village.
q. Information, in sufficient detail, regarding parking areas, both on and off street, for the entertainment event.
r. A statement whether alcohol will be served on the premises of the entertainment event. If alcohol will be served, the categories of alcohol being
served must be disclosed.
s. A statement whether food will be served on the premises of the entertainment event. If food will be served, a food menu shall be provided with the
application.
t. If the maximum audience expected exceeds twenty five (25) people, an on site security program, including required interior and exterior lighting
plans, shall be prepared and accompany the application. The application shall disclose whether security personnel are to be armed or unarmed.
u. Information as to what, if any, village support is being requested or required.
v. Any other information that the plan commission and/or village board reasonably may require to determine if the proposed use meets the
requirements herein.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 439/618
B. Staff Review: The zoning administrator may, together with other departments and officials of the village, prepare a written review of the application.
Such review shall be completed and forwarded to the plan commission and/or village board within ten (10) days of receipt of the application.
C. Plan Commission Action:
1. The plan commission shall act upon an entertainment permit application at its first regularly scheduled meeting in which a quorum is present, and
which is forty eight (48) hours after the receipt of the staff report or ten (10) days removed from the filing of the application, whichever is greater. The
plan commission shall not approve a permit application unless it finds that the proposed use meets applicable entertainment permit criteria herein.
2. The plan commission must base its approval of the entertainment permit only upon criteria set forth herein for entertainment permits.
3. Within sixty (60) days after considering an entertainment permit application, the plan commission shall submit to the village board findings of fact
relating to the entertainment permit criteria herein, and a recommendation for action.
D. Village Board Action:
1. The village board shall act upon any entertainment permit application at its first regularly scheduled meeting in which a quorum is present, after it
has received the plan commission's findings of fact and recommendation for action and before sixty (60) days have elapsed from the plan
commission's consideration of the application.
2. The village board shall not approve the entertainment permit application unless it finds that the proposed entertainment meets applicable
entertainment permit criteria herein.
3. The village board must base its approval of the entertainment permit only upon the criteria set forth herein for entertainment permits.
4. The approval or denial of an entertainment permit by the village board shall be considered final action subject to judicial review.
E. Issuance Of Permit: The zoning administrator shall issue an entertainment permit without delay after approval thereof by the village board. (Ord. 2009-
20, 3-19-2009)
11-3D-5: APPROVAL CONDITIONS AND CRITERIA:
In evaluating the suitability of an annual and single event entertainment permit, the plan commission and village board shall examine the following criteria
and shall approve an annual or single event entertainment permit, provided there is compliance with the following criteria and conditions:
A. The land, building or structure on or in which the entertainment is to be performed is located within one of the following zoning districts:
C-2 Community commercial district
C-3 General commercial district
O-2 Office park district
I Industrial district
B. Efficient means shall be employed so that ordinary sounds of the entertainment event are not heard on adjoining premises or on the public street. In
addition, no unusually loud entertainment noise or boisterous or noisy conduct on the part of the patrons shall be permitted. Any access doors on the
entertainment premises shall remain closed during the course of any entertainment event. No deliveries shall be accepted while an entertainment event
is in progress.
C. No residential structure or any other nonconforming structure shall be converted for use for entertainment after the effective date hereof.
D. If the maximum audience expected exceeds twenty five (25) people, an on site security program, including required interior and exterior lighting plans,
shall be prepared and implemented. The security program shall include the following:
1. The presence of an on site manager during all business hours.
2. The presence of security personnel during the entertainment event.
3. The illumination of all off street parking areas and building entries on the permitted premises during all hours of operation with a lighting system
designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of greater than one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and walkway. In the
event parking is shared with other businesses, this requirement shall only apply within a radius of one hundred feet (100') from any entrance to the
permitted premises.
4. The illumination of all interior portions of the permitted premises during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum
maintained horizontal illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles of light on the floor.
E. All exterior areas of the permitted premises, including the building, landscaping, and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner.
Buildings and structures shall not be painted or surfaced with colors or textures or any design that would simulate a sign or advertising message.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 440/618
F. There shall be, in every permitted premises, not less than two (2) doors for exits leading to the outside, each not less than three feet (3') in width and
opening outward. Additionally, every room used for entertainment purposes shall have a direct entrance from the public street unless the entire interior
thereof is visible through windows from the street, and all parts of the premises shall be open and unobstructed by partitions, screens or other devices.
This provision shall not be applicable to licensed hotels, motels or restaurants whose principal business is the furnishing of food and lodging to patrons,
or existing establishments that have been granted approval for the use of partitions.
G. As a condition of the permit, the permittee shall permit free and unobstructed access to the premises during any and all inspections conducted by
authorized personnel during the course of village business.
H. On those premises whose use or purpose is to cater to persons eighteen (18) or above, and the corporate authorities determine it reasonable and
necessary to restrict minors unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, no minor under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted on the premises
unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
I. If consumption of alcohol is proposed, said use must comply with village and state laws.
J. If amusement ride/equipment use is proposed, said use must comply with village and state laws.
K. If animal use is proposed, said use must comply with village rules, regulations, and ordinances.
L. A certificate of general liability insurance may be required by the zoning administrator or his designee.
M. The nature and intensity of the entertainment event must be so planned that the event will be compatible with the existing and surrounding area and
uses.
N. The proposed entertainment event shall be in compliance with all other relevant provisions of this title and village ordinances, rules, regulations, and
policies.
O. The permittee must make a deposit with the village to reimburse the village for any costs incurred by the village in regards to the event for which a
permit is issued. A minimum cash deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more may be required depending on the nature of the event and the
number of events, as determined by the zoning administrator or his designee.
Said deposit shall be used to reimburse the village for any of the following: inspections relating to the event, emergency responses to the premises
related to the entertainment event, and any damage done to public property by a patron of the entertainment event, or as a direct result of the
entertainment event. The balance of said deposit shall be returned to the permittee after the expiration of the entertainment permit.
P. No permit shall be issued until all applicable fees are paid.
Q. If food is prepared or served, it must comply with all village and state rules, regulations and laws.
R. In all respects, the entertainment event shall not significantly or materially be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the public or injurious to
other property or improvements in the surrounding area.
S. An indemnification agreement may be required by the zoning administrator or his designee.
T. No entertainer or performer shall be permitted to engage in any performance that is lewd, obscene or indecent.
1. As used in this article, "lewd", "obscene", or "indecent" shall mean a performance which, when taken as a whole, depicts or describes sexual
conduct in any way that appeals to the prurient interest, portrays sexual conduct in a patently offensive way, and does not have serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.
2. As used in this article, "sexual conduct" shall mean acts of sexual intercourse between humans, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; acts of
masturbation, fellatio, and cunnilingus; acts of excretory function; lewd exhibition of the genitals, especially in a stimulated condition; and sexual
relations between animals and humans.
U. No intoxicated person shall be permitted to remain in any permitted premises, and no person bordering on intoxication shall be served with any
beverage containing alcohol or be permitted to dance in any permitted premises.
V. Occupancy and attendance must be limited and shall be in compliance with village and state laws.
W. Parking areas, both on and off street, for entertainment events are to be of adequate size and properly located, and the entrance and exit drives shall
be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances.
X. The permittee shall provide a separate table or booth on the permitted premises for the exclusive use of all performers and entertainers appearing
therein, for them to occupy before and after each performance. The performers and entertainers shall not sit or remain at any other table or booth or
mingle with the patrons on the permitted premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 441/618
Y. The size of the permitted premises shall be sufficient to adequately accommodate the entertainment event.
Z. The presence of past police activity at entertainment events presented by the permittee within the village and in jurisdictions outside of the village.
AA. Refuse collection shall comply with all village rules, regulations, and ordinances.
BB. Every permitted premises shall have adequate toilets and lavatory facilities for each sex at the entertainment event. The toilets and lavatory facilities
shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and comply with all village ordinances.
CC. The permit holder shall be required to pay for any additional police, fire, or other village response required to attend the entertainment event.
DD. A review of the specific premises may be required by the village to determine that life and safety codes are not in violation during the proposed
entertainment event.
EE. The village board may place additional restrictions on the issuance of an entertainment permit that are in the best interests of the health, welfare, and
safety of event participants and bystanders, including, but not limited to, having the permit holder pay for any additional police, fire, or other village
response required to attend the entertainment event. (Ord. 2009-20, 3-19-2009)
11-3D-6: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The plan commission shall recommend denial of and the village board shall deny the entertainment permit for any of the following reasons:
A. The application does not meet the standards set forth in this article.
B. An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue on his/her payment to the village of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him/her or
imposed upon him/her in relation to an entertainment use.
C. An applicant has failed to provide information required on the application for the issuance of the entertainment permit or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
D. The premises to be used for the permitted entertainment has not been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building codes by the
department or agency responsible under law for investigating said compliance.
E. The required application or permit fees have not been paid.
F. The proposed location is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this title including, but not limited to, the requirements under
this article. (Ord. 2009-20, 3-19-2009)
11-3D-7: RENEWAL OF PERMIT:
A. Application For Renewal:
1. A valid entertainment permit issued pursuant to this article may be renewed upon written application to the village board made at least thirty (30)
days before it expires, and upon payment of all current fees and charges. An entertainment permit shall remain valid pending the village board's
consideration of the renewal application if the permittee has timely filed and paid for the application for renewal. For good cause, the village board
may extend the time for filing a renewal application for up to ninety (90) days and may extend the prior entertainment permit pending the village
board's consideration of the renewal application.
2. The application for renewal shall supply current information with respect to each category of information required in the initial application.
3. Within thirty (30) days from the date the renewal application for an entertainment permit is date stamped and received at the community
development department, the zoning administrator shall determine if it is complete, and if incomplete, shall notify the applicant in writing of its specific
deficiencies. If a written determination is not provided to the applicant within thirty (30) days after it is submitted to the community development
department, the application shall be deemed complete.
B. Village Board Action:
1. The village board shall make its decision on an application for the renewal of an entertainment permit within three (3) months from the date the
application is deemed to be complete. The village board may recommend to extend the entertainment permit, with amended or deleted conditions, or
deny the extension.
2. The village board shall not approve the permit renewal application unless it finds that the proposed entertainment meets applicable entertainment
permit criteria herein.
3. The village board must base its approval of a renewal of an entertainment permit only upon the criteria set forth herein for entertainment permits.
The approval or denial of a renewal of an entertainment permit by the village board shall be considered final action subject to judicial review.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 442/618
C. Inspections: All department or agency inspections, including, but not limited to, health, fire, and building inspections, which are required for the village
board to consider renewal of an entertainment permit shall be completed within the time limits for village board action provided in this article. (Ord.
2009-20, 3-19-2009)
11-3D-8: INSPECTIONS:
All annual or single event entertainment permits and permit renewals shall be subject to periodic inspections by authorized village personnel to ensure
continual compliance with the terms of this article. (Ord. 2009-20, 3-19-2009)
11-3D-9: POSTING PERMIT:
Once issued, an annual or single event entertainment permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location and made available to all village personnel upon
request for inspection. (Ord. 2009-20, 3-19-2009)
11-3D-10: ANNUAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Application For Permit; Restrictions; Change In Ownership: An annual entertainment permit shall be issued to those establishments upon approval of
the village board. An application shall be submitted detailing each entertainment event or activity for that annual permit. The permit shall be limited to
those events submitted on the application and any reasonable terms and conditions which the village finds necessary for the public health, welfare or
safety. Any changes in ownership of an establishment with an approved annual entertainment permit shall void the permit. Any new owner shall be
required to submit a new application for an annual entertainment permit.
B. Approval Or Denial Of Permit: All initial or new annual entertainment permit applications shall be reviewed and submitted to the plan commission for a
recommendation of approval or denial to the village board. (Ord. 2009-20, 3-19-2009)
C. Permit Fee: The fee for an annual entertainment permit shall be as set forth in title 1, chapter 15 of this code. (Ord. 2014-62, 10-16-2014)
D. Term Of Permit: An annual entertainment permit shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance. Annual renewals of a permit will be based on
past experience with the permittee and full compliance with this code and requirements and conditions of the issuance of a permit.
E. Renewals: An annual entertainment permit is issued on a calendar year basis and must be renewed each year to be valid. The village board may
impose reasonable additional terms or conditions as to the entertainment in the event public health, welfare or safety are adversely affected.
F. Modifications: Should additional entertainment events be contemplated, which were not approved prior to the issuance of the annual entertainment
permit, or the establishment floor plans are modified, the permittee shall amend the current entertainment permit through the appropriate application to
seek approval of any additional entertainment events or modifications. All annual entertainment permit modifications shall be reviewed and submitted to
the plan commission for a recommendation of approval or denial to the village board.
G. Exemptions:
1. Village governmental entities shall be exempt from annual entertainment permitting and fees.
2. Village educational institutions, approved and authorized by the state of Illinois, and daycare centers licensed by the village shall be exempt from
annual entertainment permitting and fees.
3. Village religious institutions, approved or accepted by the state of Illinois, shall be exempt from annual entertainment permitting and fees. (Ord.
2009-20, 3-19-2009)
H. Hours Of Operation: Entertainment shall be permitted as follows:
1. No later than one o'clock (1:00) A.M. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.
2. No later than two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday. (Ord. 2009-20, 3-19-2009; amd. 2011 Code)
11-3D-11: SINGLE EVENT PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Application For Permit; Restrictions; Change In Ownership: A single event entertainment permit shall be issued to those establishments upon approval
of the village board. An application shall be submitted detailing the entertainment event or activity for that single event permit. The permit shall be
limited to the event submitted on the application and any reasonable terms and conditions which the village finds necessary for the public health,
welfare or safety. A single event or short term entertainment permit shall entitle the holder to provide for the entertainment only upon the permitted
premises subject to the conditions of this article and the permit. Any change in ownership of an establishment with an approved single event
entertainment permit shall void the permit. Any new owner shall be required to submit a new application for an entertainment permit.
B. Approval Or Denial Of Permit: All single event entertainment permit applications shall be reviewed and submitted to the plan commission for a
recommendation of approval or denial to the village board. (Ord. 2009-20, 3-19-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 443/618
C. Permit Fee: The fee for such single event entertainment permit shall be as set forth in title 1, chapter 15 of this code. (Ord. 2014-62, 10-16-2014)
D. Term Of Permit: The term of a single event entertainment permit is limited to a onetime event not to exceed three (3) consecutive days during a
calendar year. If the entertainment event exceeds three (3) consecutive days, an annual entertainment permit shall be required.
E. Modifications: Should additional entertainment events be contemplated, which were not approved prior to the issuance of the single event entertainment
permit, or the establishment floor plans are modified, the permittee shall amend the current entertainment permit through the appropriate application to
seek approval of any additional entertainment events or modifications. Depending on the modifications requested, the permittee may be required to
apply for an annual entertainment permit. In any case, all single event entertainment permit modifications shall be reviewed and submitted to the plan
commission for a recommendation of approval or denial to the village board.
F. Exemptions:
1. Village governmental entities shall be exempt from single event entertainment permitting and fees.
2. Village educational institutions, approved and authorized by the state of Illinois, and daycare centers licensed by the village shall be exempt from
single event entertainment permitting and fees.
3. Village religious institutions, approved or accepted by the state of Illinois, shall be exempt from single event entertainment permitting and fees. (Ord.
2009-20, 3-19-2009)
11-3D-12: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT CONDITIONS:
Each entertainment permit holder shall only permit entertainment as approved and permitted by the village subject to the terms and conditions of the
entertainment permit. No entertainment permit holder may allow or provide entertainment which does not strictly comply with the entertainment permit,
including its terms and conditions. Any entertainment not in compliance with the entertainment permit shall be considered to be in violation of this article.
(Ord. 2009-20, 3-19-2009)
11-3D-13: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. An entertainment permit may be revoked by the village board:
1. If the applicant or any person making a representation on behalf of the applicant makes a misrepresentation of any fact in the application or in any
testimony before any board or commission of the village.
2. If there is not compliance with any criteria on which the permit is approved.
3. If, after initial compliance with the criteria, compliance with such criteria is not maintained at any time.
4. If the entertainment use is not established, or a required building permit is not obtained and building started, within one year of the date the permit is
issued.
5. If, prior to the issuance of any required building permit, the entertainment use permittee transfers his interest in the property to another party. (Ord.
2009-20, 3-19-2009)
6. If the entertainment use shall cease for more than sixty (60) days. (Ord. 2012-25, 5-3-2012)
B. However, no entertainment permit shall be revoked except after a public hearing by the village board after a three (3) day written notice to the permittee
affording the permittee an opportunity to appear and respond to the basis for the revocation contained in the notice. The three (3) day notice provision
shall commence on the day following delivery of the notice by certified mail, personal service or facsimile transmission. (Ord. 2009-20, 3-19-2009)
Chapter 4
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
11-4-1: SUBSTANDARD RESIDENTIAL LOTS OF RECORD:
Any lot of record as of the effective date hereof that is located in a residential district and that does not meet the requirements for area and/or width herein
may be used for single-family residence; provided, that the use conforms with all other requirements of the applicable zoning district. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-
1999)
11-4-2: FLOODPLAIN LANDS:
The use of land located within floodplains is regulated by title 13, chapters 1 and 2 of this code, in addition to the requirements herein. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-
1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-4-3: AIR RIGHTS:
The development of air rights shall be a conditional use in all zoning districts and subject to all other requirements of the zoning district applying to the land
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 444/618
below as well as to the procedures and criteria governing conditional uses. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-4-4: ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING PER LOT:
Except within planned unit developments, integrated shopping centers subject to conditional use procedures or public and institutional buildings districts,
no more than one principal building or use shall be permitted on any lot in any zoning district. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-4-5: ARTERIAL STREETS:
A. Lots Abutting Regional Arterial Streets: In subdivisions created after the effective date hereof in residence districts, lots abutting a regional arterial street
shall not have direct access to the arterial. Lots shall front upon and have access only to existing or new collector or local streets, and not to an arterial,
except where the plan commission determines this to be impractical. Regional arterial streets shall be as designated in the village official
comprehensive plan.
B. Exceptions To Arterial Lot Dimensions: The following lots are exempt from special required minimum lot widths and front or corner side yard depths
along arterial streets, as designated in the village official comprehensive plan, provided in the regulations for individual zoning districts: (Ord. 99-02, 1-
7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
1. Existing lots of record as of the effective date hereof.
2. Lots subdivided after the effective date hereof that meet any of the following conditions:
a. The only access to the lot is from public streets or public access drives that are not arterials, do not primarily serve a residence area, and are
either already in existence or have been planned and approved by the village.
b. The only access to the lot is from curb cuts provided jointly with one or more other lots.
(1) Where such lots are part of the same subdivision, the curb cuts shall meet all Village requirements.
(2) Where such lots are not part of the same subdivision, Village requirements shall be met to the extent possible, and the total number of curb
cuts shall not be increased.
c. The only access to the lot is ultimately to be provided from a frontage road planned and approved by the Illinois Department of Transportation, the
County, or the Village and where right-of-way adjacent to the lot has been dedicated totaling one hundred feet (100') from the centerline of the
arterial or such lesser distance equaling or exceeding fifty feet (50') as the Village may approve. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-4-6: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
A. Compatibility: Accessory uses and structures shall be compatible with the principal use of the lot on which they are located and shall not be established
prior to the establishment of the principal use. Except in the AE District, the keeping, preparation, or culture of poultry, pigeons, or livestock shall not be
an accessory use.
B. Location: Accessory uses may be located within required yards only as provided in subsection 11-4-7A, table 4-1, of this chapter. No accessory building
may be located closer than five feet (5') to any wall of the principal building unless it is structurally a part of the principal building. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-
1999)
C. Sheds: No lot in a Residence District shall have more than one shed for storage and the shed shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet total floor
area. (Ord. 2018-100, 12-13-2018)
D. Dish Antennas (Earth Stations):
1. Any satellite dish antenna shall be treated as a permitted use in any Residential Zoning District, subject to the following requirements:
a. The satellite dish is installed on the roof of a building, is not larger than forty inches (40") in diameter, does not front on a street, does not project
more than two feet (2') above the highest point of the roofline, and is of a color which blends with the roof. No more than one roof mounted
antenna is allowed per principal structure.
b. The satellite dish is installed on the ground, on a pad, or any other structure besides a building, is not larger than forty inches (40") in diameter, is
located between the principal structure and the rear lot line, and has a maximum height not exceeding six and one-half feet (61/2') above the
ground. No more than one ground mounted antenna is allowed per zoning lot.
c. The satellite dish is installed on a building in a location other than the roof, is less than forty inches (40") in diameter, is a neutral color, and is not
located on a facade which fronts on a street. No more than one wall mounted antenna shall be allowed per principal structure.
2. Any satellite dish antenna less than eighty inches (80") in diameter shall be treated as a permitted use in any Nonresidential Zoning District.
3. Any satellite dish which fails to meet the requirements of this subsection shall be deemed to be a conditional use, subject to the requirements of
chapter 3, article C of this title.
E. Other Television Or Radio Towers Or Antennas: Other radio or television towers or antennas as accessory uses shall not have an antenna height
exceeding fifty five feet (55'), shall not be more than three feet (3') from the principal building, and shall not be so positioned as to be a hazard to any
utility line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 445/618
F. Decks, Patios And Porches:
1. Decks or patios that are enclosed by windows or screens and a permanent roof shall be considered as accessory structures rather than as part of
the principal building. Such decks shall be subject to the requirements of subsection 11-4-7A, table 4-1, of this chapter, and the bulk requirements of
each zoning district.
2. No open porch shall cover more than twenty percent (20%) of the required front yard, or of the actual front yard if it is smaller than the required front
yard.
G. Dog Runs: No more than one enclosed dog run, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title as "dog run, enclosed", shall be permitted on any lot in a
Residence District. The fence enclosing the run shall be an open fence, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title as "fence, open", a maximum of eight
feet (8') in height and fifty feet (50') in total length on all sides and shall be located at least ten feet (10') from all lot lines.
H. Garages: Refer to subsection 11-5-7E of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
I. Skateboard Ramps: "Skateboard ramps", as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, must meet the following guidelines:
1. Area And Height: The structure may not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in floor area and thirty inches (30") in height.
2. Prohibited Location: The structure may not be located in a required rear or side yard setback area or be located in any area between the front
building line of a residential structure and the front property line.
3. Location In Relation To Adjacent Property: The structure may not be located within twenty feet (20') of any residential structure on an adjacent
property.
4. Minimize Noise Disturbances: The structure must be designed to minimize noise disturbances to surrounding properties and be operated in
compliance with the provisions of the noise regulations.
5. Applicability Of Provisions; Compliance: In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this village, the provisions set forth in this
subsection shall apply to any skateboard ramp constructed, erected, placed, or maintained within the village of Glendale Heights on or after the
effective date of this subsection, and shall also apply to any skateboard ramp currently in existence within the village of Glendale Heights as of the
effective date of this subsection. In the case of existing skateboard ramps, any skateboard ramp owner or property owner upon which any such
skateboard ramp is located shall have a period of sixty (60) days from the effective date of this subsection to remove said skateboard ramp or
otherwise bring it into compliance with this subsection. (Ord. 2013-04, 1-17-2013)
11-4-7: YARDS:
A. Obstructions: Required yards may be obstructed by accessory uses or building projections only as provided in the following table:
TABLE 4-1
PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS
Air conditioning equipment shelters x x x x
Arbors and trellises x
Awnings and canopies projecting into 10% or less of yard
depth
x
Balconies, open x
Bay windows x
Chimneys x
Decks, open or enclosed1 x
Dish antennas1 x
Dog runs, enclosed1 x
Eaves, overhanging x
Fences1 x
Flagpoles x
Garages or carports1 x
Gardens, vegetable x x x x
Greenhouses x
Gutters x
Projection Or
Accessory Use
All Yards
Rear Yards
Interior Side Yard
Corner Side Yards
Courtyards
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 446/618
Hedges (see Fences) x
Laundry drying equipment x x
Lawn furniture x
Light standards, ornamental x
Loading, off street x
Parking, off street1 x
Patios, enclosed x
Patios, open x x x
Porches and breezeways, open1 x
Recreational equipment x x
Sheds, storage buildings1 x
Signs1 x
Stairways, open unroofed x
Steps x
Swimming pools, private x
Television or radio towers or antennas1 x x x
Tennis courts, private x
Trees, shrubs and flowers x
Walls (see Fences)1 x
Other accessory uses x
Note:
1. See also separate regulations herein for this use.
B. Yards Used For Only One Structure: The minimum yard space required for one building or structure shall not be used as the required yard space for
another adjoining building or structure.
C. Reduction In Lot Area: No lot shall be reduced in area so that the yards or other open spaces shall be less than required by this title.
D. Vacant Through And Corner Lots:
1. On a vacant through or corner lot, either of the lot lines abutting a street may be established as the front lot line; except, that where two (2) or more
through lots are contiguous and a front lot line has been duly established by the construction of a building on one lot, the same street lot line shall
serve as the front lot line of all such contiguous lots.
2. On a through lot, a front yard shall be provided along any lot line abutting a street.
E. Corner Side Yards On Lots Of Record: If a corner lot that is a lot of record as of the effective date hereof has insufficient width to meet the requirement
for the corner side yard and still provide thirty two feet (32') of width for the building and the other side yard, then the corner side yard may be reduced
to not less than thirty percent (30%) of the lot width.
F. Conformity With Existing Front Yards: Where lots comprising fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two (2)
intersecting streets are developed with principal use structures, the average depth of the actual front yards thereof shall establish the required front
yard depth for the remainder of that frontage.
G. Through Lots With Structures: On a through lot, accessory structures shall be permitted in the front yard at the rear of the dwelling unit, provided a
fence is installed. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-4-8: FENCES:
The following general provisions shall apply to all fences erected, constructed, or installed after the effective date hereof:
Projection Or
Accessory Use
All Yards
Rear Yards
Interior Side Yard
Corner Side Yards
Courtyards
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 447/618
A. Application Of Provisions: Except as otherwise provided herein, all provisions in this section governing fences shall also apply to walls, screening,
hedges, or other densely growing shrubbery, and retaining walls where they extend above ground level.
B. Permit Required: No permanent or temporary fence shall be erected, constructed, or installed without first having been issued a fence permit by the
zoning administrator. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
C. Permitted Material:
1. Districts Other Than I District:
a. No fence or wall is permitted that is electrified or that contains broken glass, barbed wire, or other substances reasonably calculated to do bodily
harm. The following types of material shall be permitted for fences located in all but the I district:
(1) Chainlink, no slats (permitted in rear and interior side yards only).
(2) Masonry or stucco wall.
(3) Wood (no plywood).
(4) Wrought iron.
(5) Decorative PVC.
b. Barbed wire shall be permitted as fencing material only in connection with public safety, public works service and/or municipal sites where the
protection of the public interest is served. (Ord. 2001-25, 3-15-2001)
2. I District: The following types of fence materials shall be permitted in the I district:
a. Chainlink (permitted in rear and interior side yards only).
b. Masonry or stucco wall.
c. Decorative PVC.
d. Unfinished concrete or cinder block walls.
e. Wood (no plywood).
f. Wrought iron.
D. Maximum Height And Thickness:
1. Height:
Maximum Fence
Height In Feet
Solid Fence Open Fence
Within vision clearance triangle 2.5 3.5
Outside vision clearance triangle:
In industrial districts 9 9
In other districts:
In front of principal building1 2 2
In front or corner side yard 63 44
In interior side yard 6 6
In rear yard 6 6
Notes:
1. Determined by orientation of the building and not by legal front yard.
2. No fence or wall permitted, except hedges with a fence height of 2.5 feet or less and ornamental fences, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title
as fences, ornamental, with a fence height of 3.5 feet or less.
3. Not to exceed a distance of 10 feet from an extension of the building line between such building and the lot line; except, on a through lot, a 6
foot fence is permitted.
4. Open fences greater than 4 feet in height shall comply with regulations for solid fences. On a through lot, a 6 foot fence shall be permitted on the
property line at the rear of the dwelling unit.
2. Thickness: No fence, wall, or hedge shall be so thick as to inhibit passage between a lot line and any structure on the same lot.
E. Location: The location of fences shall be as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 448/618
1. Prohibitions: No fence shall be constructed or installed so as to constitute a traffic or safety hazard.
2. Districts Other Than I District: Fences in districts other than the I district shall be permitted in any rear or interior side yard.
3. I District: Fences in the I district shall be permitted in any yard.
F. Orientation: All fences, required or otherwise, shall have their finished face directed toward residence property or streets, where a residence property is
adjacent to or across from the subject site. However, the unfinished face may be oriented toward an alley.
G. Protective Netting: Any lot that immediately abuts and adjoins a golf course may construct and maintain protective netting and posts in accordance with
the following regulations:
1. Protective netting shall not be installed prior to March 1 of each year and shall be removed no later than December 15 of each year.
2. Protective netting and posts may be installed along rear lot lines and along interior side lot lines, but shall not extend past the front yard building
setback line on an interior lot, or past the corner side yard setback on a corner lot. Netting and posts shall not be permitted to be attached to the front
or rear of the dwelling across the side yard.
3. Protective netting and posts shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height above grade level.
4. Protective netting attached to temporary or permanent posts shall be either plastic or nylon cloth material. No chainlink, chicken wire, or other such
fencing materials shall be permitted.
5. No posts or protective netting shall be installed without first obtaining a building permit. Posts and protective netting installed prior to the effective
date hereof shall be brought into compliance with the regulations of this subsection within three (3) years after said effective date.
H. Maintenance Required: All fences, walls, and other barriers shall be maintained in good, structurally sound repair.
I. Nonconforming Fences: All fences legally existing on the effective date hereof that do not conform to the regulations of this section may remain and be
repaired as a permitted legal nonconforming use pursuant to the provisions of chapter 7 of this title.
J. Exemptions: The regulations herein shall not apply to chainlink fences erected on public recreation areas or school grounds. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
K. Stormwater Drainage: All closed fences shall be a minimum of one inch (1") above grade in order to allow for adequate drainage of stormwater. Fences
shall not block drainage of stormwater. (Ord. 2018-100, 12-13-2018)
11-4-9: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Subject to the limitations of this section, any home occupation that is customarily incidental to the principal use of a building as a dwelling shall be
permitted in any dwelling unit.
A. Definition: A "home occupation" is a business, profession, occupation, or trade that:
1. Is conducted for gain or support by a full time occupant of a dwelling unit; and
2. Is incidental and secondary to the use of such dwelling unit for residential purposes; and
3. Does not change the essential residential character of such dwelling unit.
B. Use Limitations:
1. Employee Limitations:
a. The operator of every home occupation shall be domiciled in the dwelling unit where such occupation is conducted.
b. No employee who is not domiciled in the dwelling unit where a home occupation is conducted shall be present in connection with, or otherwise
participate in the operation of, a home occupation at any time. For the purposes of this subsection B1b, the term employee shall not include
persons domiciled in the dwelling unit where such home occupation is conducted. This limitation on the number of employees shall not apply to
employees who do not work at the dwelling unit devoted to such home occupation.
2. Structural Limitations:
a. No alteration of any kind shall be made to the dwelling unit where a home occupation is conducted that would change its residence character as a
dwelling unit, including the enlargement of public utility services beyond that customarily required for residence use.
b. No separate entrance shall be provided in connection with the conduct of any home occupation.
3. Operational Limitations:
a. Every home occupation shall be conducted wholly within a principal dwelling unit or permitted accessory structure; provided, however, that this
subsection B3a shall not apply to a daycare home operated as a home occupation.
b. No more than a total of three hundred (300) square feet of floor area (exclusive of garage floor area devoted to permissible parking of vehicles
used in connection with the home occupation) of any dwelling unit or any permitted accessory structure shall be specially designed, arranged, or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 449/618
set apart for the conduct of a home occupation; provided, however, that this subsection B3b shall not apply to a daycare home operated as a home
occupation.
c. No stock in trade shall be displayed or sold on the premises of any home occupation.
d. No routine attendance of patients, clients, subcontractors, or employees associated with any home occupation shall be allowed at the premises of
the home occupation; except, that attendance of up to eight (8) children at any one time may be allowed at a daycare home operated as a home
occupation, and that the attendance of up to four (4) persons at any one time may be allowed for the purpose of receiving private instruction in any
subject or skill. "Routine attendance" means that the conduct of the home occupation requires nondomiciled persons to visit the premises of the
home occupation as part of the regular conduct of the occupation, without regard to the number, frequency, or duration of such visits.
e. No mechanical, electrical, or other equipment that produces noise, electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare, emissions, odor, or
radiation outside the dwelling unit or any permitted accessory structure that is greater or more frequent than that typical of equipment used in
connection with residence occupancy shall be used in connection with any home occupation.
f. No outdoor storage shall be allowed in connection with any home occupation.
g. No refuse in excess of the amount allowable for regular residence pick up shall be generated by any home occupation.
h. Commercial vehicles used in connection with any home occupation shall be subject to the requirements of section 11-4-11 of this chapter.
4. Signage; Changes In Appearance Of Premises: There shall be no visible evidence of the conduct of such occupation other than one nonilluminated
sign, one square foot in area or less, mounted flat against the wall of the principal building, and there shall be no change in the outside appearance
of the premises.
5. Traffic Limitations: No home occupation shall generate more vehicular or pedestrian traffic than is typical of residences in the area.
6. Nuisance Causing Activities: In addition to the foregoing specific limitations, no home occupation shall cause or create any nuisance, or cause or
create any substantial or undue adverse impact on any adjacent property or the character of the area, or threaten the public health, safety or general
welfare, or be noxious, offensive, or hazardous.
7. Licensing Requirements: Every home occupation shall be subject to applicable business licensing and inspection requirements, and shall comply
with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including, without limitation, obtaining, maintaining, and complying with regulations
applicable to any required federal, state, or local license or permit.
8. Certificate Of Zoning Compliance: A certificate of zoning compliance shall be obtained for every home occupation.
9. Prohibited Occupations: Home occupations shall not include:
a. Any wholesale or retail business that involves the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises.
b. Any manufacturing or processing operation.
c. Any repair or service establishment.
d. A barbershop or beauty parlor.
e. A stable or kennel.
f. A restaurant.
g. A clinic or hospital.
h. A mortuary.
i. A child daycare center.
j. A private club.
k. The renting of trailers.
l. A tourist home. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
m. Firearm sales, except for federally licensed firearms dealers subject to compliance with subsection B10 of this section. (Ord. 2007-46, 6-21-2007)
n. Ticket sales outlet.
o. Any activity that creates noise, fumes, odor, dust, electrical interference, or pedestrian or vehicular traffic that is more than normal for the area in
which it is located. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
10. Firearms And Ammunition:
a. All persons engaging in home occupation activities for which a federal firearms license is required shall store firearms in locked cases or firearms
safes. No open display is permitted.
b. Firearms ammunition shall only be stored in locked, fireproof cases.
c. In addition, no more than one customer is permitted at the residence at one time.
d. Any firearms sold and delivered to a customer must be secured with an approved trigger lock or gunlock prior to leaving the residence. (Ord. 2007-
46, 6-21-2007)
11-4-10: SPECIAL CONDITIONS FOR SMALL COMMUNITY RESIDENCES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 450/618
A. Administrative Occupancy Permit And Certificate Of Occupancy Required: The sponsoring agency must obtain a certificate of occupancy prior to
establishing a community residence. No dwelling unit shall be occupied as a community residence until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by
the zoning administrator. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Ineligibility For Certificate: No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a community residence unless:
1. The community residence is located at least one thousand feet (1,000') from any existing community residence, as measured from lot line to lot line;
2. The applicant demonstrates that it has either obtained or is eligible for state or local licensing or certification to operate the proposed community
residence, or that the proposed community residence is licensed or certified or eligible for licensing or certification; and
3. There is compliance by the proposed community residence with all other applicable village codes including code requirements for minimum bedroom
space or living space per occupant.
C. Other Required Licenses And Permits: No certificate of occupancy shall be issued pursuant to this section until the applicant has obtained the state or
local license or certification to operate the proposed community residence for which it is eligible.
D. Nontransferability Of Certificate: A certificate of occupancy is not transferable to another operator or to another location. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
E. Revocation Of Certificate: The zoning administrator may revoke a certificate of occupancy for a community residence if its license or certification, or the
operator's license or certification to operate community residence, is revoked. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-4-11: STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES:
A. Recreational Vehicles: A single "recreational vehicle", as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, may be parked or stored on a lot in a residence district;
provided, that:
1. It is at no time occupied for living or sleeping purposes except as may be allowed by the village on a temporary basis;
2. It is not connected to natural gas, water, or sanitary sewer service;
3. It is stored in its collapsed position if it is a vehicle of the collapsible type not stored in a garage;
4. It is parked or stored in a location determined by the following:
a. In a garage or carport, where one exists on the premises large enough to accommodate the vehicle;
b. Otherwise, in the driveway to the rear of the principal building line that is parallel or most nearly parallel to the street to which the driveway has
access, where there is a driveway extending to the rear of this line;
c. Otherwise, in the driveway ahead of said building line but not encroaching upon any public sidewalk.
B. Trucks: Trucks that may be parked or stored in a residence district, other than in a completely enclosed garage, shall be limited to trucks that are, or are
used in connection with, recreational vehicles and pickup trucks or vans used predominantly for family, recreational, or vanpooling or ridesharing use.
C. Commercial Vehicles: No commercial vehicle, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title as "vehicle, commercial", may be parked or stored in a residence
district other than in a completely enclosed garage, except for loading or unloading of household belongings between six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight for the purpose of moving a personal residence or for up to thirty (30) minutes for deliveries or service calls. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-
1999)
11-4-12: TEMPORARY USES:
A. Definition: A "temporary use" is a use that:
1. Is established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time; and
2. Does not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
B. Permit Requirements:
1. Permit Required; Exemptions:
a. Temporary uses of land may be permitted in any zoning district by the issuance by the zoning administrator of a temporary use permit, subject to
the provisions of this section.
b. No temporary use shall be established or maintained unless a permit evidencing the compliance of such use with the provisions of this title shall
have first been issued; provided, however, that permitted temporary uses of public owned or leased buildings and property shall be exempt from
this requirement.
2. Application For Permit: An application for a temporary use permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator. The application shall include:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 451/618
b. The location and purpose of the temporary use requested and the requested starting and ending dates.
c. The written approval of the ownership or management of the shopping center, if such use is to be conducted within a shopping center.
d. Evidence or assurances that there has been or will be compliance with the conditions and requirements of this title.
3. Issuance Of Permit: Upon receipt of a complete and accurate application and upon determining that there is evidence of compliance with the
conditions and requirements set forth in this title, the zoning administrator shall issue a temporary use permit.
4. Denial Of Permit: Such a permit may be denied if the zoning administrator determines that the applicant has failed to comply with the terms or
conditions of any previously issued zoning certificate for a temporary use or that the permanent use of the subject property fails to comply in all
respects with the provisions of all village ordinances regulating the development, use, and maintenance of the property. Such a certificate shall be
denied if the zoning administrator determines that the public health, safety, or welfare would be, or may reasonably be expected to be, impaired by
the issuance thereof.
5. Conditions On Permit:
a. Such permit shall be limited to the uses and time periods provided below and shall set forth any applicable conditions provided in this title.
b. Such a permit may be conditioned upon such special requirements as the zoning administrator may determine are necessary to achieve the
purposes of this title and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
6. Display Of Permit: The permittee shall display the permit within plain view on the premises of the temporary use for the duration of the use.
7. Revocation Of Permit: Such a permit shall be revoked if any of the standards and conditions imposed pursuant to this section are violated.
C. Permitted Temporary Uses: Subject to the specific regulations and time limits that follow and to the other applicable regulations of the district in which
the use is permitted, the following temporary uses and no others are permitted in the zoning districts herein specified:
1. Indoor and outdoor art and craft, rummage and plant shows; car shows, exhibits and sales: In any commercial, business park or public and
institutional buildings district; provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific prior approval of the zoning administrator on the basis of
the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, and traffic access and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. Every such
show, exhibit or sale shall be limited to a period not to exceed three (3) days. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
2. Christmas tree sales: In any commercial district accessory to a permitted or conditional use; and when conducted by a not for profit religious,
philanthropic, or civic group or organization on property owned or leased by such group or organization, in a residence or public and institutional
buildings district; provided, however, any such use in a residence or public and institutional buildings district shall not exceed thirty (30) days and
shall require the specific prior approval of the zoning administrator on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, and traffic
access and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. Display of Christmas trees need not comply with the yard requirements of this
title; except, that no tree shall be displayed within the "vision clearance triangle" defined in section 11-2-2 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd.
2011 Code)
3. Contractors' offices and equipment sheds: In any district when accessory to a construction project. No such use shall contain any sleeping or
cooking accommodations. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed the duration of the active construction phase of such project.
4. Real estate offices, including model units: In any district when accessory to a new development. No such use shall contain any sleeping or cooking
accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit. Such use shall be limited to the period of the active selling or leasing of units or space in
such development and to activities related to the development in which such office is located. No such office shall be used as the general office or
headquarters of any firm. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
5. Carnivals and circuses:
a. In any nonresidence district or residence or public and institutional buildings district on school, church or park property, but only when sponsored
by a not for profit religious, philanthropic, or civic group or organization; provided, however, that any such use shall require the specific prior
approval of the zoning administrator on the basis of the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, and traffic access and the absence of
undue adverse impact on other properties. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed one week. Such use need not comply with the yard
requirements of this title; except, that structures or equipment that might block the view of operators of motor vehicles on any public or private
street shall not be located within the "vision clearance triangle" defined in section 11-2-2 of this title. Such use need not comply with the maximum
height requirements of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
b. The concessionaire responsible for the operation of any such carnival or circus shall:
(1) Submit, in advance of the event date, a site layout displaying adequate ingress and egress routes for emergency vehicles and no dead end
aisles; and
(2) Provide fire extinguishers of a type and at site locations approved by the zoning administrator; and
(3) Provide and service refuse containers in the number and locations required by the zoning administrator; and
(4) Provide for a thorough cleanup of the site upon termination of the event; and
(5) Upon written notice from the zoning administrator, terminate the use of any amusement device or structure found by the zoning administrator to
pose a threat to the public safety.
6. Tents: In any district, in connection with any permitted, accessory, temporary, or conditional use. No tent shall be allowed to remain for a period of
more than sixty (60) days. Unless waived in writing by the zoning administrator, every tent shall comply with the time limits, bulk, space, and yard
requirements applicable to accessory uses pursuant to sections 11-4-6 and 11-4-7 of this chapter.
7. Civic uses of public property: In a public and institutional buildings district, any civic use of any public building or property when authorized by the
governmental agency owning or controlling such property; provided, however, that no such use shall impose an undue adverse effect on neighboring
streets or property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 452/618
8. Sales of overstock, seconds and similar goods in districts where not a permitted use: In the I and BP districts when accessory to any use permitted
or specially permitted in such district, but only in compliance with the following conditions:
a. Existing Inventory Only: No products shall be sold except such products as are manufactured, warehoused or distributed in the normal course of
business of the principal use operated on the zoning lot in question. No products shall be brought in from other sources for purposes of the
temporary sale.
b. No Outdoor Sales: Any area in which such a temporary retail use takes place, including the sale and display of products, shall be fully enclosed.
c. Number And Duration Of Sales Limited: Not more than three (3) such temporary uses shall be conducted on the same premises in any calendar
year, or more than one such sale in any calendar quarter. In each calendar quarter, one such sale may be for a period of not more than three (3)
successive days, including Saturday and Sunday, e.g., Friday, Saturday, and Sunday or Saturday, Sunday and Monday.
9. Display and sale of farm, garden or floral commodities: In any commercial district; provided, however, that such temporary uses are limited to ninety
(90) days' duration, provides adequate ingress and egress from adjoining roadways and provides one off street parking space per seventy five (75)
square feet of display area, with a minimum of three (3) spaces.
10. Shopping center sidewalk sales: In any commercial district; provided, however, that such sales do not exceed a cumulative total of ten (10) days
per calendar year, are not held more than twice a year, and do not cover an area exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the width of any sidewalk within the
center.
11. Sidewalk and outdoor restaurants: In any commercial district as an accessory use to a restaurant as a principal use; provided, however, that any
such restaurant serving alcoholic beverages shall require a conditional use permit pursuant to chapter 3, article C of this title; and provided further,
that any such restaurant serving alcoholic beverages shall have a six foot (6') fence surrounding the outdoor area, and that no ingress shall be
permitted except through the principal use.
D. Bulk, Space And Yard Regulations: Except as expressly provided otherwise, every temporary use shall comply with the bulk, yard, and space
regulations applicable in the district in which such temporary use is located.
E. Use Limitations:
1. General Limitations: No temporary use shall be permitted in any district if it would have a significant negative impact, including aesthetic impact, on
any adjacent property or on the area as a whole in which it is located.
2. Hours And Days Of Operation: No temporary use shall be operated during any hours or on any days of the week except such as are designated by
the zoning administrator in the permit required by subsection B of this section, on the basis of the nature of the temporary use and the character of
the surrounding area.
3. Public Safety: No temporary use shall be permitted unless the village fire and police departments shall have first certified that such use will result in
no additional, undue on site or off site threat to public safety. No temporary use shall be operated except in accordance with such restrictions and
conditions as said departments may require in connection with such certification. If required by the zoning administrator, the operator of the
temporary use shall employ a fire watch team and appropriate security personnel.
4. Traffic: No temporary use shall be permitted if additional vehicular traffic reasonably expected to be generated by such temporary use would have
undue detrimental effects on surrounding streets and uses.
5. Conflicts With Other Temporary Uses: No temporary use shall be permitted if such use would conflict with another previously authorized temporary
use.
6. Temporary Signs: See section 11-6-10 of this title.
7. Parking: Before approving any temporary use, the zoning administrator shall make an assessment of the total number of off street parking spaces
that will be reasonably required in connection with the proposed temporary use, on the basis of the particular use, its intensity, and the availability of
other parking facilities in the area, and shall approve such temporary use only if such off street parking is provided. No temporary use shall be
authorized that would, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, unreasonably reduce the amount of off street parking spaces available for use in
connection with permanent uses located on the zoning lot in question.
8. Additional Conditions: Every temporary use shall, in addition, comply with, and the zoning administrator may impose, such other conditions as may
reasonably be necessary to achieve the purposes of this title or to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-4-13: GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS:
The following provisions apply in all commercial, office, business park and industrial districts except where this title provides otherwise:
A. Within Enclosed Buildings: All business, service storage, merchandise, display and, where permitted, repair and processing shall be conducted wholly
within enclosed buildings except for off street parking, off street loading, and open sales lots or outside storage in districts where these uses are
permitted.
B. Retail Sales Of New Merchandise: Goods sold at retail shall consist primarily of new merchandise, and any goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises unless otherwise permitted herein.
C. Performance Standards: All uses in commercial and office districts shall comply with the performance standards applicable to the BP business park
district.
D. Outdoor Sales And Storage:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 453/618
1. Where open sales lots are permitted, they shall be provided with a permanent, durable, and dustless surface and shall be drained to dispose of all
surface water.
2. Outdoor storage, where permitted, shall be screened to conceal materials stored from adjacent properties and adjacent thoroughfares. (Ord. 99-02,
1-7-1999)
11-4-14: PUBLIC UTILITY AND MUNICIPAL USES:
A. Permitted Uses:
1. The following public utility uses and municipal uses are permitted in any zoning district: poles, towers, tunnels, conduits, wires, cables, vaults,
laterals, pipes, mains, drains, valves, hydrants, or any similar distributing equipment; fire alarm or police call boxes; traffic signals; and telephone
booths and pay telephones. Aboveground fuel storage tanks shall be a permitted use in all districts only in conjunction with municipal public utility
uses as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, as follows: (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
Closed Cup Flashpoint In Degrees Fahrenheit Maximum Gallons Aboveground
Under 24 1,000
24 to 104 1,000
105 to 186 1,000
Over 186 1,000
Total all flammable liquids 1,000
2. Storage of unfinished products in original sealed containers of sixty (60) gallons or less is exempt from the above standards.
B. Conditional Uses: Buildings and structures not included in the Illinois utility exemption and not specifically permitted as a matter of right in the various
zones pertaining to water, sewerage, gas, telephone and electric utilities, and police, fire, radio and television stations, including broadcasting
antennas, shall be conditional uses subject to the following requirements:
1. Lot Area And Location: The required lot area and location shall be specified as part of the conditional use permit and shall be determined in relation
to the proposed use, the intensity of such use, and the effects of such use upon the environment.
2. Fencing Or Screening: If findings indicate that a hazard may result or that interference with the development or use and enjoyment of surrounding
properties may ensue, fencing or screening with a densely planted hedge or other shielding material may be required in a manner consistent with
such findings. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-4-15: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERS; REFUSE AND STORAGE AREAS:
A. Purposes: The purposes of the requirements in this section are to provide for appropriate landscaping of building sites as well as the screening of
parking and other outdoor areas in order to create and convey an aesthetically pleasing environment that will:
1. Protect residential environments from effects of more intensive adjacent uses;
2. Protect users of parking areas from excessive wind, glare, and temperature extremes;
3. Reduce the adverse effects on public streets and adjacent properties of noise, blowing dust and debris, and motor vehicle headlight glare;
4. Discourage unsafe access to and circulation within off street parking areas; and
5. Contribute to improved community appearance and preservation and enhancement of property values.
B. Application Of Provisions:
1. All projects having landscape requirements under this title shall be required to submit a landscape plan and meet the landscaping requirements of
this section, except for single-family detached and single-family attached lots.
2. Existing conditions on developed sites which are not in conformance with the requirements of this section that are otherwise lawful on the effective
date hereof may be continued as a matter of right. If there is any lawful expansion of a nonconforming use, the submission of a landscape plan, as
determined by the zoning administrator, shall be required, which plan shall be based on the zoning districts within which such uses appear.
C. Approval Process: Landscape plans for the planting required for this section shall be submitted to the village for review by, and subject to the approval
of, the zoning administrator. The following elements shall be included in all landscaping plans:
1. Landscape Plan Elements:
a. Title block including the name and street address of the project, designer's name, scale of the plan (no smaller than 1 inch = 50 feet for plans with
trees only; and no smaller than 1 inch = 20 feet for plans with shrubs and smaller plants), north arrow and date of the plan.
b. Property lines.
c. Name, location, right of way and paving widths of all abutting streets.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 454/618
d. Note zoning and use of all abutting properties; location of buildings on abutting properties within two hundred feet (200') of property lines.
e. Natural features such as ponds, lakes and streams; delineation of 100-year floodplain and wetland boundaries, if applicable.
f. Existing and proposed stormwater management ponds and areas.
g. Required landscaped yard widths.
h. Location, height, dimensions, and use of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures, including parking lots, sidewalks, and other
paved areas, fences, walls, and recreational equipment.
2. Planting Elements:
a. Location, general types and quality of existing vegetation, specimen trees and natural areas.
b. For plant preservation credits, existing trees of three inch (3") caliper and above to be saved including locations noted, condition, and a list of
species. Show on submittals the methods and details for protection of existing vegetation during construction.
c. Location and keyed labels of all proposed plants.
d. Location of all proposed areas to be seeded and/or sodded.
e. Plant list or schedule to include key symbols, quantity, correct botanical and common names, size, spacing and condition of all proposed plants.
f. Location and description of other landscape improvements, such as earth berms, screens, sculptures, fountains, street furniture, signs, lighting and
paved areas.
g. General and specific notes to indicate or explain the design and construction procedures to be used and compliance with ordinance requirements.
D. Landscaping Materials:
1. Varieties of living landscape materials used shall be healthy, hardy, and drought resistant; be suitable for climate and environmental influences on
the site, such as exposure to sun, wind, water, heat, automobile exhaust fumes, and road salt; and be compatible with the slope of the site, with
existing vegetation to be preserved, and with utilities above or below ground level. Where appropriate, landscape materials used shall be protected
from damage from pedestrian or vehicular traffic by tree grates, pavers, or other measures.
2. IDOT "General Requirements For Landscape Operations On State Highway Right-Of-Way In Urban Areas" and IDOT "Location Standards For Plant
Material On The Right-Of-Way" should be observed for village collector roadways, unless waived by the zoning administrator. Salt tolerance of plant
species shall be evaluated using the most recent approved IDOT list.
3. All plants shall conform to the "American Standards For Nursery Stock", latest edition, and shall be installed according to the current standards of the
American Association Of Nurserymen.
4. Native plant materials and landscapes are encouraged but are not mandated.
5. In addition to the approved list below, hardy trees providing year round interest and color, and trees providing food and habitat for native and
migrating birds and other animals, as approved by the zoning administrator, shall be allowed; trees which have shallow destructive root systems or
which create unacceptable quantities of vegetative debris shall not be approved when located near streets, drives or parking lots.
a. Shade Trees:
Botanic Name Common Name
Acer rubrum Red maple1
Acer saccharum "green mountain" Green mountain sugar maple
Carpinus caroliniana American hornbeam
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry1
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsuratree
Fraxinus pennsylvanica Green ash1 (seedless)
Fraxinus americana "autumn purple" Autumn purple white ash
Fraxinus quadrangulata Blue ash
Ginkgo biloba (male) Ginkgo (male)
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Thornless honey locust1
Gymnocladus dioica Kentucky coffeetree
Pyres calleryana Gallery pear1
Quercus bicolor Swamp white oak
Quercus rubra Red oak
Quercus macrocarpa Bur oak
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 455/618
Quercus imbricaria Shingle oak
Tilia cordata Littleleaf linden1
Tilia x "redmond" Redmond linden
Tilia tomentosa Silver linden
Tilia x euchlora Crimean linden1
Note:
1. Includes cultivars.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
b. Evergreens:
Botanic Name Common Name
Abies concolor White fir
Picea pungens Colorado spruce
Pines flexilis Limber pine
Pines strobes White pine
Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglas fir
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
c. Ornamental Trees:
Botanic Name Common Name
Cercis canadensis Redbud
Crataegus crusgalli "inermis" Thornless cockspur
Crataegus viridis "winter king" Winter king hawthorn
Malus floribunda Japanese flowering crabapple
Malus "prairie fire" Prairie fire crabapple
Malus "profusion" Profusion crabapple
Malus "snowdrift" Snowdrift crabapple
Malus sargentii Sargent crabapple
6. The following are prohibited as street trees on public properties or when located near drives or parking areas:
Botanic Name Common Name
Acer negundo Box elder
Acer platanoides Norway maple
Acer saccharinum Silver maple
Ailanthus altissima Tree of heaven
Betula spp. Birch (except river birch)
Juglans nigra Black walnut
Catalpa speciosa Catalpa
Elaeagnus spp. Russian olive
Ginkgo biloba (female) Ginkgo (female)
Maclura pomifera Osage orange
Morns spp. Mulberry
Populus spp. Cottonwood
Poplar
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 456/618
Aspen
Rhamnus cathartics Buckthorn
Salix spp. Willow
Ulmus parvifolia Chinese elm
7. a. Deciduous shade and street trees shall be fully branched and have a minimum caliper of three inches (3") for nonresidential and two and one-half
inches (21/2") for residential development, measured six inches (6") above ground level. Specimens shall be properly pruned to maintain a natural
form.
b. Ornamental trees shall be fully branched and have a minimum caliper of two inches (2") for nonresidential and one and one-half inches (11/2") for
residential development, measured six inches (6") above ground level. Specimens shall be properly pruned to maintain a natural form and effective
screening.
c. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height and fully branched to the ground.
d. Tall shrubs shall be supplied in five (5) gallon or larger containers, or balled and burlapped. Plants shall measure at least thirty six inches (36") in
height and shall be fully branched to the ground. Shrubs shall be properly pruned to maintain effective screening.
e. Low shrubs shall be supplied in two (2) gallon or larger containers for residential development or five (5) gallon or larger containers for
nonresidential development. Plants shall measure at least eighteen inches (18") in height or spread for residential development and at least twenty
four inches (24") in height or spread for nonresidential development.
f. Ground cover plants shall be planted so that an effective covering is obtained within two (2) growing seasons.
8. All reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve the existing trees on each building site, consistent with the approved tree list and similar species
which would be an asset to the site.
E. General Requirements:
1. Except for accessory uses expressly permitted to be located in required yards, all yards and open space between and about structures and off street
parking and loading areas and lots shall be landscaped and kept free of accumulations of garbage, trash, refuse, debris and other unsightly or
nuisance creating materials.
2. All landscaping shall be continually maintained by the owner or other person responsible for maintenance of the premises, and all planting areas
shall be kept free of accumulations of garbage, trash, refuse, debris and other unsightly or nuisance creating materials until developed.
3. Berms shall be not less than two feet (2') in height nor greater than six feet (6') in height, with heights depending on the finished grades of the
abutting properties in relationship to any proposed development.
F. Street, Easement And Buffer Strip Plantings For Nonresidential Developments: The standards are expressed in terms of shade trees required per linear
foot of roadway, easement, or buffer strip, and include the full width of each. For determining numbers of conifers and ornamentals applicable to the
standard, a conifer at least six feet (6') in height shall equal a shade tree, and two (2) ornamentals as specified above shall equal a shade tree. It is
recommended that trees be grouped in clusters.
1. Major Entry:
a. Parkways: One shade tree each side per forty (40) linear feet of roadway.
b. Median: Two (2) shade trees per forty (40) linear feet of median length, plus one tree for each twenty five (25) linear feet of median where the
median is wider than thirty feet (30').
2. Frontage Road:
a. Primary screening by a berm not less than two feet (2') in height nor greater than six feet (6') in height, with slopes not exceeding three to one
(3:1).
b. Provide one shade tree per forty (40) linear feet of frontage.
3. Front Yards (Parking Setbacks); Nonresidential Districts: The front yard and any yard abutting a street shall be attractively landscaped except where
driveways for ingress or egress are located.
4. Building Site Plantings: Each building shall include a minimum of one shade tree in frontage areas for each fifty (50) linear feet of building site
frontage. It is recommended that trees be grouped in clusters.
5. Residential Transition Yards:
a. Primary screening by a berm not less than two feet (2') in height nor greater than six feet (6') in height, with heights depending on the finished
grades of the abutting residential properties in relationship to the proposed building height and finished grades of the new development.
b. Provide one shade tree per forty (40) linear feet of residentially zoned or used property abutting the subject property.
6. Parking Lot Screening:
a. Every parking lot abutting property zoned in any residential district shall, to the extent hereinafter specified, be buffered and screened by a
perimeter landscaped open space having a width of at least ten feet (10') or the width of the required yard, whichever is less.
b. The landscaping and screening treatment of such space shall be so designed and maintained to screen parked cars and shall be bermed so as to
partially conceal parked cars from view of the street or adjacent property except where the size or configuration of the existing or proposed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 457/618
topography of the lot makes this infeasible or unnecessary or where erosion, drainage, or maintenance problems might result.
c. The provisions of this subsection F6 shall apply to parking lots developed prior to the effective date hereof, but only to the extent that such parking
lots have, on said effective date, unpaved areas abutting them in which landscaping and screening may be installed.
7. Parking Lot Interior Landscaping:
a. Every parking lot shall contain at least one tree for each twenty four (24) parking spaces constructed after the effective date hereof. Such trees
may be provided by the preservation of existing trees or the planting of new trees. Each tree shall be surrounded by a landscaped area of at least
one hundred twenty (120) square feet. No existing or new tree located more than five feet (5') outside the perimeter of the paved parking area shall
be counted in meeting the requirements of this subsection. All islands in excess of fifty (50) square feet, created curbs or other traffic flow
regulators shall be landscaped. All internal landscaped islands shall be protected with curbing.
b. No shrub shall be planted closer than two feet (2') from any curb, and no tree shall be planted closer than three feet (3') from any curb.
c. Low shrubs planted in parking lot islands shall be maintained at a height not to exceed three feet (3') in order to keep sightlines clear.
d. In industrial districts, a minimum of five percent (5%) of the parking area shall be devoted to landscaping, and in all other nonresidential districts, a
minimum of ten percent (10%) shall be devoted to landscaping.
8. Ground Cover In Landscaped Buffer Strips: Grass or other ground cover shall be planted over all landscaped strips including berms, except in areas
planted in flowers, shrubs, or trees, so as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within three (3) months after planting.
Nonliving landscaping materials such as sand, stone, rocks, or barks may be substituted for living cover over a maximum of thirty percent (30%) of
the landscaped area.
9. General Requirements:
a. The owner, occupant, and tenant, and the respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance, repair,
and replacement of all landscaping and screening so as to preserve at least the same quantity and quality as initially approved.
b. All parking island strips and parking screening strips shall be separated on all sides from the parking surface by curbing.
c. Plant materials, including deciduous trees and evergreen trees, shall not cause a hazard. Landscape plant material overhanging walks, pedestrian
or bicycle paths and seating areas shall be pruned to a minimum height of eight feet (8'), and to a minimum height of twelve feet (12') over streets
and highways and above parking lot aisles and spaces.
d. Plantings shall conform with the requirements of the "vision clearance triangle" as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title.
G. Alternative Compliance: Certain project conditions may justify approval of alternative methods of compliance within the requirements of this section.
Conditions may arise where normal compliance is impractical or impossible or where maximum achievement of the village objectives can only be
obtained through alternative compliance.
1. Requests for alternative compliance will be considered for any application to which the requirements of this title apply when one or more of the
following conditions are present:
a. Topography, soil, vegetation or other site conditions are such that full compliance is impossible or impractical; or improved environmental quality
would result from the alternative compliance.
b. Space limitations, unusually shaped lots or prevailing design practices in the surrounding neighborhood may justify alternative compliance for infill
sites and for improvements or redevelopment in older developed areas.
c. A change of use on an existing site increases the screening required to more than is feasible to provide.
d. Safety considerations make alternative compliance necessary.
2. Requests for alternative compliance shall be accompanied by sufficient explanation and justification, written and graphic, to allow appropriate
evaluation and decision.
3. A proposed alternative compliance measure must be equal to or better than normal compliance in terms of quality, durability, hardiness and ability to
meet the landscape standards of this title.
4. Alternative compliance shall be limited to the specific project under consideration and shall not establish precedents for acceptance in other cases.
H. Refuse Containers:
1. Screening: All refuse containers shall be enclosed by a screening fence, wall or densely planted evergreen hedge of a height sufficient to screen
such containers or storage areas from view from adjoining properties and public or private streets.
2. Location: No refuse containers shall be located between any principal structure and either its front or corner side lot line.
3. Compliance With Village Regulations: Refuse enclosures, containers, and pallet storage must comply with this code.
4. Exemptions:
a. The requirements of subsection H1 of this section shall not apply to standard receptacles permitted for use by single-family dwellings or to
receptacles accessory to schools.
b. None of the requirements of this subsection shall apply to receptacles placed and maintained for use by the general public to avoid littering or to
receptacles temporarily placed on construction sites for the purpose of collecting construction debris.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 458/618
I. Storage Areas: Storage, service, maintenance, and loading areas must be constructed, maintained, and used in accordance with the following
conditions:
1. No materials, supplies, or equipment shall be stored upon a site, except inside a closed building or pursuant to a conditional use permit.
2. All public utility and similar equipment shall be screened from view from access streets and adjacent properties by means of a fence, berm, wall or
dense opaque landscaping materials.
3. Trucks and semitrailers shall not be parked or stored out of doors overnight, in the parking lot or on the premises, except within an enclosed loading
dock or garage or within a walled and gated sight screen enclosure, open to the sky, constructed of the same masonry exterior materials as the
principal building and equal in height to the height of the first floor of the principal building. However, temporary parking overnight, not to exceed a
forty eight (48) hour time period, may be permitted for delivery vehicles which arrive after normal business hours. Diesel trucks shall not idle their
engines between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., except for engine warmup purposes which shall be allowed for a
period not exceeding thirty (30) minutes immediately prior to the departure of such vehicle from the premises. Refrigeration unit engines on
trucks/trailers shall not be operated between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
4. In the BP and I districts, all activities involving manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly, disassembly, repairing, cleaning, servicing and
testing shall be conducted in completely enclosed buildings. If allowed as a permitted or conditional use, the storage of materials, products, and
goods must be screened with a solid fence or wall on all lot lines with only such openings as are necessary for ingress or egress. Said fence or wall
shall be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance and shall be of such height that any materials stored within the confines of such fence cannot
be seen from any lot line or public right of way.
5. Storage of hazardous materials should require secondary containment, monitoring, development of an emergency response plan and participation in
the Illinois pollution prevention (P2) program.
J. Maintenance Of Improved Sites And Condition Of Improved Lots: Sites that are not improved or built upon shall be maintained in a clean and neat
appearance by the property owner. Weeds and brush shall be removed semiannually. The owner or occupant of any lot shall at all times keep it and the
buildings, improvements, and appurtenances thereon in a safe and clean condition and shall comply with all applicable governmental, health, fire and
safety ordinances and regulations. Trash shall be removed expeditiously. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-4-16: LIGHTING NEAR RESIDENCE DISTRICTS:
A. Guidelines; Objectives Of Properly Designed Lighting:
1. To contribute to the safe and efficient use of a development site;
2. To contribute to the site security;
3. To complement and reinforce the architecture and site design character;
4. To keep on site parking lot lighting fixtures and illumination levels consistent throughout the parking lot;
5. To prevent casting glare onto adjacent lots and streets;
6. To encourage conformity with energy saving guidelines; and
7. Architecturally, to articulate and animate the particular building design, as well as provide the required functional lighting for safety and clarity of
pedestrian movement.
B. Definitions: See section 11-2-2 of this title.
C. Standards: The following standards are required of all exterior lighting installed on sites immediately adjacent to any residence district; provided,
however, that such standards are not intended to apply to public street lighting:
1. The maximum height of a light post permitted is dependent on the amount of cutoff provided in order to protect against excessive glare and light
intruding onto adjacent residence properties.
2. When a light source has no cutoff:
a. Maximum permitted illumination equals one-fourth (0.25) foot-candle.
b. Maximum permitted height of the post equals ten feet (10').
3. When a light source has total cutoff of an angle greater than or equal to ninety degrees (90°):
a. Maximum permitted illumination equals one-half (0.50) foot-candle.
b. Maximum permitted height of the post equals fifteen feet (15').
4. When a light source has a total cutoff of light at an angle less than ninety degrees (90°) and is located so that the light source is completely shielded
from the direct view of an observer five feet (5') above the ground at the point where the cutoff angle intersects the ground:
a. Maximum permitted illumination equals one foot-candle. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
b. Maximum permitted height of the post equals twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary:
a. No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 459/618
b. Light sources shall not be located within the required side or rear yard or in a portion of front yard which includes part of the side yard as extended
adjacent to any residence district.
c. The fixture illuminant (bulb) shall not be visible from the property line adjacent to any residence district.
d. The maximum permitted illumination onto a residence lot shall not exceed one-tenth (0.1) foot-candle, except for right of way lighting.
6. Lighting levels shall be measured in foot-candles with a direct reading, portable light meter. The meter sensor shall be mounted not more than six
inches (6") above the ground line in a horizontal position. Readings shall be taken only after the cell has been exposed long enough to provide a
constant reading. Measurements shall be made after dark with the light sources in question on, then with the same sources off. The difference
between the two (2) readings shall be compared to the maximum permitted illumination. This procedure eliminates the effects of moonlight and other
ambient light.
7. At the time any exterior lighting is installed or substantially modified, an exterior lighting plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator in order to
determine whether the requirements of this section have been met.
D. Exemptions To Landscaping And Lighting Requirements: Where side or rear yard setbacks adjacent to a residence district are required and the
landscaping and lighting standards are required, but not existing, the property shall not be subject to such regulations and standards until such time as
a building permit is required. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-4-17: ARCHITECTURE FOR NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Building Exterior Wall Materials: The front exterior walls facing a street or streets the property adjoins shall be of masonry, stone, glass or architectural
precast concrete panels. The side exterior walls may be of metal; except, that the lower third or lower seven feet (7'), whichever is less, of the wall shall
be of masonry, stone, glass or architectural precast concrete panels. In no event shall concrete blocks be allowed on any exterior surface of a building;
except, that decorative concrete blocks shall be allowed upon approval of the zoning administrator.
B. Rooftop Mechanical Equipment: Except for antennas mounted on roofs pursuant to the provisions of this title, all mechanical equipment located on the
roof of any building constructed after the effective date hereof shall be fully screened by a parapet wall or other screening structure constructed of
materials compatible with the principal building facade to the height of such equipment.
C. Parking Garage Design: Every parking garage, other than garages accessory to single-family dwellings, constructed after the effective date hereof shall
be constructed of the same materials as, or materials architecturally and aesthetically compatible with, the principal building to which it is accessory.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-4-18: ADULT REGULATED USE LOCATIONS:
A. Adult regulated uses are prohibited within the area circumscribed by a circle which has a radius consisting of the following distances from the following
specified uses or zones:
1. Within, or within five hundred feet (500') of, any residence district, known as AE, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, or PIB district, or any single-family or
multiple-family residence use, except when the adult regulated use is located within an adult regulated use commercial overlay district, then such
distance shall be reduced from five hundred feet (500') to two hundred feet (200').
2. Within, or within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of, any public or private school.
3. Within, or within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of, any church or other religious facility or institution.
4. Within, or within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of, any mental health center.
5. Within, or within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of, any public library, public park or recreation area.
6. Adjacent to, or within five hundred feet (500') of, a school route.
7. Within, or within one thousand feet (1,000') of, any other adult regulated use.
B. The distances provided in this section shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of
the property parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property, right of way, or the land use district
boundary line from which the proposed land use is to be separated.
C. An adult regulated use which is established in conformity with the locational restrictions of this section shall not be made nonconforming if, subsequent
to the establishment of the adult regulated use, a residence zone, public or private school, church, religious facility, mental health center, public library,
public park, recreation area or school route is created or established within the distance limitations for an adult regulated use specified in this section.
However, if any adult regulated use is terminated or discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more subsequent to the location of a use imposing a
distance limitation on the adult regulated use, then the adult regulated use shall become a nonconforming use. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-4-19: VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE:
A. Within the "vision clearance triangle", as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, no solid fence, or any other solid obstruction, having a fence height of
over two and one-half feet (2.5'), nor any open fence with a fence height of over three and one-half feet (3.5'), shall be permitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 460/618
B. Overhanging objects shall be permitted within this triangle only if all parts thereof are higher than eight feet (8') above the level of the railroad or the
pavement of the street where the centerlines intersect.
C. Signs shall be permitted only if the sign clearance is eight feet (8') or greater. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
Chapter 5
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
11-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the requirements in this chapter is to further the appropriate provision, design, and landscaping of off street parking and loading areas that
will:
A. Provide access to land uses generating large traffic volumes in a community dependent on automobile and truck transportation.
B. Foster safe and efficient circulation of vehicles and pedestrians both on private property and on adjacent public streets.
C. Minimize nuisances in residential areas from on street parking of large numbers of cars.
D. Provide convenient parking in areas protected from wind, glare, and temperature extremes by appropriate landscaping. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-5-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions in this chapter apply to any provision, removal, enlargement, or alteration of any off street parking space or loading berth accessory to any
building or structure existing as of the effective date hereof or any new space or berth required to be provided under this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-5-3: SITE PLAN SUBMISSION:
A. A fully dimensioned site plan showing off street parking and loading facilities and associated landscaping shall accompany an application for any of the
following for any use required to provide over four (4) off street parking spaces or any off street loading berths:
1. Building permit.
2. Certificate of occupancy.
3. Conditional use permit.
4. Rezoning.
5. Approval of preliminary or final plat.
6. Variance from off street parking or loading requirements.
B. The zoning administrator may waive this requirement in any instance in which the nature of the ultimate tenant or user and, therefore, the specific
parking and loading requirements applicable, are not yet determined, such as in the case of a rezoning for an industrial subdivision. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-
1999)
11-5-4: RESTRICTED USE OF PARKING AND LOADING AREAS:
No storage of any kind, nor motor vehicle repair work except for emergency services, is permitted in any off street parking or loading area. (Ord. 99-02, 1-
7-1999)
11-5-5: ACCESS TO PARKING AND LOADING AREAS:
A. Each required off street parking space and loading berth shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide a safe and
efficient thoroughfare in a manner that will least interfere with traffic movement thereupon.
B. Vehicular access from a public thoroughfare to an off street parking or loading area shall be covered with a hard surfaced, all weather pavement. The
location and route of access thereto shall be identified to the public. No driveway across public property shall be wider than twenty four feet (24'),
excluding curb returns. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-5-6: PARKING AND LOADING DIMENSIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 461/618
Depth 18' 60'
Width 9' 14'
Vertical clearance 7' 15'
Aisle width:
Angle of spaces: Drive aisle width:
30 degrees 11' - -
45 degrees 13' - -
60 degrees 18' - -
90 degrees 24' - -
Apron depth:
Clockwise traffic flow - 100'
Counterclockwise traffic flow - 40'
Note:
1. A berth size as small as 12 feet by 30 feet may be approved as a conditional use where the Plan Commission determines that small local delivery trucks
rather than tractor-trailers will service a particular use.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-5-7: OFF STREET PARKING REGULATIONS:
A. Use Of Spaces: Except as otherwise provided herein, required off street parking shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles of
patrons, occupants, visitors, or employees.
B. Fuel Sales In Parking Areas: Fuel or motor oil may be sold in an off street parking area only to users thereof and only within a completely enclosed
building with no advertising sign visible from the outside and with all fuel pumps screened from the view of the street.
C. Location:
1. On Same Or Other Lot: Required off street parking for single- and two-family dwellings shall be provided on the same lot as the use served. Other
required parking may also be provided on a separate lot that is in the same possession, by deed or lease, and is within three hundred feet (300')
walking distance of the main entrance of the use served.
2. In Required Yards:
a. Off street parking for single-family detached and attached dwellings may be located in a front yard, or in a corner side yard the front of the dwelling
faces, only where the parking is located entirely on a driveway.
b. Off street parking may be located in front, corner side, side, and rear yards in Multi-Family Residence and Nonresidence Districts as specified in
each district, but in no case shall such parking be located closer than seven feet (7') to an adjoining property line or public right-of-way line. The
area between these lines and the parking area shall be landscaped. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
D. Residential Driveways: All driveways serving single-family detached or attached dwellings shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Construction: Driveways must be of an impervious surface, and construction must be completed within one year of driveway permit approval.
2. Location:
a. A driveway may not be built or widened to extend in front of a dwelling (as determined by the orientation of the dwelling rather than by the location
of the legal front yard); except, that:
(1) It may extend in front of an attached garage or carport.
(2) It may extend in front of any other portion of the dwelling unit to the extent necessary to allow vehicles to enter an attached garage or carport.
(3) It may extend in front of a portion of a duplex dwelling unit when common driveways prohibit the extension of said driveway away from the
dwelling unit in accordance with the following standards:
(A) The driveway may be extended a maximum of nine feet (9') from the original driveway width, which is the width necessary to allow vehicles
to enter the attached garage from the street.
(B) The driveway extension shall not extend toward the dwelling unit beyond the front building wall of the attached garage.
Parking
Space
Loading
Berth1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 462/618
b. Driveways shall be extended to the rear of the house on all lots where there is no attached garage. Such driveways shall be constructed with an
impervious surface. In residentially zoned districts, no driveways shall exceed twenty four feet (24') in width, and a driveway shall be constructed
on only one side of any such residential lot.
3. Width: A driveway must be a minimum of nine feet (9') wide and may be no wider than twenty four feet (24') between a front or corner side lot line
and the wall of the dwelling, attached garage, or attached carport closest to that lot line. The driveway width shall match the approach width at the
public sidewalk. A driveway widened beyond the approach width must taper down at a forty five degree (45°) angle to match the approach width at
the public sidewalk. Where the entrance to the garage or carport is parallel to a side lot line, the portion of the driveway located farther from the front
or corner side lot line than the aforementioned wall may be wider than twenty four feet (24') but may not extend:
a. Farther from the front or corner side lot line than the extremity of the entrance to the garage or carport farthest from such lot line.
b. Closer to the side lot line on the side of the garage or carport entrance than does the portion of the driveway located between the aforementioned
wall and the front or corner side lot line.
4. Number Of Street Entrances: No driveway may have more than one street entrance, except in the R-1 District, where a maximum of two (2)
entrances is permitted.
5. Walkways:
a. Driveway ribbons are permitted to extend in front of the dwelling along the edge of the driveway provided they meet the following:
(1) Maximum width of two feet (2').
(2) Driveway ribbons must be a different impervious surface than the driveway. Asphalt, concrete block, gravel, and house brick are prohibited
materials for driveway ribbons. Concrete or brick pavers shall only be used for driveway ribbons.
(3) A driveway ribbon on the property line side of the driveway is permitted if the ribbon width (maximum of 2 feet) is subtracted from the maximum
driveway width allowed.
b. All service walks on private property shall not exceed a width of four feet (4').
E. Residential Garages And Carports: All garages and carports serving single-family detached or attached dwellings shall conform to the following
requirements:
1. Number: One detached or attached garage providing a minimum of two (2) parking spaces is required for each dwelling unit.
2. Conversion: No attached garage or carport may be converted to a living area unless the driveway is relocated to the side yard (or in the case of a
dwelling facing a corner side yard, to the legal front or rear yard).
3. Construction Of Second Garage: No detached garage shall be built on a lot containing an existing attached garage unless the attached garage or
carport is either converted to living space or removed and any driveway between the front or corner side lot line and the entrance to the attached
garage is removed. A lot containing an attached carport is permitted to have a detached garage. (Ord. 2018-101, 12-13-2018)
F. Storage Of Trucks And Recreational Vehicles In Residential Districts: See section 11-4-11 of this title.
G. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided as required in section 11-4-15 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
H. Surfacing: All off street parking lots shall be surfaced with an impervious surface and be constructed in accordance with current standard specifications
for road and bridge construction adopted by the Illinois Department of Transportation. Parking of automobiles, trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles, and
all outdoor storage shall be located on an approved impervious surface. Parking or outdoor storage located on gravel or recycled asphalt is prohibited.
(Ord. 2018-101, 12-13-2018)
11-5-7-1: REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF STREET PARKING SPACES:
Apartment hotel 52
Automotive:
Auto laundry 43 and 57
Service station 45 and 54
Vehicle sales 20
Bank or financial institution 26 and 57
Boarding house 52
Contractor or construction office 45
Department store 20
Furniture and appliance store 23
Class1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 463/618
Hotel 52
Industrial:
Cartage and express firms 43
Manufacturing, research, testing 45 and 19 and 56
Radio or TV station or studio 45
Warehousing and wholesaling 44 and 34
Institutional:
Child daycare center 19
Church 41
Library, museum, gallery 20
Nursing home 51
Philanthropic and charitable 16
Public utilities and service 46
Medical:
Animal hospital 20
Clinic 29
Hospital 49
Mortuary 4 and 45 and 56
Motel 52
Office building 35
Other retail 23
Recreational:
Arena or stadium 41
Auditorium (nonschool) 41
Bowling alley:
Per lane 70
Restaurant/bar 21
Community center 41
Dance or meeting hall 41
Indoor theater 40
Skating rink 41
Swimming pool 41
Residential:
Efficiency 4
1 bedroom 4
All other units 4
Restaurant:
Carryout 30
Drive-in 31 and 57
Eat in 31
Eat in restaurant serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises with off track betting facility 40
Schools:
Elementary 45
Junior high 45
Class1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 464/618
High school 47
College 47
Commercial 47
Shopping center:
Under 400,000 square feet 24
400,000 - 600,000 square feet 25
Over 600,000 square feet 26
Supermarket or food store 27
Tavern 31
Warehousing and wholesaling 44 and 34
Note:
1. See section 11-5-7-2 of this chapter.
All required space figures are to be prorated for each establishment. Fractional spaces shall be rounded to the nearest integer. (Ord. 2018-101, 12-13-
2018)
11-5-7-2: CLASSES OF PARKING:
A. Residential Uses:
Class 11 1 space per dwelling unit
Class 21 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit
Class 31 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Class 41 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Class 51 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Class 61 4 spaces per dwelling unit
Class 71 1 space per 3 residents, plus 1 space per staff person
Class 81 Reserved
Class 91 Reserved
Class 101 Reserved
Class 111 Reserved
Class 121 Reserved
Class 131 Reserved
Class 141 Reserved
Note:
1. Required spaces to be increased by 1 space for each roomer or lodger and increased by 0.1 space per dwelling unit for guest parking and 0.1 space
per dwelling unit for any amenity such as a clubhouse.
B. Nonresidential Uses:
1. Building Square Feet:
Class
15
0.67 space per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
16
1 space per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
17
1.5 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 465/618
Class
18
1.7 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
19
2 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
20
2.5 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
21
3 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
22
3.3 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
23
3.5 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
24
4 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
25
4.5 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
26
5 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
27
5.5 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
28
6 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
29
6.5 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
30
8 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
31
10 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
32
15 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Class
33
4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space per each 1,500 square feet of outdoor display area
Class
34
1 space per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area up to 10,000 square feet, and 1 space per each 2,000 square feet of gross floor
area over 10,000 square feet
Class
35
4 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area up to 4,000 square feet, and 6 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area over 4,000 square feet
Class
36
2 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 3 persons of auditorium design capacity
Class
37
4 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of office space, plus 1 space for each 4 persons of design capacity
Class
38
4 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of office space, plus 1 space per each 6 persons of design capacity
2. Design Capacity/Design Capacity Combinations:
Class 39 4 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of office space, plus 1 space per each 15 persons of design capacity
Class 40 1 space per each 3 persons of design capacity
Class 41 1 space per each 4 persons of design capacity
Class 42 1 space per 2 students of design capacity, plus 4 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for office uses
3. Employee/Employee Combinations:
Class 43 0.5 space per each employee, based on largest shift
Class 44 0.67 space per each employee, based on largest shift
Class 45 1 space per each employee, based on largest shift
Class 46 1 space per each 3 employees, based on largest shift
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 466/618
Class 47 1 space per employee, plus 1 space for each 4 students of design capacity
Class 48 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per each 8 students of design capacity
Class 49 1 space per employee, plus 1 space per 2 patient beds
Class 50 1 space per 2 patient beds, plus 2 spaces per 3 employees, plus 1 space per staff doctor
Class 51 1 space for each employee, plus 1 space for each 4 patient beds
Class 52 1 space per each employee, plus 1 space per room or suite
4. Miscellaneous:
Class 53 1 space for each 3 seats or 60 inches of seating space, whichever is less
Class 54 2 spaces per each service bay
Class 55 3 spaces per each service bay
Class 56 1 space per vehicle used in business
Class 57 Stacking spaces to accommodate waiting autos equal in number to 5 times the number of bays or drive-in windows
Class 58 Stacking spaces to accommodate waiting autos equal in number to 5 times the number of bays or drive-in windows, plus 1 space
per each employee
Classes 59 -
69
Reserved
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
C. Institutional And Commercial Recreational Uses:
Class 70 Bowling 7 spaces per lane
Class 71 Billiards 2 spaces for each table
Class 72 Golf courses 80 spaces for each 9 holes
Class 73 Impervious playing surfaces 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Class 74 Miniature golf 50 spaces for each 9 holes
Class 75 Parks 1 space for each 5,000 square feet of play area
Class 76 Skating rink 1 space for each 4 persons of design capacity
Class 77 Swimming pools 1 space per 75 square feet of water area
Class 78 Tennis or racquet court 2 spaces per court
Class 79 - 89 Reserved
D. Other Uses:
Class 90 No parking requirement
Class 91 Spaces as determined by the zoning administrator
E. Parking Stalls For Persons With Disabilities Required: Parking stalls for persons with disabilities shall be provided as required by the current (or 1998)
Illinois accessibility code. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-5-8: OFF STREET LOADING REGULATIONS:
A. Location: All required loading berths shall be located:
1. On the same lot as the use to be served, except when collectively provided as central loading facilities.
2. Twenty five feet (25') or more from the nearest point of intersection of any streets.
3. Outside of required front and side yards.
4. In such a manner that no portion of a vehicle shall project into a street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 467/618
5. Fifty feet (50') or more from the boundary of any residence district, except for any of the following:
a. Berths completely enclosed within a building.
b. Berths for vehicles of a capacity of two (2) tons or less.
c. Berths screened by a uniformly painted solid fence, wall, or combination thereof, at least six feet (6') in height.
B. Surfacing: All open off street loading berths shall be surfaced with a dustless, all weather material capable of bearing a live load of two hundred (200)
pounds per square foot.
C. Collective Facilities: Loading berths required for individual lots may be collectively provided in central facilities; provided, that all of the following
requirements are met:
1. The number of berths provided is not less than that required by the total floor space for each category of use served.
2. Each lot served has direct access to the central facilities without crossing streets at grade.
3. The central facilities are not more than five hundred feet (500') from any lot they serve.
4. Any tunnel or ramp between the central facilities and any lot served is at least seven feet (7') wide and has a vertical clearance of at least seven feet
(7').
5. Written covenants and easements approved by the village and recorded with the county provide for the retention, maintenance, and use of such
facilities. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-5-8-1: REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF STREET LOADING BERTHS:
Type Of Use Building Size In Square Feet Number Of Berths1
Offices 10,000 - 100,000 1
Public uses 10,000 - 100,000 1
Institutional uses 10,000 - 100,000 1
Manufacturing:
Warehousing and storage 5,000 - 40,000 1
Cartage and express 40,001 - 100,000 2
Retail and service 5,000 - 10,000 1
10,001 - 25,000 2
25,001 - 40,000 3
40,001 - 100,000 4
Note:
1. Plus 1 additional berth for every 100,000 square feet over 100,000 square feet, with fractional berths rounded to the nearest integer.
No berth shall, at the same time, fully or partially serve to meet the requirements for both off street parking and loading facilities.
Uses smaller than the smallest values given for each category shall also be provided with adequate receiving facilities for motor vehicles. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-
1999)
11-5-9: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS:
Landscaping of parking lots shall be as set forth in section 11-4-15 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
Chapter 6
SIGNS
11-6-1: PURPOSES:
A. The purposes of this chapter are to preserve and protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating outdoor signs of all types. It is intended to
enhance the physical appearance of the village, make it a more enjoyable and pleasing community and create an attractive economic and business
climate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 468/618
B. These regulations are intended to reduce the sign or advertising distractions which may increase traffic accidents, eliminate hazards caused by signs
overhanging or projecting over public rights of way, relieve pedestrian and traffic congestion, provide more open space and avoid the visual conflict
between adjacent signs.
C. It is hereby determined that the primary purpose of signage is to help people find what they need without difficulty or confusion. Thus, while not
restricting the freedom of expression, regulations must be established for preventing an overload of graphic messages in the environment. (Ord. 99-02,
1-7-1999)
11-6-2: OBJECTIVES:
This chapter establishes standards for the erection, display, safety and maintenance of signs which are intended to allow a person to observe or ignore
graphic messages, according to one's own purpose, as well as to encourage the general attractiveness of the community and to protect property values.
These standards are intended to meet the following objectives:
A. Business Climate: It is recognized that signs are an economical and effective means of communicating information and are an important asset to most
businesses. The continued health of business and economic activities shall be encouraged by the use of signs which:
1. Clearly and efficiently identify and classify the goods, services, facilities, and locations available to the community.
2. Express the identity of business activities or the proprietors associated with those activities.
3. Increase opportunities for local business groups to collectively determine policies for private signing and lighting in their areas.
B. Effective Communication: A reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs is to be promoted by authorizing the use of signs which are:
1. Legible in the circumstances in which they are viewed.
2. Recognize that signs are a necessary means of visual communication for the convenience of the general public taken as a whole, as opposed to the
convenience of any individual person.
3. Appropriate to the function to which they pertain.
C. Public Welfare: The public health, safety and welfare is to be preserved, protected and promoted through sign regulations which:
1. Eliminate confusion and distractions which jeopardize vehicular and pedestrian safety.
2. Prohibit the placement of signs which obstruct vision or access in a manner which creates dangerous conditions.
3. Preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses.
4. Are lawful and not misleading.
D. Aesthetic Character/Compatibility: The aesthetic character of the village is to be preserved and enhanced by the establishment of sign regulations
which:
1. Are compatible with their surroundings, pursuant to the objectives of good design, and compatible with zoning districts and regulations.
2. Promote an amenable and aesthetic environment in keeping with the character of the village as a whole.
3. Protect the physical and mental well being of the general public by encouraging a sense of aesthetic appreciation for the village's visual
environment.
4. Minimize the blighting influences posed by visual clutter, decay, and neglect.
5. Protect the value of architectural resources and ensure the integrity of the architectural elements and character of the buildings and sites to which
signs principally relate. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-6-3: COMPLIANCE AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
No sign shall hereafter be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered except in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter and after issuance of a sign permit by the village, except as provided under section 11-6-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-6-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT:
No sign permit shall be required for the types of signs listed in this section, nor for any change thereto that does not convert them into nonexempt signs.
These signs, and changes thereto, shall, however, be subject to the sign standards herein except for those in section 11-6-11 of this chapter.
A. Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title as "sign, real estate", for one to five (5) residential units not exceeding four
(4) square feet in area, displayed a minimum of five feet (5') from all lot lines, and removed one week after the consummation of the sale or rental. Real
estate signs for other properties are not exempt.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 469/618
B. Governmental And Utility Signs: Informational signs or displays maintained by a government body or public utility, including traffic or parking regulatory
devices, legal notices, warnings of hazards, and similar displays.
C. Government Mandated Signs: Street address numerals, public hearing signs and other signs or exterior displays required to be maintained by
government order or regulation; provided, that the content and size thereof does not exceed that required by such order or regulation.
D. Nameplates: Nameplate signs, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title as "sign, nameplate", no larger than two (2) square feet in area.
E. Nonprofit Organization Displays: The flag, pennant, or insignia of any governmental unit or religious, civic, educational, or philanthropic organization.
F. Memorials: Memorial signs and tablets.
G. No Trespassing, No Dumping Or No Hunting Signs: A maximum of two (2) no trespassing, no dumping, or no hunting signs, or the like, per lot, each not
larger than two (2) square feet in area. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
H. Seasonal Decorations: Decorations clearly incidental, customary, and/or commonly associated with a national, local, or religious holiday or celebration,
and not otherwise prohibited by this chapter, shall not be displayed for a period exceeding fourteen (14) days following the holiday or celebration.
Christmas decorations, however, may be displayed until April 1 of the following year. (Ord. 2001-71, 10-18-2001)
I. Garage/Yard Sale And Residential Directional Signs: Garage/yard sale and residential directional signs are exempt from permit requirements but subject
to specific regulations provided in this chapter.
J. Temporary Window Signs: One or more temporary window signs, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title as "sign, window, temporary", that advertise
only sales or special events and that, together with all nonexempt permanent window signs, have an aggregate area not greater than fifty percent
(50%) of the total display window area of a business premises. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
K. Election Campaign Signs: One election campaign sign per candidate, per street frontage, per lot that:
1. Is not illuminated;
2. Does not exceed a total of thirty two (32) square feet in area;
3. Must have a one foot (1') minimum setback, provided said sign does not interfere with sight distances at intersections;
4. If freestanding, is not higher than eight feet (8') above grade; and (Ord. 2007-45, 6-21-2007)
5. Window signs are permitted in addition to freestanding lawn signs. (Ord. 2007-45, 6-21-2007; amd. Ord. 2012-26, 5-3-2012)
L. Scoreboards: Scoreboards for athletic fields.
M. Nonilluminated Directional Signs: Nonilluminated directional signs not over three (3) square feet in area or three feet (3') in height. Directional signs
exceeding either dimension and illuminated directional signs of any size are not exempt.
N. Changes To Signs: No sign permit shall be required for the following changes to exempt or nonexempt signs, but such changes must conform to all
applicable sign regulations of this chapter:
1. A change in the copy on a sign designed for replaceable copy, including painted or printed signs.
2. Painting, cleaning, repair, maintenance, or face replacement of a sign not involving structural change and made necessary by breakage or
deterioration but not by a change in advertiser.
O. Service Station Signs And Displays: In addition to other signs and displays permitted herein, the following displays are permitted as accessory to
automobile service stations:
1. Oil Racks: Racks for the orderly display of cans of motor oil located on or at the ends of each pump island.
2. Tire Racks: Up to two (2) tire racks, each not more than eight feet (8') high, six feet (6') long, and five feet (5') wide and conforming to all yard
requirements, to display new tire casings.
3. Product Displays: Items for sale on the premises openly displayed within twenty feet (20') of the principal building but not within any required yard, as
well as under pump island canopies or between pumps within the area of the pump island base.
4. Pricing Signs: Freestanding signs providing only pricing information that have a sign area not greater than twelve (12) square feet and that conform
to all other requirements for main freestanding signs in commercial areas in section 11-6-11 of this chapter.
P. Signs Not Visible Beyond Property Boundaries: Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they are situated or from any
public thoroughfare or right-of-way.
Q. Signs Within Buildings: Any sign which is located completely within an enclosed building, and which sign is not visible from outside of the building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 470/618
R. Vending Machines: Vending machine signs. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
S. Signs On Private Property: No parking signs which warn "no parking or violators will be towed at owners' expense" in an Industrial, Commercial, or
Multi-Family Zoning District. (Ord. 2018-102, 12-13-2018)
11-6-5: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs and displays, as they are defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, are prohibited in all zoning districts:
A. Temporary signs and any attention getting device or activity, except as otherwise permitted or exempted from these regulations.
B. Projecting, roof, festoon, flashing, beacon, vehicle sign, snipe sign, and trailer sign.
C. Inflatable signs, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter.
D. Murals or signs painted on exterior building walls or fences.
E. Signs on vacant land other than real estate signs, construction signs, or outdoor advertising signs, as defined and regulated herein.
F. Outdoor display of merchandise to attract attention to a business except as permitted by a temporary use permit or a conditional use permit for an open
sales lot, and service stations as permitted by this chapter.
G. Signs consisting of a string of hanging lights, except for seasonal decorations, Christmas tree sales, and theater marquees as permitted by this chapter.
H. Pennants, except as permitted by this chapter for grand openings. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
I. Signs which move or have moving parts, which movement is caused either by the wind or mechanically, except for temporary feather signs. (Ord. 2014-
62, 10-16-2014)
J. Signs which contain statements, words, pictures or other depictions of an obscene, indecent or immoral character and which offend public morals or
decency.
K. Miscellaneous advertising devices, other than signs which conform to the provisions of this chapter, shall not be allowed.
L. Signs in conflict with traffic signals, vehicular or pedestrian travel, access to fire hydrants and fire lanes and exits, and other signs which reasonably
impede or impair the public health, safety and welfare.
M. Obsolete signs.
N. Signs which are determined by the zoning administrator and village chief of police to constitute a traffic hazard by reason of size, location, content, color
or illumination.
O. Searchlights. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-6-6: CONDITIONAL USE SIGNS:
The following are allowed only as conditional uses: Outdoor advertising signs in the C-3 and I districts. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-6-7: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. Authority To Continue: Except as provided in subsection G of this section, any lawfully existing nonconforming sign may be continued so long as it
otherwise remains lawful, subject to the regulations contained in subsections C, D, E and F of this section.
B. Certificate Of Compliance:
1. The burden of establishing that any nonconforming sign is lawfully existing under the provisions of this chapter shall, in all cases, be upon the owner
of such nonconformity and not upon the village.
2. The owner or any person receiving notice of any nonconforming sign may at any time apply to the zoning administrator for a certificate of zoning
compliance to confirm the legality of such nonconformity as of a specified date. Such application shall be filed and processed pursuant to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 471/618
provisions of section 11-3-4 of this title.
3. Any person receiving a notice of a nonconforming sign pursuant to subsection B2 of this section shall be required, within sixty (60) days of the
receipt of such notice, to apply to the zoning administrator for such a certificate of zoning compliance with respect to the nonconformity identified in
said notice. Unless an appeal from the determination of the zoning administrator contained in said notice has been filed, such application shall be
accompanied by an affidavit admitting such determination. Such affidavit shall be kept on file by the zoning administrator and shall be a matter of
public record. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
4. If, upon reviewing an application for a certificate of zoning compliance for a nonconformity, the zoning administrator shall determine that the sign in
question was lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of the provision creating the nonconformity in question, and remains lawfully existing subject
only to such nonconformity at the time of such application, and that any required affidavit is in order, the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate
of zoning compliance evidencing such facts and setting forth the nature and extent of the nonconformity and the date, if any, upon which such
nonconformity is required to be terminated; otherwise, the zoning administrator shall decline to issue such certificate and shall declare such sign to
be in violation of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Repair And Maintenance: Normal maintenance and incidental repair or replacement of nonbearing sign elements and electrical wiring and fixtures may
be performed on any sign; provided, however, that any repair or replacement shall, whenever possible, eliminate or reduce any nonconformity in the
element being repaired or replaced; and provided further, however, that this subsection shall not be deemed to authorize any violation of subsections
D, E and F of this section.
D. Alteration, Enlargement, Moving: No nonconforming sign shall be changed or altered in any manner that would increase the degree of its
nonconformity; be enlarged or expanded; be structurally altered to prolong its useful life; or be moved in whole or in part to any other location where it
would remain nonconforming. A change in sign message that does not otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be
prohibited by this subsection.
E. Change Of Sign: A nonconforming sign that has been changed to eliminate its nonconformity, or any element of its nonconformity, shall not thereafter
be changed to restore such nonconformity or nonconformity element.
F. Damage Or Destruction: Any nonconforming sign, or any nonconforming element of a sign capable of change or discontinuance separate from other
elements of the sign, damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of thirty five percent (35%) or more of its replacement cost new shall not be
restored but shall be removed or brought into conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
G. Termination Of Certain Signs:
1. Immediate Termination: The following nonconforming signs, or sign features, shall be terminated within sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof
by removal of the sign or by alteration of the sign to eliminate the specified feature:
a. Attention getting devices.
b. Moving or animated signs, except public service signs when expressly permitted by this chapter.
c. Portable signs.
d. Temporary signs, except as expressly permitted by section 11-4-12 of this title.
e. Any sign that advertises, identifies or pertains to a business no longer conducted or a product no longer sold on the premises where such sign is
located.
f. Any sign on a tree or utility pole, whether on public or private property.
g. Any sign on public property, except governmental signs authorized in this chapter.
h. Any sign that violates any provision or requirement of this chapter.
i. Any sign constructed or erected without a valid permit.
2. Termination In Accordance With Previous Amortization Schedule: Any sign that was required to be removed by this chapter that has not been
removed in accordance with the terms of the appropriate sections hereof shall be removed immediately, and every such sign is hereby declared to
be unlawful and a public nuisance. Any sign subject hereto that was not fully amortized pursuant hereto shall be terminated and removed at the
earliest date required, either by the appropriate sections hereof or by this subsection.
3. Termination By Abandonment:
a. Any nonconforming sign, the use of which is discontinued for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days, regardless of any intent to resume or not to
abandon such sign, shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall not thereafter be reestablished or resumed. Every such sign shall be immediately
removed or brought into conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
b. Any period of such discontinuance caused by government actions, strikes, material shortages or acts of God, and without any contributing fault by
the nonconforming user, shall not be considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for purposes of this subsection G3.
4. Termination By Change Of Business Ownership: Any nonconforming sign advertising, identifying or pertaining to a business on the premises on
which it is located shall be terminated upon any change in the ownership or control of such business.
5. Termination By Amortization:
a. Any nonconforming sign, or any nonconforming element of a sign capable of change or discontinuance separate from other elements of the sign,
that has not been terminated pursuant to any other provision of this chapter shall be terminated no later than the date provided in the following
schedule: (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 472/618
Original Value Of Sign Or Sign Element, As Shown On, Or Estimated From,
Building Permit
Removal Required Within Stated Period After The Effective
Date Hereof
$1,000.00 or less 1 year
$1,001.00 to $3,000.00 2 years
$3,001.00 to $5,000.00 3 years
$5,001.00 to $7,000.00 4 years
More than $7,000.00 5 years
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
b. Where no original value can be established, the zoning administrator's estimate of current depreciated replacement cost shall be used.
H. Time For Compliance With Maintenance, Appearance And Landscaping: All legal nonconforming signs shall, within eighteen (18) months of the
effective date hereof, be brought into compliance with each rule and regulation set forth in this chapter relating to the maintenance, appearance, and
landscaping of signs and of lots and parcels improved with signs. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-6-8: CONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE, LIGHTING AND SAFETY:
All signs shall be constructed and maintained as hereinafter described:
A. Compliance With Building And Electrical Codes:
1. All signs shall be constructed of approved materials and shall comply with the requirements of the village building codes, and any amendments
thereto, as adopted by the village from time to time.
2. All signs in which any electrical wiring and/or connections are to be used shall comply with the village electrical code.
B. Painting And Maintenance:
1. The owner of any sign shall paint and maintain all parts and supports thereof as necessary to prevent rusting, rotting or deterioration.
2. All signs shall be maintained in a safe and orderly condition and attractive appearance, and shall be repainted or otherwise maintained periodically to
prevent corrosion or deterioration caused by weather, age or other condition.
3. For freestanding signs, such maintenance shall also require that the ground area be kept free and clean of weeds, trash and other debris. (Ord. 99-
02, 1-7-1999)
4. The owner of a sign shall be responsible for providing such maintenance, including any necessary repairs, which shall be completed within thirty (30)
days after notification by the zoning administrator of maintenance required hereunder. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
C. Wind Pressure And Dead Load Requirements: Every sign shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of thirty (30) pounds per
square foot and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the village building codes, and any amendments thereto, or other applicable
ordinances.
D. Information Required On Sign: Every sign hereafter erected shall have painted in a conspicuous place thereon, in legible letters, the date of erection,
the name of the permittee and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in connection therewith.
E. Glass Restrictions: Any glass forming part of a sign shall be safety glass. In case any single piece or pane of glass has an area exceeding three (3)
square feet, it shall be wired glass.
F. Obstructions To Doors, Windows, Or Fire Escapes Prohibited: No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free access to, or
egress from, any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
G. Unsafe Or Unlawful Signs:
1. If the zoning administrator shall find that any sign is unsafe, insecure or a menace to the public, or has been constructed, erected or maintained in
violation of the provisions of this chapter, or has not been completed within six (6) months of the date of the issuance of the permit, he shall give
written notice to the owner. If the owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within ten (10) days
after such notice, the village shall initiate such legal proceedings as may be required to compel the removal of said sign(s) and the recovery of any
costs incurred in connection therewith.
2. Any sign which no longer identifies a bona fide business conducted or a product sold on the premises where said sign is located shall be taken down
and removed by the person having the beneficial use of the building, structure or property upon which said sign may be found within ten (10) days
after the written notification from the zoning administrator, and upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in the order, the
village shall initiate such legal proceedings as may be required to compel the removal of said sign(s) and the recovering of any cost incurred in
connection therewith. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 473/618
11-6-9: SIGN STANDARDS GENERALLY:
All exempt and nonexempt signs shall conform to the following standards:
A. Location And Placement:
1. Within Public Right Of Way: No sign or associated light fixture shall be located within, project into, or overhang a public right of way, such as a sign
upon a tree or utility pole therein.
2. Obstructions: No sign may obstruct a fire escape, door, window, or other entrance or exitway, nor any window surface required for ventilation by any
village code.
3. Traffic Hazards: No sign may, by reason of location or location and size, obstruct the vision of drivers or obstruct or detract from the visibility or
effectiveness of any traffic signal or control device.
4. Proximity To Electric Wires: No metal sign shall be located within a vertical distance of eight feet (8') or a horizontal distance of four feet (4') of
electrical wires or conductors, even if such wires or conductors are insulated or otherwise protected.
5. Clearance For Metal Electrical Signs: A minimum sign clearance of one and one-half feet (1.5') shall be maintained for all metal signs with electrical
wiring.
6. Vision Clearance: Any sign located within the "vision clearance triangle", as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, or within thirty feet (30') of the
intersection of a private driveway and an arterial or collector street shall have a minimum sign clearance of eight feet (8').
B. Illumination:
1. Bare Bulb Or Flame Illumination: Illumination by bare bulbs or flames is prohibited; except, that bare bulbs are permitted on changing copy signs or
on theater marquees.
2. Hours Of Illumination: No sign shall be illuminated beyond the close of business or eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., whichever is later.
3. Projecting Light Fixtures: Gooseneck reflectors or other arms projecting from the sign mounted with lights to illuminate the sign are permitted on
freestanding and wall signs.
4. Constant Illumination: Sign illumination shall be constant in intensity and color.
5. Nonglaring Illumination: The light for any illuminated sign shall be shaded, shielded, or directed so as not to cause glare in surrounding properties or
in public streets.
6. Traffic Hazards: No direct or reflected light from a light source for an illuminated sign shall create a traffic hazard for operators of motor vehicles.
C. Design And Content Of Signs:
1. Resemblance To Traffic Devices: No sign shall, by reason of shape, color, content, or use of lighting, be similar in appearance to any traffic signal or
traffic sign in a way that may interfere with traffic movement or safety.
2. Obscenity: No sign or display shall contain words or pictures of obscene, indecent, or immoral character that offend the public morals and decency
of the village.
3. Permit Number: The sign permit number shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on every nonexempt sign.
D. Other Standards: All nonexempt signs shall conform to the applicable standards for individual sign types in section 11-6-11 of this chapter. (Ord. 99-02,
1-7-1999)
11-6-10: TEMPORARY SIGN STANDARDS:
A. General Standards:
1. Permit Limitations: A permit must be obtained for all temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours after the
expiration of the permit. No more than four (4) temporary permits shall be issued for any one business in any calendar year. Temporary signs are
also limited to sixty (60) days per calendar year and a maximum of thirty (30) days for each event, with a thirty (30) day break between events.
2. Number: Not more than one nonilluminated temporary sign, as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title as "sign, temporary", shall be permitted per
business establishment at one time; except, in multi-tenant buildings and shopping centers, a maximum of two (2) temporary signs may be displayed
at any one time.
3. Size: No temporary banner permitted by this chapter shall exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area. No temporary portable sign shall exceed twenty
four (24) square feet in area or eight feet (8') in height, except pole banners as permitted by this chapter. No temporary feather sign shall exceed
twenty four (24) square feet in area and may be no greater than ten feet (10') in height.
4. Location: Portable and feather signs must be set back a minimum of seven feet (7') to any property line and must be located outside of the vision
clearance triangle at street and driveway intersections. Signs shall be located only on the same zoning lot as the temporary use and not be
detrimental to the character of the area. A banner that is mounted on a wall must be secured taut. Banners shall not be displayed to cover permanent
business signs.
5. Legend: No temporary sign shall contain an advertisement of any business or service not conducted on or in the premises on which such sign is
displayed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 474/618
6. Design And Maintenance: All temporary signs shall be professionally printed and tasteful in color and design. Temporary signs which become
tattered or torn while being displayed shall immediately be replaced or removed. (Ord. 2014-62, 10-16-2014)
B. Requirements For Specific Sign Types:
1. Grand Openings: In addition to the temporary signs permitted by this chapter, new businesses, or existing businesses closed for remodeling for at
least six (6) months, and a grand opening of a residential planned unit development shall be permitted to display pennants and temporary signs for
an additional fourteen (14) days for grand openings during the first four (4) months.
2. Pole Banners: Temporary signs mounted on light poles or other pole structures shall not exceed six feet (6') in height and two and one-half feet
(21/2') in width and shall be mounted a maximum of sixteen feet (16') above grade level. Such temporary signs must maintain a nine foot (9')
clearance above parking lots and driveways. No more than two (2) banners per pole are permitted. Pole banners may also be displayed for shopping
center sidewalk sales and year round at automobile sales dealerships. The number of pole banners to be displayed at any one time shall be subject
to the approval of the zoning administrator.
3. Temporary Inflatable Signs: Temporary inflatable signs shall be permitted in the C-3 general commercial district only on lots with a minimum of six
hundred feet (600') of frontage.
4. Business Flag: One business flag, not to exceed three feet by five feet (3' x 5'), is permitted per business when displayed on a pole below the
American flag in accordance with all federal and state regulations.
5. Garage/Yard Sale Signs: A maximum of one sign per lot is permitted, not to exceed four (4) square feet in area and displayed only on the days of the
sale.
6. Residential Directional Signs: Signs directing people to a residence conducting a sale (e.g., open house or garage/yard sale) are permitted off
premises only when displayed on private property zoned Residential and only with the consent of the property owner. A maximum of two (2)
directional signs are permitted, limited to one sign per lot, not to exceed four (4) square feet in area. Residential directional signs displayed within the
public right-of-way may be removed by the Village without prior notice.
C. Conditions And Restrictions: The Zoning Administrator may impose such conditions and restrictions on the premises to be benefited by a temporary
sign as may be necessary to comply with the standards set forth herein, to reduce or minimize any injurious effect of such variation on other property in
the neighborhood, and to implement the general intent, purpose, and objectives of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-6-11: NONEXEMPT SIGN STANDARDS:
A.
All Uses:
1.
Directional Signs At Street Entrance Or Exit:
a.
Number
permitted
1 per entrance or exit
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
3
c.
Maximum
height in feet
3
d.
Other
requirements
Directional signs may be located in any required yard
2.
Directional Signs At All Other Locations:
a.
Number
permitted
1 per lot
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
9
c.
Maximum
height in feet
3
d.
Other
requirements
Directional signs may be located in any required yard
3.
Real Estate Signs:
a. Number Maximum of 1 sign per street frontage or lot
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 475/618
permitted
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
32
c.
Maximum
height in feet
16
d.
Other
requirements
Shall be located a minimum of 5 feet from each lot line and shall be removed within 7 days of sale or rental
4.
Construction Signs:
a.
Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per street frontage or lot
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
32
c.
Maximum
height in feet
16
d.
Other
requirements
Nonilluminated; shall be removed within 2 weeks of issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance
B.
Residential Uses:
1.
Multi-Family Identification Signs:
a.
Number
permitted
1 per lot
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
3
c.
Maximum
height in feet
7
2.
Subdivision Or PUD Entrance Signs:
a.
Number
permitted
1 per street entrance
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
32
c.
Maximum
height in feet
7
d.
Other
requirements
To be illuminated by indirect lighting that is shaded, shielded, or directed so as not to cause glare in surrounding
properties or in public streets; shall contain the name of development only
C.
Institutional Uses:
1.
Other Signs:
a.
Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per street frontage or lot
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
16
c. Maximum 8
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 476/618
height in feet
d.
Other
requirements
Set back from street lines a minimum of 1/3 of the applicable required yard
D.
Commercial Uses:
1.
Canopy Signs:
a.
Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per street frontage or lot
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
1.5 square feet per linear foot of building frontage; applies cumulatively for all wall, canopy, under canopy and
permanent window signs
c.
Maximum
height in feet
n/a
d.
Minimum
clearance in
feet
8
2.
Under Canopy Signs:
a.
Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per business establishment
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
5
c.
Maximum
height in feet
n/a
d.
Minimum
clearance in
feet
8
e.
Other
requirements
Maximum width of 60 percent of horizontal canopy projection. Area is counted in maximum wall sign area
3.
Menu Board Signs:
a.
Number
permitted
2
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
32
c.
Maximum
height in feet
16
d.
Other
requirements
Shall be freestanding or wall signs located in side or rear yards only
4.
Wall Signs:
a.
Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per business establishment
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
1.5 square feet per linear foot of building frontage; applies cumulatively for all wall, canopy, under canopy and
permanent window signs
c.
Sign height Shall not extend above the fascia or parapet line
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 477/618
d.
Other
requirements
May locate on principal building walls facing public streets only; may project a maximum of 1 foot into required yard
5.
Window Signs, Permanent:
a.
Number
permitted
n/a
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
Both permanent and temporary window signs together must not exceed 50 percent of the area of display windows.
The total area of both permanent window signs and wall signs must not exceed the maximum area for wall signs.
Permanent window signs may contain only the business name and type, logo, address, phone number, major
product, and business hours
c.
Maximum
height in feet
n/a
6.
Freestanding Signs:
a.
Main Sign:
(1) Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per street frontage or lot
(2) Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
1 square foot per linear foot of building frontage up to 100 feet, plus 0.25 square foot per linear foot of building
frontage over 100 feet up to a maximum of 120 square feet
(3) Maximum
height in feet
16
(4) Other
requirements
Located a minimum of 7 feet from any lot line, to be measured from the outermost perimeter of the sign
b.
Display
Board Or
Changing
Sign:
(1) Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per street frontage or lot
(2) Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
Maximum size of sign is the size of the main sign. Total area of display board or changing sign plus main sign shall
not exceed the maximum permitted area for the main freestanding sign
(3) Maximum
height in feet
16
(4) Other
requirements
Located a minimum of 7 feet from any lot line, to be measured from the outermost perimeter of the sign. Messages or
displays shall be constant and not flashing or chasing, with message or display changes limited to no less than every
5 seconds. The prior message shall disappear simultaneously with the new message. Changing signs shall not cause
illumination in excess of 0.05 foot-candle at any property line adjoining a residential use; and shall not be distracting
to the motoring public on adjacent roadways; and nonconforming signs must be brought into conformance with these
standards no later than May 1, 2008
c.
Outdoor
Advertising
Signs:
(1) Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per street frontage or lot
(2) Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
300
(3) Maximum
height in feet
25
(4) Other
requirements
Allowed only as a conditional use in the C-3 and I Districts; shall be principal use only, conform to yard requirements
of the district, and be located a minimum of 100 feet from any other outdoor advertising sign and from any Residential
District. Any illumination shall be indirect
7. In Shopping Centers:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 478/618
a.
Main Center
Sign:
(1) Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per street frontage or lot
(2) Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
120
(3) Maximum
height in feet
16
(4) Other
requirements
Permitted in addition to other signs permitted in commercial areas. Must locate a minimum of 7 feet from any lot line,
to be measured from the outermost perimeter of the sign. Centers with frontage on 2 streets may substitute 1 ground
sign for each frontage for single main pole sign
b.
Directory
Sign:
(1) Number
permitted
1
(2) Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
120
(3) Maximum
height in feet
16
(4) Other
requirements
Must be part of the main sign facing for the complex and shall be uniform in size, shape and color. Total area of the
directory sign and main sign shall not exceed the maximum permitted area for the main freestanding sign
E.
Office And Industrial Uses:
1.
Canopy Signs:
a.
Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per street frontage or lot
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
1.5 square feet per linear foot of building frontage; applies cumulatively for all wall, canopy, under canopy and
permanent window signs
c.
Maximum
height in feet
n/a
d.
Minimum
clearance in
feet
8
2.
Under Canopy Signs:
a.
Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per business establishment
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
5
c.
Maximum
height in feet
n/a
d.
Minimum
clearance in
feet
8
e.
Other
requirements
Maximum width of 60 percent of horizontal canopy projection. Area is counted in maximum wall sign area
3. Menu Board Signs:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 479/618
a.
Number
permitted
2
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
32
c.
Maximum
height in feet
16
d.
Other
requirements
Shall be freestanding or wall signs located in side or rear yards only
4.
Wall Signs:
a.
Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per business establishment
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
1.5 square feet per linear foot of building frontage; applies cumulatively for all wall, canopy, under canopy and
permanent window signs
c.
Sign height Shall not extend above the fascia or parapet line
d.
Other
requirements
May locate on principal building walls facing public streets only; may project a maximum of 1 foot into required yard
5.
Window Signs, Permanent:
a.
Number
permitted
n/a
b.
Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
Both permanent and temporary window signs together must not exceed 50 percent of the area of display windows.
The total area of both permanent window signs and wall signs must not exceed the maximum area for wall signs.
Permanent window signs may contain only the business name and type, logo, address, phone number, major
product, and business hours
c.
Maximum
height in feet
n/a
6.
Freestanding Signs:
a.
Industrial Or
Office Park
Entrance
Sign:
(1) Number
permitted
1 per street entrance
(2) Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
150
(3) Maximum
height in feet
8
(4) Other
requirements
Minimum of 5 feet from any lot line
b.
Directory
Sign:
(1) Number
permitted
1
(2) Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
150
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 480/618
(3) Maximum
height in feet
16
(4) Other
requirements
Must be part of the main sign facing for the complex and shall be uniform in size, shape and color. Total area of the
directory sign and main sign shall not exceed the maximum permitted area for a main freestanding sign
c.
Outdoor
Advertising
Signs:
(1) Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per street frontage or lot
(2) Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
300
(3) Maximum
height in feet
25
(4) Other
requirements
Allowed only as a conditional use in the C-3 and I Districts. Shall be principal use only, conform to yard requirements
of the district, and be located a minimum of 100 feet from any other outdoor advertising sign and from any Residential
District. Any illumination shall be indirect
d.
Other Signs:
(1) Number
permitted
Maximum of 1 sign per street frontage or lot
(2) Maximum
area in
square feet
per side
1 square foot of building frontage up to a maximum of 50 square feet. Shall contain only the building or park name,
location, and list of tenants. Must locate a minimum of 7 feet from any lot line, to be measured from the outermost
perimeter of the sign
(3) Maximum
height in feet
6
(4) Other
requirements
1 square foot of building frontage up to a maximum of 50 square feet. Shall contain only the building or park name,
location, and list of tenants. Must locate a minimum of 7 feet from any lot line, to be measured from the outermost
perimeter of the sign
(Ord. 2018-102, 12-13-2018)
11-6-12: SIGN AREA BONUSES:
Allowable sign area for commercial uses may be increased by the percentages specified below under the conditions also specified therein:
Area
Bonus
Type Of
Sign
Conditions For Bonus
15% Wall In shopping center with lease provisions approved by the Village that restrict all wall signs uniform or complementary in
size, shape, and color
15% Freestanding
Sign is erected in landscaped area, the design of which is approved by the Village, that is at least twice the area of the
sign in size
15% Freestanding
Sign height is 8 feet or less
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-6-13: SPECIAL SIGN DISTRICTS:
A. Designated By Ordinance: Upon the finding of unique circumstances, specific geographic areas or specific properties in the Village, the Village Board
may designate by ordinance special Sign Districts for the purpose of improving the overall appearance of signs in the area or giving effect to special
needs of unique businesses.
B. Grounds For Creating District: A special Sign District may be created when there are unique circumstances relating to a geographic area which require
regulations beyond the application of the provisions of this chapter. Examples of these circumstances are:
1. Special Improvement Areas: Certain groups of adjacent businesses or neighborhood areas in the Village may have special characteristics which
require unique considerations for signs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 481/618
2. Large Properties Or Unique Businesses: The premises of certain larger properties or businesses on small parcels may have signage needs that are
unique.
C. Initiating District: Any interested person may initiate the consideration of a special Sign District by presenting a request therefor to the Plan Commission
for a recommendation.
D. Application Content: In addition to the requirements listed for permit applications in section 11-6-16 of this chapter, the application for a comprehensive
sign plan for a special Sign District shall include a plan for all signs to be used in the district, including their maximum size, color, location, illumination
details, lettering type, mounting details, and landscaping details.
E. Comprehensive Sign Plan: No sign for which a permit is required may be erected in a special sign district unless it is in conformance with the
comprehensive sign plan approved for that district. The comprehensive sign plan for a district may be amended by following the same procedure that is
used to establish the initial sign plan.
F. Review Criteria: The plan commission shall use the design guidelines set forth in section 11-6-15 of this chapter in its review of the proposed
comprehensive sign plan.
G. Permitted Variations: In conjunction with the approval of the comprehensive sign plan, the plan commission may authorize variations to the regulations
included in this chapter. Such variations shall be permitted only when the applicant demonstrates that they are necessary to provide an improved
comprehensive solution that is consistent with the purpose of this chapter as found in section 11-6-1 of this chapter. The petitioner shall demonstrate
that all reasonable efforts (utilizing color, contrast, lettering legibility, illumination, and graphic composition) have been made to increase the reading
effectiveness of the proposed signage within the normal requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
H. Approval Procedure: No special sign district shall be created by the village board without following the procedures set forth for the approval of a
conditional use in chapter 3, article C of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-6-14: LANDSCAPING AND LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE:
A. Landscape Plan: Every permit application for a freestanding or ground sign shall be accompanied by a landscape plan meeting the following standards:
1. The required landscaped areas shall be improved with such plantings as grass sodding or seeding, hedges, conifers, flowering plants, evergreens,
etc., of a size and in quantity proportionate to the size and height of the sign as judged by the zoning administrator in a way harmonious with the
landscape concept for the whole site. Landscaping shall form an attractive, dense cluster at the base of the sign that is equally attractive in winter
and summer.
2. In addition to the plantings herein described, the landscaped area shall also include ground protection such as, but not limited to, ground cover
plants, landscaping bark, decorative stone or landscape timbers.
3. It shall be the duty of each party owning any lot or parcel improved or to be improved with the landscaping required herein to maintain said
landscaping including, but not by way of limitation, the replacement of any dead or diseased vegetation, the trimming of any overgrown vegetation
and the maintenance of any ground cover or protection provided in accordance with the terms hereof. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
B. Landscaping Practices: Landscaping in rights of way and on site shall be planted and pruned in accordance with the guidelines set forth in IDOT
"General Requirements For Landscape Operations On State Highway Right-Of-Way In Urban Areas" and IDOT "Location Standards For Plant Material
On The Right-Of-Way". (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-6-15: DESIGN GUIDELINES:
A. General Design Principles:
1. Signs shall be adequately legible under the circumstances in which they are primarily seen. The legibility of signs is related to:
a. The speed at which they are viewed.
b. The context and surroundings in which they are seen.
c. The design, colors, and contrast of the sign copy and sign face.
The design of the sign, including copy, lettering size and style, and colors, shall logically relate to the predominant speed of traffic which will see it.
Signs shall legibly convey their messages without being distracting or unsafe to motorists reading them.
2. Signs shall not detract from the general appearance and architectural character of their surroundings including streets, buildings, and other signs in
the area. Signs shall not be designed to compete with one another but shall contribute to the composite legibility and attractiveness of streets within
the village.
3. Signs shall be an integral architectural element of the buildings and sites that they identify, and their design shall be consistent with, and not detract
from, the overall architectural concept of their site.
4. Signs shall be carefully crafted, durable, and consistent with the quality and permanence of the buildings and sites that they identify.
5. All signs shall be regularly maintained and repaired or replaced in response to the aging and weathering of their materials.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 482/618
B. Specific Guidelines By Design Element:
1. Scale And Proportion:
a. Freestanding Signs: The scale of freestanding signs shall be compatible with the building or buildings they identify, and the signs shall not be of
such a size that they visually overpower the buildings on the site.
b. Building Signs (Signs Attached To Or Part Of A Building Or Structure On The Site Other Than Freestanding Signs): Building signs shall be
harmonious in scale and proportion with the building facade to which they are mounted and with the architectural elements of the building such as
windows, cornices, sign friezes, and bays. Signs that are part of building elements such as walls, windows, canopies, awnings, and mansard roofs
shall not visually overpower those elements nor detract from the composition of the building facade.
2. Shape And Silhouette:
a. Freestanding Signs: The silhouette and outlined shape of freestanding signs shall be simple and compatible with the building to which it relates.
Signs of excessively complicated outline or composed of many different connected shapes are unacceptable. Freestanding signs should have an
attractive combination of pole skirts, landscaping, berms or similar treatment to provide a visual base for the sign and integrate the sign into the
overall architecture, landscaping, and topography on the site. Freestanding signs may not obstruct or limit the sight distance of motorists within any
sight triangle as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title as "vision clearance triangle".
b. Building Signs: The silhouettes and outlined shapes of building signs shall be compatible with the building facade on which they are mounted.
Shapes that disrupt the architectural order and composition of a building facade are unacceptable.
3. Placement And Height:
a. Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs shall not be placed close against a building so that they obscure important architectural features such as
entrances, display windows, or decorative cornices when viewed from the street.
b. Building Signs: Sign placement on a building shall respect and not disrupt the architectural composition of the building facade. No part of any sign
should overlap or cover the architectural edges and lines of the building such as cornices, eaves, window and door frames, columns, decorative
elements, and corners.
4. Sign Copy:
a. Sign copy shall be brief enough to be legible under the circumstances and speed at which it will be seen and should be composed in proportion to
the area of the sign face.
b. The use of simple pictures, symbols, or logographs is encouraged as a replacement for words that describe the name or nature of a business or
use.
c. The number of graphic elements and letters shall be held to the minimum needed to convey each sign's message and shall be composed in
proportion to the area of the sign's face.
5. Lettering:
a. Lettering styles on signs shall be legible under the circumstances and speed at which they will be seen.
b. Simple and easily readable lettering styles shall primarily be used, and specialized, decorative lettering styles shall be adequately legible and
compatible with the architectural concept of the property.
c. The number of different lettering styles on a sign or on a series of signs within a complex of buildings shall be minimized and shall relate to the
overall architectural concept for the property.
d. Lettering and copy shall not be crowded onto the surface of a sign or building surface and shall be composed to leave ample space around the
copy to preserve legibility.
6. Materials And Construction:
a. The materials and textures of signs shall have good architectural character and shall not be inconsistent with nor detract from the overall design
concept of the sites and buildings of which they are a part.
b. Natural materials such as wood, stone, or brick are encouraged for signs.
c. Signs shall be designed for permanence, and their materials and construction shall not detract from the permanence of the buildings they identify.
7. Color:
a. The visual appearance of signs on a street shall be harmonious, orderly, and reinforce the architectural character of the street. Colors or
combinations of colors that are harsh and disrupt the visual harmony and order of the street are unacceptable.
b. Bold, bright, or harsh colors shall be used sparingly, as accents on a sign, rather than as predominant colors. Strong contrasts of tone or color
shall be avoided except when necessary for legibility.
c. Visible frames, supports, or structural elements of signs that are not part of the sign face shall be of dark, subdued coloring or, if made of brick,
stone, or wood, shall be of naturally dark colors compatible with the natural finish of the material.
8. Illumination:
a. Signs that are illuminated shall be designed to be equally attractive, whether illuminated or not.
b. The intensity of illumination for the sign shall not be excessively bright and shall be even over the face of the sign with no bright spots.
c. Freestanding signs shall be illuminated internally or by concealed fixtures so that no reflectors, extension arms, or fixtures are visible from the
street.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 483/618
d. Signs that are part of a building shall have internal lighting or a concealed means of illumination. The only exception shall be decorative fixtures
that are consistent with the style of the building and do not disrupt the order and composition of the building facades.
e. To maintain legibility, the illumination of letters and graphics shall be substantially brighter than the illumination of the background on a sign face.
C. Additional Guidelines For Special Signs And Situations:
1. Signs With Company Logos: Company logos or identification logos of a prototypical design on signs shall conform to all the provisions in these
guidelines and shall stay within the spirit and intent of these guidelines regarding the visual order and restraint of the street environment.
2. Signs In Shopping Centers And Other Unified Business Centers:
a. There shall be an architectural harmony and unity of signs within a unified business center on a property. Sign type, color scheme, size, and
illumination within the site shall be coordinated and shall be compatible with the architecture of the center.
b. Building signs shall be in harmony with the overall architectural concept for the site and be compatible with each other and with the building
facades. Separate business signs shall be located uniformly on a sign frieze, canopy or other appropriate architectural element consistent with the
architectural concept for the center as a whole.
3. Changeable Copy Signs:
a. Changeable copy may be incorporated into a sign face when the changeable component of the sign face occupies less than half the total area of
that sign face.
b. Changeable copy on a sign face shall be composed in proportion to the entire sign face with a border or similar treatment around the changeable
copy to integrate it into the sign face.
c. Lettering of changeable copy shall be of a single, simple, easily legible lettering style and shall be of uniform color and size throughout the
changeable copy portion of the sign. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-6-16: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
A. Permit Requirements:
1. Contents Of Application: An application for a sign permit shall be made upon forms provided by the zoning administrator and shall include the
following information:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, of the owners or managers of the property on which the sign is to be displayed, and of
the intended owner of the sign.
b. The location of the property where the sign is to be displayed.
c. A site plan showing the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, rights of way, and street grade, and the locations and sign
areas of all existing signs on the same premises.
d. Two (2) copies of plans and specifications showing methods of construction and support, all dimensions of the sign, and all electrical components.
e. An elevation sketch showing all exposed surfaces of the sign and all proposed messages or representations thereupon, accurately represented as
to shape, size, proportion, and color.
f. Name of the party that is to produce and erect the sign.
g. Written consent of the owners of the property on which the sign is to be displayed, if other than the applicant.
h. Other information required by the zoning administrator to ascertain compliance with village regulations.
i. A nonrefundable fee as established by the village.
j. The number of copies of plans and specifications as specified by the zoning administrator showing method of construction, location and support,
attachment to a building or ground, illumination and lighting intensity, sealed by a registered architect or structural engineer or professional
engineer. If required by the zoning administrator, a copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead load and
wind pressure in any direction, in the amount required by all regulations and ordinances of the village.
k. Any electrical permit required for the sign.
l. A statement specifying the number and aggregate size of all signs existing on the lot or premises at the time of making such application.
m. The information submitted by the applicant shall be in sufficient detail to illustrate clearly the design for which approval is being sought and its
relationship to the structure it serves.
2. Issuance Of Permit; Deposit Required:
a. The zoning administrator shall issue a sign permit for any sign for which a complete and accurate sign permit application has been filed when he
or she has determined that the sign is in compliance with this chapter and other applicable village ordinances.
b. A two hundred dollar ($200.00) cash escrow deposit shall be deposited with the village at the time a permit for a temporary sign is issued. This
deposit shall be refunded after the temporary sign has been removed in accordance with the time period specified on the permit. The deposit shall
be forfeited if the temporary sign is not removed within the time permit.
3. Denial Of Permit: The zoning administrator shall give written notice to the applicant of denial of a sign permit application, together with the reasons
for the denial.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 484/618
4. Time Limit On Installation Of Sign: A sign permit shall become void if the sign authorized thereby has not been completely installed within six (6)
months of the date the permit was issued.
5. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
a. The zoning administrator may suspend or revoke, in writing to the permittee, any sign permit issued on the basis of misstatement of fact.
b. In the event that the person, firm or corporation to whom a sign permit has been granted fails to complete or assure completion of the work
required in accordance with the provisions of said permit during the time said permit is in effect, the zoning administrator shall notify such person,
firm or corporation in writing. If such failure is not corrected within ten (10) days after notification, the sign permit shall be revoked by order of the
zoning administrator.
c. Any sign permit issued under this chapter shall be revoked by the zoning administrator when it is shown that:
(1) The permit was issued without or in excess of the authority of the zoning administrator; or
(2) The application for the sign permit contained a material misrepresentation of fact; or
(3) The sign or its structure was erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or used in a manner not in compliance with this chapter or the
submittals which served as the basis for issuance of said permit; or
(4) A sign is found to be unsafe and is not promptly repaired.
6. Removal Of Unsafe, Abandoned Or Unlawful Signs:
a. Any sign, other than an outdoor advertising sign, that no longer identifies a business, activity, event, or service conducted or product, service, or
entertainment sold on the premises where the sign is located shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed.
b. If, upon inspection, the zoning administrator finds that a sign is abandoned, unsafe, or in any way not in compliance with village ordinances, he or
she shall issue a written order to the permittee stating the nature of the violation and requiring the repair, replacement, or removal of the
permanent sign within fourteen (14) days of the date of the order. The notice to remove unsafe, abandoned or unlawful temporary signs shall be
one day.
c. If, after fourteen (14) days of issuance, there has not yet been compliance with an order, or if a sign constitutes an immediate hazard to the public
safety, the zoning administrator may recommend to the village board that it authorize judicial process to cause the sign to be removed or repaired
pursuant to the provisions concerning unsafe buildings of article 11 of the Illinois municipal code.
d. After any removal of a sign through judicial process, the zoning administrator shall send a notice to the sign owner stating the nature of the
removal work performed and demanding payment of the cost thereof plus ten percent (10%) for inspection and administration costs. If said amount
is not paid within thirty (30) days of the notice, it shall become a lien against the property of the sign owner. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
B. Insurance, Bond And License Requirements:
1. Insurance:
a. Every applicant for a sign permit for a sign to be so located that it may fall upon a public right of way shall file with the zoning administrator a
multiperil liability insurance policy, or a certificate of insurance therefor, covering all damage or injury that might be caused in an amount not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999;
amd. 2011 Code)
b. The village and its officers, agents, and employees shall be named as additional parties insured. This policy shall be maintained in force so long
as the sign permit is in effect. The zoning administrator shall revoke such permit if at any time the insurance is not in full force. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-
1999)
2. Bond: In lieu of insurance, the applicant may file an indemnity bond, with a corporate surety satisfactory to the zoning administrator, in the amount of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), which will indemnify and hold harmless the village and its officers, agents, and employees from all claims, losses,
or lawsuits resulting from the sign. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
3. Contractor Licenses: In addition, no person shall perform work related to the construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, improvement, or
maintenance of any sign who has not obtained a village contractor's license. No person shall perform electrical work upon a sign who has not
presented his or her electrical registration to the village.
C. Variances And Appeals: Variances and appeals relating to the application of sign regulations shall be as provided for all other provisions of this title.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
Chapter 7
NONCONFORMITIES
11-7-1: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to provide for the continuation and, within a suitable period of time, elimination of existing uses of property that do not conform
to the requirements of this title or that may not conform to future amendments hereto. The provisions herein are designed to accomplish this intent in a
way that:
A. Minimizes the nuisance, reduction in neighboring property values, and other adverse effects of properties that do not conform to their environs.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 485/618
B. Allows the property owner or lessee to recover all or a substantial part of his investment in the nonconformity, while also minimizing the time period
during which, by virtue of the nonconformity, he or she enjoys a special right not available to other property owners in the same zoning district. (Ord.
99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-7-2: DEFINITION; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. A "nonconformity" is any characteristic of a building, structure, or lot or parcel of land, or of the use thereof, which was lawful prior to the effective date
hereof or any amendment hereto and that does not conform to the requirements applicable to the zoning district in which it is located. The lawful
issuance of a building permit prior to the dates specified above shall be considered to establish the lawfulness of any building or structure.
B. There are two (2) categories of nonconformities:
1. Use Nonconformities: A use nonconformity may apply to either a principal use or an accessory use. There are two (2) categories of use
nonconformities:
a. Activities Nonconformities:
(1) Any activities or functions carried on at a premises that are not allowed by the permitted and conditional uses of the zoning district in which the
premises is situated, irrespective of the use for which the premises was designed.
(2) The use of a dwelling now located in a residence district as the site of a previously legal business is an example of an activity nonconformity.
b. Design Nonconformities:
(1) The design or intended use of all or substantially all of a premises for any use not allowed by the permitted and conditional uses of the zoning
district in which it is located, irrespective of the nature of the activities currently carried on at that premises.
(2) A previously legal premises now located in a residence district that was designed and intended as an automobile service station or an open
sales lot would be an example of a design nonconformity, even if no service station or sales business was currently operated on the premises.
2. Standards Nonconformities:
a. All other nonconformities with the requirements of this title, including nonconformities involving:
(1) Yards.
(2) Building height.
(3) Lot area or lot area per dwelling unit.
(4) Lot width.
(5) Floor area ratio.
(6) Size of business.
(7) Off street parking and loading.
(8) Signs.
(9) Buffer planting strips.
(10) Screening.
b. An undeveloped lot not meeting the minimum width required by its zoning district, or an otherwise conforming business with a sign that does not
meet a requirement of the sign regulations would be examples of standards nonconformities. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-7-3: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED STRUCTURES:
A. If a structure with a nonconformity is damaged to the extent that the cost of restoration to its previous condition exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
replacement cost, as defined herein, any new construction or reconstruction must comply with all zoning district regulations.
B. The replacement cost shall be computed as the unequalized assessed valuation for property tax purposes of improvements only (excluding the
valuation of the land) immediately prior to the occurrence of the damage, divided by the assessment ratio of assessed value to true value expressed as
a decimal.
C. The existing nonconformity may be reestablished; provided only, that restoration of damage amounting to fifty percent (50%) or less of replacement cost
is started within one year and completed within two (2) years from the date the damage occurred. The village may grant an extension of the two (2)
year period if restoration work has been diligently prosecuted and completion within said period is impossible owing to conditions not the fault of the
property owner. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-7-4: ADDITIONS TO, ENLARGEMENTS OF AND ALTERATIONS OF STRUCTURES:
A. Activity Or Design Nonconformity: No addition, enlargement, or "structural alteration", as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, shall be made to any
structure having a design or activity nonconformity without the elimination of all such nonconformity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 486/618
B. Standards Nonconformity: No addition, enlargement, or "structural alteration", as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title, shall be made to any structure
having a standards nonconformity without both:
1. The conformance of any new addition or enlargement portion of the structure to all requirements of the zoning district; and
2. The elimination, in whole or in part, to the extent the zoning administrator determines physically and economically feasible, of standards
nonconformities existing on the property before the addition or enlargement, particularly where such nonconformities can be reduced or eliminated
without relocation of structures, acquisition of additional land, or expenditures disproportionate to the cost of the enlargement. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-7-5: EXPANSION:
A. Within Structures:
1. Activity Or Design Nonconformity: Expansion of activities within a structure having an activity or design nonconformity, or both, is permitted only
under one of the following conditions:
a. The structure has a design nonconformity, and the expansion involves no "structural alteration", as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title.
b. The property is made conforming to all applicable provisions of this title.
2. Standards Nonconformity: Expansion within a structure having a standards nonconformity is permitted conditioned upon the elimination, in whole or
in part, to the extent the zoning administrator determines physically and economically feasible, of standards nonconformities existing on the property
before expansion, particularly where such nonconformities can be reduced or eliminated without relocation of structures, acquisition of additional
land, or expenditures disproportionate to the cost of expansion.
B. Expansion Of Land Use: Expansion of the use of land having any nonconformity, whether involving a principal or accessory use, is permitted beyond
the land area presently occupied; provided only, that the property is made conforming to all applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-7-6: MOVING STRUCTURES:
No structure with any nonconformity shall be moved, in whole or in part, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless in the new location, it will
conform to all regulations of the applicable zoning district. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-7-7: CONDITIONAL USES NOT CONFORMING:
Conditional uses approved by the village shall not be considered to have use nonconformities but shall require an additional conditional use permit for any
alteration, enlargement, or extension. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-7-8: INTERMITTENT USES NOT CONFORMING:
The casual, intermittent, or temporary use of land or structures shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconformity. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-7-9: CHANGE IN ACTIVITY:
No nonconforming activity may be changed to another nonconforming activity. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-7-10: DISCONTINUANCE OF ACTIVITY:
If a nonconforming activity is discontinued for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days, any subsequent activity on the same property shall
conform to the permitted and conditional use regulations of the applicable zoning district. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-7-11: AMORTIZATION:
A. General Requirements:
1. All nonconformities shall be removed or the uses altered to eliminate, as applicable, the nonconformity within the amortization periods specified,
subsections B, C and D of this section.
2. The amortization periods therein were determined based on:
a. The degree of nuisance or other adverse effects each type of nonconformity creates.
b. The size of the investment in the feature that creates the nonconformity and the relative ease and expense with which the nonconformity may be
eliminated.
c. The accelerated cost recovery system adopted in 1981 by the U.S. internal revenue service, which provides for a fifteen (15) year period during
which investors in real property may recover the costs of their investment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 487/618
3. The following types of nonconformities shall not be subject to the amortization provisions herein:
a. Standards nonconformities, as defined in subsection 11-7-2B2 of this chapter.
b. Design nonconformities of dwelling units.
c. Nonconformities of uses that are located in a commercial or office district and are a permitted or conditional use in any commercial or office
district.
B. Administration:
1. A certificate of nonconformance and amortization schedule shall be required for the continuation of all nonconformities created by this title or any
amendment hereto.
2. When the village zoning administrator determines that a property has any nonconformity, he or she shall notify the owner or lessee thereof, in
writing, of such nonconformity and of the regulations applicable thereto.
3. Following receipt of the notice, the owner or lessee shall file with the zoning administrator, within three (3) months of the date thereof, either
evidence that the property is not nonconforming or a completed application for a certificate of nonconformance and amortization schedule.
4. The application shall require the applicant to submit information as required by the zoning administrator to determine the applicable amortization
period for the nonconformity. Upon timely receipt of a complete and accurate application therefor, the zoning administrator shall, within five (5)
working days, issue a certificate of nonconformance and amortization schedule for the nonconforming property.
5. Failure to apply for a certificate of nonconformance and amortization schedule within three (3) months of the notice provided in this subsection will
require the amortization of the nonconformance within six (6) months of the notice provided herein.
6. Nonconforming uses that have obtained a certificate of nonconformance and amortization schedule from the zoning administrator shall be
discontinued within the amortization period specified in subsection C of this section for said use.
C. Amortization Periods Established:
Amortization Period In Years
Use With Nonconformity
Value
In Residential
Districts
In Other
Districts
1. Adult regulated uses -- 1 1
2. Structures and buildings (other than adult regulated uses):
As principal use:
With conforming design and nonconforming activity -- 2.5 5
With nonconforming design and conforming or nonconforming activity -- 7.5 15
As accessory use -- Same for principal use
3. Land (other than adult regulated uses):
As principal use:
With no structures -- 1 2
With only accessory structures $6,000.00 or less1 1.5 3
Over $6,000.001 2.5 5
As accessory use -- Same for principal use
Note:
1. Value refers to value of improvements only.
Standards nonconformities are not amortized.
Value is unequalized assessed valuation for property tax purposes on the date of passage of the ordinance or the amendment that created the
nonconformity divided by the assessment ratio, expressed as a decimal, of assessed value to true value.
All amortization periods start from the date of the notice from the zoning administrator to the property owner or lessee that a nonconformity exists.
D. Extended Amortization Periods:
1. An owner or lessee of nonconforming land, a structure, a building or an adult regulated use may, within three (3) months of the notice provided
herein, apply for an extended amortization schedule of up to two (2) additional years. The owner or lessee shall state on the application that it is for
an extended amortization period and shall set forth the reasons for pursuing the extended period.
2. Upon receipt of a complete and accurate application for an extended amortization schedule, the plan commission shall schedule and hold, not less
than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty five (45) days thereafter, a public hearing. At least fifteen (15) days in advance of the hearing, notice of the
time and place of such hearing shall be published at the applicant's expense in a newspaper of general circulation in the county and shall be posted
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 488/618
on the road or street frontage of the property for which an application for a certificate of nonconformance has been requested. In addition, notice of
the hearing shall be sent to each civic or property owners' organization requesting notices of hearings of nonconformances; however, failure to notify
a civic or property owners' organization so requesting such shall not place any liability whatsoever upon the village, nor shall such failure invalidate
the legality of said hearing. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
3. Approval and/or establishment of extended amortization periods and instructions for issuance of extended amortization schedules based on
applications therefor shall be granted by the plan commission only in accordance with the following standards. No extended amortization schedule
shall be approved or established unless the plan commission shall find: (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
a. The conditions upon which the application for the extended amortization schedule are based are unique to the property for which the extended
amortization schedule is sought and are not applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning classification.
b. That the period of amortization of the nonconformance will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general
welfare.
c. That the nonconformance during the period of amortization will be not injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity
for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the adjacent neighborhood.
d. That the nonconformance during the period of amortization will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding
property for uses permitted in the district.
e. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and/or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
f. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public
streets.
g. That the nonconformance will conform to all other applicable regulations of the district in which it is located except those specific requirements
directly relating to the nonconformance status of the property. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
Chapter 8
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
11-8-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The intent of this title is to create a series of districts of such number and character as are necessary to achieve compatibility of uses within each district, to
implement the adopted official comprehensive plan, and to complement the official zoning map of the village. For the purposes of this title, all land and
water areas in the village are hereby divided into the following districts:
A. Residence Districts:
AE Agriculture and estate district
R-1 Single-family detached residence district
R-2 Single-family detached residence district
R-3 Single-family detached residence district
R-4 Attached residence district
R-5 Multiple-family residence district
B. Commercial Districts:
C-1 Neighborhood commercial district
C-2 Community commercial district
C-3 General commercial district
C-4 Regional commercial district
C. Office, Business Park And Industrial Districts:
O-1 Local office district
O-2 Office park district
BP Business park district
I Light industrial district
D. Special Districts:
COS Conservation and open space district
PIB Public and institutional buildings district
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-8-2: ZONING MAP:
A. The zoning district classification of all land in the village shall be shown on the map designated as the "Village Of Glendale Heights Zoning District
Map", dated and signed by the village clerk upon adoption.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 489/618
B. The zoning district map, everything shown thereon, and all amendments thereto shall be as much a part of this title as if fully described herein and shall
be filed as part of this title by the village clerk. Said map shall be available for public inspection in the office of the village clerk. Any amendments to this
map shall be similarly dated, filed, and made available for public reference.
C. If, by amendment to this title, any district boundary, as shown on the official zoning map or any other matter shown thereon, is changed by action of the
village board, such change shall be promptly indicated on the official zoning map by the zoning administrator, or his designee, together with the date of
passage of the amendment and sufficient written description to give a precise understanding of the change. Every change shall be certified by the
village clerk. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-8-3: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
A. District boundary lines shall, unless otherwise indicated, be on the boundary lines of the village, of sections or divisions of sections, or tract or lot lines;
on the centerlines of streets, railroads, alleys, easements, rivers and other water bodies; or on the extension of such lines.
B. District boundary lines approximately following such lines shall be interpreted as located on those lines. Distances not specifically indicated on the map
shall be established using the scale of the map.
C. Where a district boundary divides a lot in single ownership, the district governing any portion of the lot may, at the owner's discretion, extend to the
entire lot if such extension is not more than twenty five feet (25') beyond the district boundary on the map. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-8-4: ZONING OF UNCLASSIFIED AND ANNEXED LANDS:
A. Unclassified Lands: It is the intent of this title that every part of the area regulated be included in one of the districts established. Any land located within
the village not shown to be included in a district on the official zoning map shall be deemed to be in the AE district.
B. Annexed Land: Any parcel of land hereafter annexed to the village shall be classified in the AE agriculture and estate district except as may be provided
by a preannexation agreement or by subsequent amendment to this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
Chapter 9
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. AE AGRICULTURE AND ESTATE DISTRICT
11-9A-1: PURPOSE:
The AE agriculture and estate district is intended:
A. To provide land outside of the intensely developed portions of the village for agriculture and low density estate and single-family residences prior to the
time such land is needed for urban development.
B. To discourage the scattering of parcels of intensive development and the premature and uneconomic extension of public facilities and services.
C. To encourage the maintenance of open areas for future urban uses that will require large undeveloped sites.
D. To provide for temporary zoning of land newly annexed to the village in cases where appropriate urban zoning has not yet been determined. (Ord. 99-
02, 1-7-1999)
11-9A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all permitted uses in the district, including:
Agricultural buildings and structures.
Clubhouses and other structures on the grounds of parks, golf courses, etc.
Private greenhouses.
Private noncommercial stables.
Agriculture, except mink, poultry, or hog farms, cattle feeding stations, or farms feeding offal or garbage.
Dwelling units:
Single-family detached dwellings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 490/618
Farm stands for sale only of produce grown on the same parcel of land.
Greenhouses and nurseries.
Home occupations.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and other publicly owned open space. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the AE district:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in the district.
Cemeteries.
Commercial stables.
Educational institutions.
Excavation for artificial lakes, borrow pits, and topsoil removal.
Golf courses and country clubs, private.
Public utility and service uses. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9A-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A.
Minimum lot area:
2.
Other 2.5 acres
3.
Planned unit development n/a
B.
Minimum lot width:
1.
Single-family 200 ft.
2.
Other 200 ft.
C.
Minimum yards:
1.
Front/corner side 30 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
2.
Side 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
3.
Rear 40 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
1. Single-family Minimum lot area 2.5 acres
4.
Regional arterial street setback1 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
D.
Maximum height of principal structure:
1.
Single-family 30 ft./2.5 stories, whichever is less
2.
All other uses 35 ft.
E.
Maximum floor area ratio:
1.
Single-family n/a
2. All other uses 0.6
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 491/618
F.
Accessory structures:
1.
Maximum height 17 ft./1 story
2.
Coverage of rear yard 35 percent2
3.
Minimum setback from property line (except fences, walls, and hedges) 3 ft.
4.
Minimum setback from principal or other accessory building (except enclosed decks
and patios)
5 ft.
Notes:
1. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage of less
than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Cumulative of all accessory structures; excludes areas occupied by open patios and decks and swimming pools. Percentage applies to area of
actual rear yard when it is smaller than area of required rear yard.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9A-5: MINIMUM HABITABLE AREA:
Three thousand (3,000) square feet (in all residences for which building permits are issued after the effective date hereof). (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9A-6: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9A-7: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9A-8: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE B. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-9B-1: PURPOSE:
The R-1 district is intended to provide, in existing and newly developing area, for the single-family detached residential environment characterized by large
lots. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district.
Dwellings:
Single-family detached.
Small community residences that comply with the special conditions.
Home occupations.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and other publicly owned open space. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the R-1 district:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 492/618
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in the district.
Cemeteries.
Dwellings:
Large community residences.
Small community residences that fail to meet all special conditions as specified in section 11-4-10 of this title, excluding community residences or
operators denied a required local or state license.
Educational institutions.
Golf courses and country clubs, private.
Nursing and halfway houses, mental health centers and retirement homes.
Planned unit developments.
Public utility and service uses.
Religious institutions.
Temporary leasing of public school property, pending action on its disposition or reuse for school purposes for permitted uses or conditional uses in the
district in which it is located. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9B-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A.
Minimum lot area:
1.
Single-family 12,000 sq. ft.
2.
Other 12,000 sq. ft.
3.
Planned unit developments 5 acres
B.
Minimum lot width:
1.
Single-family 100 ft.
2.
All other uses 100 ft.
C.
Minimum yards:
1.
Front/corner side 30 ft.
2.
Side 10 ft.
3.
Rear 40 ft.
4.
Abutting regional arterial streets1 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
D.
Maximum height of principal structure:
1.
Single-family 30 ft./2.5 stories, whichever is less
2.
All other uses 35 ft.
E.
Maximum floor area ratio:
1.
Single-family n/a
2.
All other uses 0.6
F. Accessory structures:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 493/618
1.
Maximum height 17 ft./1 story
2.
Coverage of rear yard 35 percent2
3.
Minimum setback from property line (except fences, walls, and hedges) 3 ft.
4.
Minimum setback from principal or other accessory building (except enclosed decks
and patios)
5 ft.
Notes:
1. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage of less
than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Cumulative of all accessory structures; excludes areas occupied by open patios and decks and swimming pools. Percentage applies to area of
actual rear yard when it is smaller than area of required rear yard.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9B-5: MINIMUM HABITABLE AREA:
Three thousand (3,000) square feet (in all residences for which building permits are issued after the effective date hereof). (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9B-6: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9B-7: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9B-8: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE C. R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-9C-1: PURPOSE:
The R-2 district is intended to provide, in existing and newly developing areas, for a single-family detached residential environment characterized by
medium sized lots. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district.
Dwellings:
Single-family detached.
Small community residences that comply with the special conditions as specified in section 11-4-10 of this title.
Home occupations.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and other publicly owned open space. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the R-2 district:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in the district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 494/618
Cemeteries.
Dwellings:
Large community residences.
Small community residences that fail to meet all special conditions as specified in section 11-4-10 of this title, excluding community residences or
operators denied a required local or state license.
Educational institutions.
Golf courses and country clubs, private.
Nursing and halfway houses, mental health centers and retirement homes.
Planned unit developments.
Public utility and service uses.
Religious institutions.
Temporary leasing of public school property, pending action on its disposition or reuse for school purposes for permitted uses or conditional uses in the
district in which it is located. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9C-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A.
Minimum lot area:
1.
Single-family 8,400 sq. ft.
2.
Other 8,400 sq. ft.
3.
Planned unit developments 5 acres
B.
Minimum lot width:
1.
Single-family 70 ft.
2.
All uses 70 ft.
C.
Minimum yards:
1.
Front/corner side 25 ft.
2.
Side 10 ft.
3.
Rear 30 ft.
4.
Abutting regional arterial streets1 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
D.
Maximum height of principal structure:
1.
Single-family 30 ft./2.5 stories, whichever is less
2.
All other uses 35 ft.
E.
Maximum floor area ratio:
1.
Single-family n/a
2.
All other uses 0.6
F.
Accessory structures:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 495/618
1.
Maximum height 17 ft./1 story
2.
Coverage of rear yard 35 percent2
3.
Minimum setback from property line (except fences, walls, and hedges) 3 ft.
4.
Minimum setback from principal or other accessory building (except enclosed decks
and patios)
5 ft.
Notes:
1. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage
of less than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Cumulative of all accessory structures; excludes areas occupied by open patios and decks and swimming pools. Percentage applies to area of
actual rear yard when it is smaller than area of required rear yard.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9C-5: MINIMUM HABITABLE AREA:
Two thousand (2,000) square feet (in all residences for which building permits are issued after the effective date hereof). (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9C-6: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9C-7: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9C-8: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE D. R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-9D-1: PURPOSE:
The R-3 district is intended to provide for the appropriate zoning of existing single-family neighborhoods in the village developed years ago under less
stringent development standards. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district.
Dwellings:
Single-family detached.
Small community residences that comply with the special conditions as specified in section 11-4-10 of this title.
Home occupations.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and other publicly owned open space. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the R-3 district:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in the district.
Cemeteries.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 496/618
Dwelling units:
Large community residences.
Small community residences that fail to meet all special conditions as specified in section 11-4-10 of this title, excluding community residences or
operators denied a required local or state license.
Zero lot line single-family detached dwellings.
Educational institutions.
Golf courses and country clubs, private.
Nursing and halfway houses, mental health centers and retirement homes.
Planned unit developments.
Public utility and service uses.
Religious institutions.
Temporary leasing of public school property, pending action on its disposition or reuse for school purposes for permitted uses or conditional uses in the
district in which it is located. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9D-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A.
Minimum lot area:
1.
Single-family 7,200 sq. ft.
2.
Other 7,200 sq. ft.
3.
Planned unit developments 5 acres
B.
Minimum lot width:
1.
Single-family 60 ft.
2.
Other uses 60 ft.
C.
Minimum yards:
1.
Front/corner side 25 ft.
2.
Side 6 ft.
3.
Rear 30 ft.
4.
Abutting regional arterial streets1 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
D.
Maximum height of principal structure:
1.
Single-family 30 ft./2.5 stories, whichever is less
2.
All other uses 35 ft.
E.
Maximum floor area ratio:
1.
Single-family n/a
2.
All other uses 0.6
F.
Accessory structures:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 497/618
1.
Maximum height 17 ft./1 story
2.
Coverage of rear yard 35 percent2
3.
Minimum setback from property line (except fences, walls, and hedges) 3 ft.
4.
Minimum setback from principal or other accessory building (except enclosed decks
and patios)
5 ft.
Notes:
1. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage
of less than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Cumulative of all accessory structures; excludes areas occupied by open patios and decks and swimming pools. Percentage applies to area of
actual rear yard when it is smaller than area of required rear yard.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9D-5: MINIMUM HABITABLE AREA:
One thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet (in all residences for which building permits are issued after the effective date hereof). (Ord. 99-02, 1-
7-1999)
11-9D-6: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9D-7: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9D-8: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE E. R-4 ATTACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-9E-1: PURPOSE:
The R-4 district is intended to provide for intermediate housing types and densities between single-family detached and multi-family development in order
to further a more balanced distribution of nonsingle-family detached housing in the village and to provide for intermediate density development in locations
where apartment buildings would not be compatible. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9E-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district.
Dwellings:
Single-family detached.
Townhouses.
Small community residences that comply with the special conditions as specified in section 11-4-10 of this title.
Home occupations.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and other publicly owned open space. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9E-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the R-4 district:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 498/618
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in the district.
Cemeteries.
Dwelling units:
Large community residences.
Small community residences that fail to meet all special conditions as specified in section 11-4-10 of this title, excluding community residences or
operators denied a required local or state license.
Zero lot line single-family detached dwellings.
Educational institutions.
Golf courses and country clubs, private.
Nursing and halfway houses, mental health centers and retirement homes.
Planned unit developments.
Public utility and service uses.
Religious institutions.
Temporary leasing of public school property, pending action on its disposition or reuse for school purposes for permitted uses or conditional uses in the
district in which it is located. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9E-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A.
Minimum lot area:
1.
Single-family 4,500 sq. ft.
2.
Townhouse 4,500 sq. ft./unit
3.
Other 4,500 sq. ft.
4.
Planned unit developments 5 acres
B.
Minimum lot width:
1.
Single-family 40 ft.
2.
Townhouse 40 ft./unit
3.
Other 40 ft.
C.
Minimum yards:
1.
Front/corner side 25 ft.
2.
Side 15 ft.
3.
Rear 30 ft.
4.
Abutting regional arterial streets1 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
D.
Maximum height of principal structure:
1.
Single-family 30 ft./2.5 stories, whichever is less
2.
Townhouse 30 ft./2.5 stories, whichever is less
3.
All other uses 35 ft.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 499/618
E.
Maximum floor area ratio:
1.
Single-family n/a
2.
Townhouse n/a
3.
All other uses 0.6
F.
Accessory structures:
1.
Maximum height 17 ft./1 story
2.
Coverage of rear yard 35 percent2
3.
Minimum setback from property line (except fences, walls, and hedges) 3 ft.
4.
Minimum setback from principal or other accessory building (except enclosed decks
and patios)
5 ft.
Notes:
1. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage
of less than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Cumulative of all accessory structures; excludes areas occupied by open patios and decks and swimming pools. Percentage applies to area of
actual rear yard when it is smaller than area of required rear yard.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9E-5: MINIMUM HABITABLE AREA:
The minimum habitable area in all residences for which building permits are issued after the effective date hereof shall be as follows:
A. Single-family: One thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet.
B. Attached single-family/townhouse: One thousand (1,000) square feet. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9E-6: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9E-7: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9E-8: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE F. R-5 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
11-9F-1: PURPOSE:
The R-5 district is primarily intended to provide for the appropriate zoning of existing multi-family development in the village. A secondary purpose is to
allow for the development of such additional medium density multi-family development in the future as may be consistent with a balanced distribution of
single-family detached and attached and medium density multi-family housing. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9F-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 500/618
Dwellings:
Single-family attached and detached.
Townhouses.
Multiple-family dwellings.
Large community residences that comply with the special conditions as defined herein.
Small community residences that comply with the special conditions as specified in section 11-4-10 of this title.
Home occupations.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and other publicly owned open space. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-9F-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the R-5 district:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in the district.
Cemeteries.
Congregate housing facilities.
Dwelling units:
Large community residences.
Small community residences that fail to meet all special conditions as specified in section 11-4-10 of this title, excluding community residences or
operators denied a required local or state license.
Zero lot line single-family detached dwellings.
Educational institutions.
Golf courses and country clubs, private.
Mobile home parks.
Mobile home subdivisions.
Nursing and halfway houses, mental health centers and retirement homes.
Planned unit developments.
Public utility and service uses.
Religious institutions.
Temporary leasing of public school property, pending action on its disposition or reuse for school purposes for permitted uses or conditional uses in the
district in which it is located. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. Ord. 2016-31, 6-2-2016)
11-9F-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A.
Minimum lot area:
1.
Single-family 4,500 sq. ft.
2.
Townhouse 4,500 sq. ft./unit
3.
Multiple-family 3,350 sq. ft./unit
4.
Other 4,500 sq. ft.
5. Planned unit developments 5 acres
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 501/618
B.
Minimum lot width:
1.
Single-family 30 ft.
2.
Townhouse 40 ft./unit
3.
Multiple-family n/a
4.
Other 30 ft.
C.
Minimum yards:
1.
Front/corner side 25 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
2.
Side 15 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
3.
Rear 30 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
4.
Abutting regional arterial streets1 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
5.
Residential transitional yard with AE, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 100 ft.2
D.
Minimum parking lot setbacks:
1.
Front/corner side 7 ft.3
2.
Side 7 ft.
3.
Rear 30 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
4.
Residential transitional yard with AE, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 30 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over
30 ft.
5.
Abutting regional arterial 7 ft.3
E.
Maximum height of principal structure:
1.
Single-family 30 ft./2.5 stories, whichever is less
2.
Townhouse 30 ft./2.5 stories, whichever is less
3.
Multiple-family 35 ft.
4.
All other uses 35 ft.
F.
Maximum floor area ratio:
1.
Single-family n/a
2.
Townhouse n/a
3.
Multiple-family 0.6
4.
All other uses 0.6
G.
Accessory structures:
1.
Maximum height 17 ft./1 story
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 502/618
2.
Coverage of rear yard 35 percent4
3.
Minimum setback from property line (except fences, walls, and hedges) 3 ft.
4.
Minimum setback from principal or other accessory building (except enclosed decks
and patios)
5 ft.
Notes:
1. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage of less
than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Measured from district boundary line and including any other overlapping yard required under this title. A portion of the transitional yard shall be a buffer
planting strip as set forth in section 11-4-15 of this title.
3. 30 feet for property zoned R-5 after the effective date hereof.
4. Cumulative of all accessory structures; excludes areas occupied by open patios and decks and swimming pools. Percentage applies to area of actual
rear yard when it is smaller than area of required rear yard.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9F-5: MINIMUM HABITABLE AREA:
The minimum habitable area in all residences for which building permits are issued after the effective date hereof shall be as follows:
A. Single-family 1,250 sq. ft.
B. Townhouse 1,000 sq. ft.
C. Multiple-family:
Efficiency 500 sq. ft.
1 bedroom 750 sq. ft.
2 bedrooms 1,000 sq. ft.
3 bedrooms 1,250 sq. ft.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9F-6: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9F-7: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-9F-8: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
Chapter 10
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-10A-1: PURPOSE:
The C-1 district is intended to provide convenient access to goods and services close to residential areas in a manner that is environmentally compatible
with such areas. To accomplish this intent, the district provides close to home locations for a limited range of frequently patronized establishments
providing convenience goods and services that predominantly serve only the neighborhood. It is intended that such uses will create minimal land use
incompatibility with surrounding residential areas. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-10A-2: PERMITTED USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 503/618
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district.
Bakeries and donut shops with limited food preparation on the premises.
Beauty shops and barbershops, and hairstyling salons.
Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nut and yogurt stores.
Card and gift shops.
Clothing, hat, and shoe repair stores and tailor shops.
Computer and data processing services.
Consumer electronics and music stores.
Convenience food stores.
Courier services, except air.
Dry cleaners and laundries (processing to be done off site) and laundromats.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, and commercial loan offices, with or without a drive-in or drive-through, which are
located in-line within a shopping center.
Florist shops.
Food delivery establishments.
Grooming services for pets.
Hobby and craft shops.
Home decorating establishments.
Insurance offices.
Liquor stores (package goods only).
Locksmith.
Mailbox service, private.
Newspaper and magazine shops.
Office, stationery, school, art and graphic supply stores.
Personal services, but not including adult uses.
Pet shops, including grooming.
Real estate offices.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out, but not including patron dancing, serving of alcoholic beverages or drive-in restaurants.
Tax preparation offices.
Tobacco shops (see section 4-14-9 of this code for distance requirements).
Video stores, rental and sales (see village adult use regulations). (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. Ord. 2012-27, 5-3-2012)
11-10A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the C-1 district:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in the district, including off street parking and loading and signs as provided in chapters 5
and 6 of this title.
Automated teller machines.
Child daycare center.
Drive-in and drive-through establishments.
Educational institutions.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, and commercial loan offices, with or without a drive-in or drive-through, which are
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 504/618
located in a freestanding building.
Game rooms.
Hospitals.
Integrated shopping centers.
Planned unit developments.
Psychic readers.
Public utility and services.
Recreational institutions.
Religious institutions.
Taverns and bars without patron dancing. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. Ord. 2012-27, 5-3-2012)
11-10A-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area:
1. All uses n/a
2. Planned unit developments 5 acres
B. Minimum lot width:
1. All uses n/a1
C. Minimum yards:
1. Front/corner side 30 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
2. Side 15 ft.
3. Rear 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
4. Residential setback 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
5. Regional arterial setback2 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
D. Minimum parking lot setbacks:
1. Front/corner side 7 ft.3
2. Side 7 ft.
3. Rear 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
4. Abutting residential district 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
5. Abutting regional arterial 7 ft.3
E. Maximum height 35 ft.
F. Maximum floor area ratio 0.35
Notes:
1. 200 feet for lots fronting on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, except for lots meeting requirements under
subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage
of less than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
3. 20 feet for property zoned C-1 after the effective date hereof.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-10A-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-10A-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 505/618
11-10A-7: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE B. C-2 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-10B-1: PURPOSE:
The C-2 district is intended to provide locations for a broad selection of convenience and comparison shoppers' goods and services in centralized and
highly accessible locations that serve the entire village and surrounding areas. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-10B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district.
Animal hospitals.
Antique shops.
Art shops or galleries, not including auction rooms.
Automobile parts and accessory stores.
Bakeries and donut shops with limited food preparation on the premises.
Beauty shops and barbershops, and hairstyling salons.
Bicycle sales, rental and repair shops.
Blueprinting and photostatting establishments.
Bookstores or book-stationery stores (except adult bookstores).
Business machine sales, rental and service, including computer stores.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nut and yogurt stores.
Car radio and mobile telephones, installation.
Card and gift shops.
Carpet and rug stores (retail sales).
Catering establishments.
China and glassware stores.
Clothing and shoe stores.
Clothing, hat, and shoe repair stores and tailor shops.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Commercial graphic and photocopying services.
Consumer electronics and music stores.
Convenience food stores.
Courier services, except air.
Currency exchanges.
Custom dressmaking establishments.
Department stores and discount department stores.
Domestic appliance stores and repair shops.
Drugstores.
Dry cleaners and laundries (processing to be done off site) and laundromats.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 506/618
Employment agencies.
Equipment rental.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, and commercial loan offices, with or without a drive-in or drive-through, which are
located in-line within a shopping center.
Fish and meat markets.
Florist shops.
Food delivery establishments.
Furnace supply and service.
Furniture stores, including upholstery.
Furrier shops.
Grocery stores.
Grooming services for pets.
Hardware stores.
Health clubs.
Hobby and craft shops.
Home decorating establishments.
Insurance offices.
Interior decorating shops.
Jewelry and watch sales and repair shops.
Kennels and veterinary offices.
Laboratories; medical, dental, research and testing.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Liquor stores (package goods only).
Locksmith.
Mailbox service, private.
Medical, dental, and optometry offices.
Millinery shops.
Musical instrument sales and repairs.
Newspaper and magazine shops.
Newspaper distribution agencies for home delivery and retail trade.
Office, stationery, school, art and graphic supply stores.
Offices; business, professional, governmental, political and institutional.
Optician sales (retail).
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores (retail sales only).
Paint, tile and wallpaper stores.
Personal services, but not including adult uses.
Pet shops, including grooming.
Phonographic, record, tape, and sheet music stores.
Photo processing stores.
Photography studios.
Picture framing shops.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 507/618
Post offices.
Print shops with six (6) or fewer employees.
Produce markets.
Real estate offices.
Restaurant with outdoor dining.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out, but not including patron dancing, serving of alcoholic beverages or drive-in restaurants.
Secondhand stores and rummage shops.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Sporting goods stores.
Tanning salons.
Tax preparation offices.
Taxidermists.
Theaters, indoors; except adult entertainment theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters or adult motion picture theaters.
Ticket agencies, amusement.
Tobacco shops (see section 4-14-9 of this code for distance requirements).
Toy stores.
Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
Variety stores.
Video stores, rental and sales (see village adult use regulations).
Yard goods and sewing material stores. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2012-27, 5-3-2012)
11-10B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the C-2 district:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in the district.
Automated teller machines.
Automobile detail shop.
Automobile repair shops.
Automobile service stations.
Child daycare center.
Club or lodge, private.
Commercial schools for music, dance, business or trade.
Drive-in and drive-through establishments.
Educational institutions.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, and commercial loan offices, with or without a drive-in or drive-through, which are
located in a freestanding building.
Flea markets.
Game rooms.
Indoor amusement establishments, including bowling alleys, pool halls, dance halls, commercial swimming pools, and skating rinks.
Integrated shopping center.
Kiosk.
Minimarts in conjunction with automobile service stations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 508/618
Moneylenders.
Mortuaries.
Nursing homes, group homes and mental health centers.
Off track betting (OTB) facility.
Outdoor storage with a permitted or conditional use.
Planned unit developments.
Psychic readers.
Public utility and services.
Recreational institutions.
Religious institutions.
Restaurants, drive-in.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out, serving alcoholic beverages, and/or with live patron dancing.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out, with outdoor dining, serving alcoholic beverages, and/or with live patron dancing.
Self-storage facilities provided that:
A. The minimum building size shall be sixty five thousand (65,000) square feet;
B. No more than twenty five percent (25%) of the building frontage may be used for the self-storage facility;
C. A maximum of eighty percent (80%) of the gross building square footage may be used for the self-storage facility;
D. There shall be no outside storage associated with the self-storage facility;
E. There shall be no direct access from the exterior of the building to individually leased units;
F. Motor vehicles are not permitted in the building.
Taverns and bars, with or without patron dancing. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. Ord. 2000-30, 5-4-2000; Ord. 2011-97, 11-17-2011; Ord. 2012-27, 5-3-
2012; Ord. 2017-11, 3-2-2017)
11-10B-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area:
1. All uses n/a
2. Planned unit developments 5 acres
B. Minimum lot width:
1. All uses n/a1
C. Minimum yards:
1. Front/corner side 30 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
2. Side 15 ft.
3. Rear 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
4. Residential setback 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
5. Regional arterial setback2 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
D. Minimum parking lot setbacks:
1. Front/corner side 7 ft.3
2. Side 7 ft.
3. Rear 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 509/618
4. Abutting residential district 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
5. Abutting regional arterial 7 ft.3
E. Maximum height 35 ft.
F. Maximum floor area ratio 0.50
Notes:
1. 200 feet for lots fronting on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, except for lots meeting requirements under
subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage of less
than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
3. 20 feet for property zoned C-2 after the effective date hereof.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-10B-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-10B-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-10B-7: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE C. C-3 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-10C-1: PURPOSE:
The C-3 district is intended to provide locations for highway oriented commercial uses, businesses having large space needs and services that are less
frequently purchased. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-10C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district.
Animal hospitals.
Antique shops.
Art shops or galleries not including auction rooms.
Automobile parts and accessory stores.
Bakeries and donut shops with limited food preparation on the premises.
Beauty shops and barbershops, and hairstyling salons.
Bicycle sales, rental and repair shops.
Blueprinting and photostatting establishments.
Bookstores or book-stationery stores (except adult bookstores).
Business machine sales, rental and service, including computer stores.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
Camping equipment sales.
Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nut and yogurt stores.
Car radio and mobile telephones, installation.
Card and gift shops.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 510/618
Carpet and rug stores (retail sales).
Catering establishments.
China and glassware stores.
Clothing and shoe stores.
Clothing, hat, and shoe repair stores and tailor shops.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Commercial graphic and photocopying services.
Consumer electronics and music stores.
Convenience food stores.
Courier services, except air.
Currency exchanges.
Custom dressmaking establishments.
Department stores and discount department stores.
Domestic appliance stores and repair shops.
Drugstores.
Dry cleaners and laundries (processing to be done off site) and laundromats.
Electrical showrooms and shops.
Employment agencies.
Equipment rental.
Exterminating shops.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, and commercial loan offices, with or without a drive-in or drive-through, which are
located in-line within a shopping center.
Fish and meat markets.
Florist shops.
Food delivery establishments.
Furnace supply and service.
Furniture stores, including upholstery.
Furrier shops.
Garden supplies, tools, and seed stores, including lawn mower, snowblower, and snowmobile sales and service.
Golf courses (private).
Greenhouses and nurseries.
Grocery stores.
Grooming services for pets.
Gunsmith.
Hardware stores.
Health clubs.
Hobby and craft shops.
Home decorating establishments.
Insurance offices.
Interior decorating shops.
Jewelry and watch sales and repair shops.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 511/618
Kennels and veterinary offices.
Laboratories; medical, dental, research and testing.
Laundries, commercial.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Liquor stores (package goods only).
Locksmith.
Mail order houses.
Mailbox service, private.
Medical, dental and optometry offices.
Meeting and union halls.
Millinery shops.
Monument sales.
Motor vehicle sales (indoor display only), service, or rental, including cars, trucks, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, motorcycles, motor
scooters and mopeds.
Musical instrument sales and repairs.
Newspaper and magazine shops.
Newspaper distribution agencies for home delivery and retail trade.
Office, stationery, school, art and graphic supply stores.
Offices; business, professional, governmental, political and institutional.
Optician sales (retail).
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores (retail sales only).
Paint, tile and wallpaper stores.
Personal services, but not including adult uses.
Pet shops, including grooming.
Phonographic, record, tape, and sheet music stores.
Photo processing stores.
Photography studios.
Picture framing shops.
Plumbing and heating showrooms and shops.
Post offices.
Print shops with six (6) or fewer employees.
Produce markets.
Real estate offices.
Restaurant with outdoor dining.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out, but not including patron dancing, serving of alcoholic beverages, or drive-in restaurants.
Secondhand stores and rummage shops.
Sewer cleaning and rodding service.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Sporting goods stores.
Swimming pool sales.
Tanning salons.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 512/618
Tax preparation offices.
Taxidermists.
Theaters, indoors; except adult entertainment theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, or adult motion picture theaters.
Ticket agencies, amusement.
Tobacco shops (see section 4-14-9 of this code for distance requirements).
Toy stores.
Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
Variety stores.
Video stores, rental and sales (see village adult use regulations).
Water softener service.
Yard goods and sewing material stores. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2012-27, 5-3-2012)
11-10C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the C-3 district:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in the district.
Auction rooms.
Automated teller machines.
Automobile detail shops.
Automobile laundries.
Automobile repair shops.
Automobile service stations.
Bottled gas dealers.
Building materials and product sales.
Child daycare center.
Club or lodge, private.
Commercial schools for music, dance, business or trade.
Construction and contractors' offices.
Convention and exhibit halls.
Drive-in and drive-through establishments.
Educational institutions.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, and commercial loan offices, with or without a drive-in or drive-through, which are
located in a freestanding building.
Flea markets.
Fuel and ice sales.
Fuel storage tanks.
Game rooms.
Hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, group homes and mental health centers.
Hotels and motels.
Indoor amusement establishments, including bowling alleys, pool halls, dance halls, commercial swimming pools and skating rinks.
Integrated shopping centers.
Kiosk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 513/618
Machinery sales.
Minimarts in conjunction with automobile service stations.
Model home and garage sales.
Mortuaries.
Motor vehicle body shops.
Off street parking lots, public garages, or storage garages, other than as accessory uses.
Off track betting (OTB) facility.
Open sales as a principal or accessory use.
Outdoor amusement establishments, including archery ranges, miniature golf and similar facilities, and open air facilities.
Outdoor storage with a permitted or conditional use.
Planned unit developments.
Printing and publishing establishments.
Psychic readers.
Public utility and services.
Radio and television stations and studios.
Radio and television towers.
Recording studios.
Recreational institutions.
Religious institutions.
Restaurants, drive-in.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out, serving alcoholic beverages, and/or with patron dancing.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out, with outdoor dining, serving alcoholic beverages, and/or with live patron dancing.
Taverns and bars, with or without patron dancing. (Ord. 2001-25, 3-15-2001; amd. Ord. 2011-97, 11-17-2011; Ord. 2012-27, 5-3-2012)
11-10C-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area:
1. All uses n/a
2. Planned unit developments 5 acres
B. Minimum lot width:
1. All uses n/a1
C. Minimum yards:
1. Front/corner side 30 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
2. Side 15 ft.
3. Rear 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
4. Residential setback 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
5. Regional arterial setback2 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
D. Minimum parking lot setbacks:
1. Front/corner side 7 ft.3
2. Side 7 ft.
3. Rear 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
4. Abutting residential district 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 514/618
5. Abutting regional arterial 7 ft.3
E. Maximum height 35 ft.
F. Maximum floor area ratio 0.7
Notes:
1. 200 feet for lots fronting on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, except for lots meeting requirements under
subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage
of less than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
3. 20 feet for property zoned C-3 after the effective date hereof.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-10C-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-10C-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-10C-7: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE D. C-4 REGIONAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
11-10D-1: PURPOSE:
The C-4 district is intended to provide convenient locations for highway oriented commercial uses, and businesses having large space needs on parcels of
adequate size to provide single use or mixed use developments that are unified in design and which serve citizens of the village and the surrounding
region. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-10D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district.
Animal hospitals.
Antique shops.
Art shops or galleries not including auction rooms.
Automobile parts and accessory stores.
Bakeries and donut shops with limited food preparation on the premises.
Beauty shops and barbershops, and hairstyling salons.
Bicycle sales, rental and repair shops.
Blueprinting and photostatting establishments.
Bookstores or book-stationery stores (except adult bookstores).
Business machine sales, rental and service, including computer stores.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
Camping equipment sales.
Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nut and yogurt stores.
Card and gift shops.
Carpet and rug stores (retail sales).
Catering establishments.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 515/618
China and glassware stores.
Clothing and shoe stores.
Clothing, hat, and shoe repair stores and tailor shops.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Commercial graphic and photocopying services.
Consumer electronics and music stores.
Convenience food stores.
Courier services, except air.
Currency exchanges.
Custom dressmaking establishments.
Department stores and discount department stores.
Domestic appliance repair shops.
Domestic appliance stores, including radio, television, stereo, video, lighting, clock and music.
Drugstores.
Dry cleaners and laundries (processing to be done off site) and laundromats.
Electrical showrooms and shops.
Employment agencies.
Equipment rental.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, and commercial loan offices, with or without a drive-in or drive-through, which are
located in-line within a shopping center.
Fish and meat markets.
Florist shops.
Food delivery establishments.
Furniture stores, including upholstery.
Furrier shops.
Garden supplies, tools, and seed stores, including lawn mower, snowblower, and snowmobile sales and service.
Grocery stores.
Grooming services for pets.
Gunsmith.
Hardware stores.
Health clubs.
Hobby and craft shops.
Home decorating establishments.
Insurance offices.
Interior decorating shops.
Jewelry and watch sales and repair shops.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Liquor stores (package goods only).
Locksmith.
Mailbox service, private.
Medical, dental and optometry offices.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 516/618
Meeting and union halls.
Millinery shops.
Motor vehicle sales (indoor display only), service, or rental, including cars, trucks, boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, motorcycles, motor
scooters and mopeds.
Musical instrument sales and repairs.
Newspaper and magazine shops.
Office, stationery, school, art and graphic supply stores.
Offices; business, professional, governmental, political and institutional.
Optician sales (retail).
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores (retail sales only).
Paint, tile and wallpaper stores.
Personal services, but not including adult uses.
Pet shops, including grooming.
Phonographic, record, tape, and sheet music stores.
Photo processing stores.
Photography studios.
Physical fitness centers.
Picture framing shops.
Post offices.
Print shops with six (6) or fewer employees.
Produce markets.
Real estate offices.
Restaurant with outdoor dining.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out, but not including patron dancing, serving of alcoholic beverages or drive-in restaurants.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Sporting goods stores.
Tanning salons.
Tax preparation offices.
Theaters, indoors; except adult entertainment theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, or adult motion picture theaters.
Ticket agencies, amusement.
Tobacco shops (see section 4-14-9 of this code for distance requirements).
Toy stores.
Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
Variety stores.
Video stores, rental and sales (see village adult use regulations).
Yard goods and sewing material stores. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2012-27, 5-3-2012)
11-10D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the C-4 district:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in the district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 517/618
Auction rooms.
Automated teller machines.
Automobile detail shop.
Automobile laundries.
Automobile repair shops.
Automobile service stations.
Building materials and product sales.
Child daycare center.
Club or lodge, private.
Commercial schools for music, dance, business or trade.
Convention and exhibit halls.
Drive-in and drive-through establishments.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, and commercial loan offices, with or without a drive-in or drive-through, which are
located in a freestanding building.
Game rooms.
Hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, group homes and mental health centers.
Hotels and motels.
Indoor amusement establishments, including bowling alleys, pool halls, dance halls, commercial swimming pools, and skating rinks.
Integrated shopping centers.
Kiosk.
Off street parking lots, public garages, or storage garages, other than as accessory uses.
Outdoor amusement establishments, including archery ranges, miniature golf and similar facilities.
Planned unit developments.
Psychic readers.
Public utility and services.
Radio and television stations and studios.
Radio and television towers.
Recording studios.
Recreational institutions.
Restaurants, drive-in.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out, serving alcoholic beverages, and/or with patron dancing.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out, with outdoor dining, serving alcoholic beverages, and/or with live patron dancing.
Taverns and bars, with or without patron dancing. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. Ord. 2012-27, 5-3-2012)
11-10D-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area:
1. All uses n/a
2. Planned unit developments 5 acres
B. Minimum lot width:
1. All uses n/a1
C. Minimum yards:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 518/618
1. Front/corner side 30 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
2. Side 15 ft.
3. Rear 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
4. Residential setback 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
5. Regional arterial setback2 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
D. Minimum parking lot setbacks:
1. Front/corner side 30 ft.
2. Side 15 ft.
3. Rear 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
4. Abutting residential district 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
5. Abutting regional arterial 50 ft.
E. Maximum height 75 ft.
F. Maximum floor area ratio 0.70
Notes:
1. 200 feet for lots fronting on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, except for lots meeting requirements under
subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage
of less than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-10D-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-10D-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-10D-7: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
Chapter 11
OFFICE, BUSINESS PARK AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. O-1 LOCAL OFFICE DISTRICT
11-11A-1: PURPOSE:
The O-1 district is intended to provide for small office buildings along regional arterials on smaller sites housing uses that do not generate large amounts of
traffic. The district is intended for locations that can serve as a buffer between commercial and residential development and locations that are not best
suited either for residential or for more intensive business development. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11A-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district.
Computer and data processing services.
Data processing centers.
Insurance offices.
Medical, dental, and optometry offices.
Medical surgical centers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 519/618
Offices; business, professional, governmental, political and institutional.
Real estates offices.
Transportation ticket offices.
Travel bureaus. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the O-1 district:
Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all conditional uses in the district.
Child daycare centers.
Clinics, nursing homes, group homes, mental health centers, and retirement homes.
Clubs or lodges, private.
Educational institutions.
Mortuaries.
Planned unit developments.
Public utility and service uses.
Religious institutions. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11A-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area:
1. All uses 10,000 sq. ft.
2. Planned unit developments 5 acres
B. Minimum lot width n/a1
C. Minimum yards:
1. Front/corner side 30 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
2. Side 15 ft.
3. Rear 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
4. Residential setback 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
5. Regional arterial setback2 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
D. Minimum parking lot setbacks:
1. Front/corner side 7 ft.3
2. Side 7 ft.
3. Rear 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
4. Abutting residential district 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
5. Abutting regional arterial 7 ft.3
E. Maximum height 1 story
F. Maximum floor area ratio 0.35
Notes:
1. 200 feet for lots fronting on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, except for lots meeting requirements under
subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage
of less than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
3. 20 feet for property zoned O-1 after the effective date hereof.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 520/618
11-11A-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11A-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11A-7: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE B. O-2 OFFICE PARK DISTRICT
11-11B-1: PURPOSE:
The O-2 district is intended to provide locations on larger sites for large office buildings and planned office park developments including office related retail
and service uses. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district including the following uses located totally within a building housing a principal
permitted use and with neither any separate outside entrance nor any sign facing or visible from any public street:
Barbershops and beauty shops, and hairstyling salons.
Card and gift shops.
Drugstores.
Flower shops.
Newspaper and magazine shops.
Tobacco shops (see section 4-14-9 of this code for distance requirements).
Automobile rental establishments (office only).
Blueprinting and photostatting establishments.
Business machines sales, rental, and service, including computer stores.
Commercial schools for business, trade, electronics, or data processing.
Computer and data processing services.
Data processing centers.
Employment agencies.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions, and commercial loan offices.
Graphics and drafting services.
Health clubs.
Insurance offices.
Laboratories; medical, dental, research, and testing.
Mail order houses and letter shops.
Medical, dental, and optometry offices.
Medical surgical centers.
Meeting and union halls.
Newspaper distribution agencies for home delivery and retail trade.
Office supply stores.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 521/618
Offices; business, professional, governmental, political and institutional.
Post offices.
Radio and television stations and studios.
Real estates offices.
Recording studios.
Restaurants, eat in, but not including patron dancing, or serving of alcoholic beverages, or restaurants that are drive-in establishments.
Studios for artists, musicians, and photographers.
Transportation ticket offices.
Travel bureaus. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-11B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the O-2 district:
Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all conditional uses in the district.
Automated teller machines.
Child daycare centers.
Clinics, nursing homes, group homes, mental health centers, and retirement homes.
Clubs or lodges, private.
Convention and exhibit halls.
Educational institutions.
Hotels and motels.
Mortuaries.
Off street parking lots, public garages, or storage garages, other than as accessory uses.
Planned unit developments.
Public utility and service uses.
Radio and television towers.
Religious institutions.
Restaurants, eat in, serving alcoholic beverages but without live entertainment or dancing.
Taverns and bars, without live entertainment or dancing. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11B-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area:
1. All uses 50,000 sq. ft.
2. Planned unit developments 5 acres
B. Minimum lot width n/a1
C. Minimum yards:
1. Front/corner side 30 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
2. Side 15 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
3. Rear 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
4. Residential setback 20 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
5. Regional arterial setback2 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
D. Minimum parking lot setbacks:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 522/618
1. Front/corner side 7 ft.3
2. Side 7 ft.
3. Rear 20 ft.
4. Abutting residential district 20 ft.
5. Abutting regional arterial 7 ft.3
E. Maximum height 75 ft.
F. Maximum floor area ratio 0.75
Notes:
1. 200 feet for lots fronting on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, except for lots meeting requirements under
subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage
of less than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
3. 20 feet for property zoned O-2 after the effective date hereof.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11B-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11B-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11B-7: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE C. BP BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT
11-11C-1: PURPOSES:
The purposes of the business park district are to:
A. Provide for innovative, well designed and maintained office and nuisance free light industrial, research and other compatible uses, in an environment
which is characterized by controlled ingress and egress to major streets and appropriate setbacks and yard areas with imaginative landscaping, and
which will provide screening and landscaping necessary to create a proper relationship with adjacent residential and nonresidential areas;
B. Provide a course of predictability in business park development, set a minimum level of standards by which a business park can be developed, and
establish a regulatory framework within which the community and the developer can work together to plan rationally for future business and industrial
growth;
C. Protect the owners and occupants of buildings against improper development and use of surrounding lots which could have a depreciating effect on the
value of each owner's parcel;
D. Prevent the erection or construction of improvements with improper or unsuitable materials or of improper quality;
E. Encourage and ensure the erection of attractively designed, innovative, permanent improvements, appropriately located within the business park, in
order to achieve harmonious appearance and function;
F. Provide for adequate off street parking and loading facilities;
G. Provide for maintenance of open space areas, water detention areas, landscaping and other common areas to promote an attractive and aesthetically
pleasing environment;
H. Provide for adequate transportation mobility into and throughout the business park in order to avoid traffic congestion problems;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 523/618
I. Promote a planned business environment that stresses employee amenities, maintained in a high quality fashion consistent with first class business park
developments within the metropolitan area; and
J. Provide for adequate stormwater conveyance and detention, flood prevention, and the prevention of groundwater contamination. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Uses permitted in the business park district shall be restricted to those which require a pleasant, hazard and nuisance free environment and not create a
nuisance or hazard to other property, individuals, or the public in general, as follows:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district including the following uses located totally within a building housing a
principal permitted use and with neither any separate outside entrance nor any sign facing or visible from any public street:
Barbershops and beauty shops, and hairstyling salons.
Card and gift shops.
Drugstores.
Flower shops.
Newspaper and magazine shops.
Tobacco shops (see section 4-14-9 of this code for distance requirements).
Automobile rental establishments (office only).
Blueprinting and photostatting establishments.
Business machines sales, rental, and service, including computer stores.
Commercial graphic and photocopying services.
Commercial schools for business, trade, electronics, or data processing.
Computer and data processing services.
Courier services, except air.
Data processing centers.
Dwelling unit of caretaker or guard.
Employment agencies.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions, and commercial loan offices.
Graphics and drafting services.
Health clubs.
Insurance offices.
Laboratories; medical, dental, research, and testing.
Low nuisance light manufacturing, fabricating, and assembly plants.
Mail order houses and letter shops.
Medical, dental, and optometry offices.
Medical surgical centers.
Offices; business, professional, governmental, political and institutional.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and other publicly owned open space.
Printing and publishing establishments.
Radio and television stations, studios and towers.
Real estate offices.
Recording studios.
Warehousing, storage, and distribution facilities. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-11C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 524/618
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the BP district:
Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all conditional uses in the district.
Automated teller machines.
Automobile laundries.
Automobile service stations.
Child daycare centers.
Clinics, nursing homes, group homes, mental health centers, and retirement homes.
Clubs or lodges, private.
Convention and exhibit halls.
Drive-in and drive-through facilities.
Educational institutions.
Hotels and motels.
Newspaper distribution agencies for home delivery and retail trade.
Off street parking lots, public garages, or storage garages, other than as accessory uses.
Office supply stores.
Planned unit developments.
Post offices.
Public service and utility uses.
Restaurants, eat in, serving alcoholic beverages but without live entertainment or dancing.
Studios for artists, musicians, and photographers.
Taverns and bars, without live entertainment or dancing.
Transportation ticket offices.
Travel bureaus. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11C-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area:
1. All uses 20,000 sq. ft.
2. Planned developments 5 acres
B. Minimum lot width:
1. All uses 100 ft.1
C. Minimum yards:
1. Front/corner side (from ultimate right of way as currently planned):
a. Major street 60 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
b. Collector/local street 40 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
2. Side 15 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
3. Rear 30 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
4. Residential 50 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
5. Regional arterial2 70 ft., plus 2 ft. for each 1 ft. of building height over 30 ft.
D. Minimum parking lot setbacks:
1. Front/corner side 30 ft.
2. Side 15 ft.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 525/618
3. Rear 20 ft.
4. Abutting residential district 50 ft.
E. Maximum height 75 ft.
F. Maximum floor area ratio 0.5
Notes:
1. 200 feet for lots fronting on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, except for lots meeting requirements under
subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional arterial street designated in the village comprehensive plan, having a frontage
of less than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11C-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11C-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11C-7: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11C-8: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Intent: It is the intent of this section to provide that business, utilities, light industry, research and related activities shall be established and maintained
with proper appearance from streets and adjoining properties and to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community. Each such
permitted or conditional use shall be a good neighbor to adjoining properties by the control of emission of noise, odor, glare, light, vibration, smoke,
particulate matter, and gases.
B. Compliance Required: The building plans shall bear the signature of a qualified professional stating that there will be compliance with all performance
standards based upon the submitted building plans. The village retains the option to conduct its own investigation to determine compliance with the
performance standards. There shall be compliance with the performance standards set forth herein, and any use which fails to comply with these
standards shall be in violation of this title and shall be subject to penalties provided for such violation. In addition to conformance with current laws and
regulations, the businesses shall be required to take practical steps to prevent groundwater contamination including secondary containment,
monitoring, development of emergency response plans and participation in the Illinois pollution prevention program.
C. Standards:
1. Noise: No noise (other than ordinary vehicular noise) from operations of any use in the business park district shall be detectable from any lot other
than the zoning lot on which the use is located.
2. Glare And Heat: No glare or heat from any operations of any use in the business park district shall be detectable from any lot other than the zoning
lot on which the use is located. Any lights used for exterior illumination shall direct light away from adjoining properties.
3. Vibration: No earthborn vibration from any operations of any use in the business park district shall be detectable from any lot other than the zoning
lot on which the use is located.
4. Air Pollution: No air pollution, including smoke or gas, odors, and particulate matter, from any operations of any use in the business park district shall
be detectable from any lot other than the zoning lot on which the use is located, unless in compliance with all applicable regulations of the Illinois
environmental protection agency.
5. Electromagnetic Interference: Electromagnetic interference from any operations of any use in the business park district shall not adversely affect the
operation of any equipment located off the zoning lot on which such interference originates.
6. Fire And Explosive Hazards: Materials that present potential fire and explosive hazards shall be transported, stored, and used only in conformance
with all applicable federal, state, and local laws.
7. Special Hazards: Hazardous, toxic, and radioactive materials shall be transported, stored, and used only in conformance with all applicable federal,
state, and local laws. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
8. Safety Equipment: No research or development laboratory or commercial testing facility shall be established after the effective date hereof unless
the building in which such use is established shall be equipped with sprinkler systems, and automatic fire detection and suppression systems, and
shall be in compliance with any current village ordinances for new construction. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 526/618
ARTICLE D. I LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
11-11D-1: PURPOSE:
The I District is intended to provide for low nuisance industrial uses that are environmentally compatible with a primarily residential community and can be
located in proximity to residential areas. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Uses permitted in the Light Industrial District shall be restricted to those which require a pleasant, hazard free environment and not create a hazard to
other property, individuals, or the public in general as follows:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district.
Adult regulated uses.
Bakeries.
Dry cleaning plants and commercial laundries.
Dwelling unit of caretaker or guard.
Low nuisance light manufacturing, fabricating, and assembly plants.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and other publicly owned open space.
Printing and publishing establishments.
Research and development facilities.
Warehousing, storage, and distribution facilities. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-11D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the Plan Commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in this title, the Corporate Authorities of the Village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the I District:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the district including the following uses located totally within a building housing a principal
permitted use and with neither any separate outside entrance nor any sign facing or visible from any public street:
Barbershops and beauty shops, and hairstyling salons.
Card and gift shops.
Drugstores.
Flower shops.
Newspaper and magazine shops.
Tobacco shops (see section 4-14-9 of this Code for distance requirements).
Automated teller machines.
Automobile internet/online sales with ancillary use of repair shops and automobile laundries within an enclosed structure. There shall not be any
advertising of a repair shop or car wash services. Repair and car wash services shall not be available to the general public.
Automobile laundries.
Automobile rental establishments (office only).
Automobile service stations.
Blueprinting and photostatting establishment.
Business machines and computer sales, rental and service.
Child daycare centers.
Clinics, nursing homes, group homes, mental health centers, and retirement homes.
Clubs or lodges, private.
Commercial graphic and photocopying services.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 527/618
Commercial schools for business, trade, electronics, or data processing.
Computer and data processing services.
Convention and exhibit halls.
Courier services, except air.
Data processing centers.
Educational institutions.
Employment agencies.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions, and commercial loan offices.
Fuel storage tanks.
Graphics and drafting services.
Health clubs.
Hotels and motels.
Insurance offices.
Laboratories; medical, dental, research, and testing.
Mail order houses and letter shops.
Medical cannabis cultivation center.
Medical cannabis dispensing organization.
Medical, dental and optometry offices.
Medical surgical centers.
Meeting and union halls.
Miniwarehouses.
Mortuaries.
Motor freight terminals.
Newspaper distribution agencies for home delivery and retail trade.
Off street parking lots, public garages, or storage garages, other than as accessory uses.
Off street parking of trucks and trailers.
Office supply stores.
Offices; business, professional, governmental, political and institutional.
Outdoor storage associated with any permitted or conditional use in the district.
Planned unit developments.
Post offices.
Public utility and service uses.
Quarries.
Radio and television stations and studios.
Real estate offices.
Recording studios.
Religious institutions.
Restaurants, eat in, but not including patron dancing, or serving of alcoholic beverages, or restaurants that are drive-in establishments.
Restaurants, eat in, serving alcoholic beverages but without live entertainment or dancing.
Studios for artists, musicians, and photographers.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 528/618
Taverns and bars, without live entertainment or dancing.
Transportation ticket offices.
Travel bureaus.
Utilization or storage of over five (5) pounds of detonable materials as provided section 11-11D-8 of this article.
Warehousing, repair, manufacture and installation of two-way radio and light bars. (Ord. 2001-25, 3-15-2001; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-62, 10-16-2014;
Ord. 2017-78, 12-14-2017)
11-11D-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum lot area:
1. All uses 20,000 square feet
2. Planned unit developments 5 acres
B. Minimum lot width:
1. All uses 100 feet
2. Along regional arterial streets1 200 feet
C. Minimum yards:
1. Front/corner side 40 feet, plus 2 feet for every 1 foot of building height over 30 feet
2. Side 15 feet, plus 2 feet for every 1 foot of building height over 30 feet
3. Rear 20 feet, plus 2 feet for every 1 foot of building height over 30 feet
4. Residential setback4a 100 feet, plus 2 feet for every 1 foot of building height over 30 feet
5. Regional arterial setback2 70 feet, plus 2 feet for every 1 foot of building height over 30 feet
D. Minimum parking lot setbacks:
1. Front/corner side 7 feet3
2. Side 7 feet
3. Rear 20 feet
4. Abutting residential district4b 100 feet
5. Abutting regional arterial 7 feet3
E. Maximum height 40 feet
F. Maximum floor area ratio 0.6
Notes:
1. 200 feet for lots fronting on a regional arterial street designated in the Village Comprehensive Plan, except for lots meeting requirements under
subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
2. Required for any use with a front or corner side yard on a regional arterial street designated in the Village Comprehensive Plan, having a frontage of
less than 200 feet, and not qualifying under subsection 11-4-5B of this title.
3. 20 feet for property zoned I after the effective date hereof.
4. Activities adjacent to residence districts:
a. Within 300 feet of the boundary line of a residence district or public right-of-way, all activities and operations, other than off street parking and loading,
that are not within completely enclosed buildings shall be screened by a solid wall or uniformly painted solid fence at least 8 feet but no more than 9 feet in
height. No open storage shall be visible from a public street or from abutting property above the screening fence or wall.
b. Off street parking and loading are not permitted within any required yard abutting the boundary of a residence district.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-11D-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11D-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 529/618
11-11D-7: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11D-8: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Noise:
1. Maximum Sound Levels: No operation or activity shall cause or create noise above the sound pressure levels in tables 11D-1 and 11D-2 of this
section at the locations specified therein.
2. Measurement: A sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer shall be employed to measure the intensity and frequency of sound. The
flat network slow meter response of the sound level meter shall be used.
3. Exemptions: The following shall be exempt from noise performance standards:
a. Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
b. Noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves.
c. Transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, railroads, and aircraft.
d. Noises associated with snowplowing and mosquito abatement.
e. Church bells, chimes, and carillons.
f. Other noises not under the direct control of the property user. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
4. Tables:
a. Table 11D-1:
TABLE 11D-1
PERMITTED SOUND LEVELS
Pre-1960 Octave Band Cycles Per
Second
Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level In Decibels At Boundaries Of Nearest Residential
District
0 - 75 67
75 - 150 66
150 - 300 61
300 - 600 54
600 - 1,200 47
1,200 - 2,400 39
2,400 - 4,800 29
4,800 and over 20
Above figures for octave band analyzers calibrated with pre-1960 octave bands (American Standards Association Z24.10-1953 octave band filter
set).
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
Preferred Center Frequency Cycles Per
Second
Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level In Decibels At Boundaries Of Nearest
Residential District
31.5 65
63 67
125 66
250 59
500 52
1,000 46
2,000 37
4,000 26
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 530/618
8,000 17
Above figures for octave band analyzers calibrated with preferred frequencies (American Standards Association S1.6-1960, Preferred Frequencies
For Acoustical Measurement).
Adjustments:
* At the boundaries of nearest commercial and office districts, levels in the above tables shall be increased by 5 percent.
* Between the hours of 9:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M., sound levels in the above tables shall be reduced by 5 decibels.
* Sound levels in the above tables shall be modified where applicable by the adjustments in table 11D-2 of this section.
b. Table 11D-2:
TABLE 11D-2
ADJUSTMENTS TO PERMITTED SOUND LEVELS
Duration Of Noise In Any One Hour Period (Use 1 Adjustment Only) Adjustment In Decibels
Under 12 minutes Add 5 dB
Under 3 minutes Add 10 dB
Under 1/2 minute Add 15 dB
Noise is impulsive in character (e.g., hammering) Subtract 5 dB
Noise is periodic in character (e.g., hum, screech) Subtract 5 dB
B. Vibration:
1. Maximum Vibration: Ground transmitted vibration shall not exceed the maximum permitted particle velocities in table 11D-3 of this section at the
locations specified therein.
2. Measurement:
a. A seismograph or other three (3) component measuring system capable of simultaneous measurement of vibration in three (3) mutually
perpendicular directions shall be used to measure vibration.
b. Particle velocity may be measured directly or computed by the following formula:
PV = 6.28 x F x D
PV: Particle velocity in inches per second
F: Vibration frequency in cycles per second
D: Single amplitude displacement of the vibration in inches
The maximum particle velocity shall be the maximum vector sum of the three (3) mutually perpendicular components recorded simultaneously.
3. Table 11D-3:
TABLE 11D-3
MAXIMUM GROUND TRANSMITTED VIBRATION
Maximum Permitted Particle Velocity1
District At Adjacent Lot Line At Nearest Residential District Boundary2
I 0.1 0.02
Notes:
1. Where vibration is produced as discrete impulses (impact vibrations) not exceeding 100 per minute, maximum permitted velocities may be
doubled.
2. Between 7:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M., maximum permitted velocity at residential district boundaries shall be reduced 50 percent.
C. Smoke: Emissions of smoke shall not exceed the maximum permitted smoke units as defined in section 11-2-2 of this title and Ringelmann number
ratings in table 11D-4 of this section.
TABLE 11D-4
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 531/618
MAXIMUM SMOKE EMISSIONS
During 1 Hour Per 24 Hour Day1 All Other Times
Maximum permitted smoke units per hour per stack 16 8
Highest Ringelmann number permitted 32 1
Notes:
1. When blowing soot or cleaning fires.
2. For a maximum duration of 3 minutes.
D. Particulate Matter:
1. Maximum Emissions:
a. Particulate matter is fine solid or liquid particles small enough to be carried in the air, including products of combustion such as soot and fly ash,
industrial dust, and products of wind erosion.
b. The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed the value given below as adjusted by
the factors in table 11D-5 of this section.
District Maximum Pounds Per Acre Of Net Site Area Per Hour
I 1
2. Measurement: The emission rate in pounds per hour from any single stack shall be determined by selecting the continuous four (4) hour period
which will result in the highest average emission rate.
3. Control Of Wind Erosion: Emission of particulate matter from materials, products, or surfaces subject to wind erosion shall be minimized by paving,
oiling, wetting, covering, landscaping, fencing, or other means. This shall apply to vacant lots; unpaved roads; yards and storage piles of bulk
materials such as coal, sand, cinders, slag, and sulfur; and similar sources of windborne particulates.
4. Table 11D-5:
TABLE 11D-5
ADJUSTMENTS TO PARTICULATE STANDARDS
User should interpolate for values not listed.
Minus sign indicates value is to be subtracted from particulate standard.
Height Of Emission:
Height Of Emission
Above Grade In Feet
Adjustment In
Lbs./Hour/Acre
50 -0.01
100 -0.06
150 -0.1
200 -0.16
300 -0.3
400 -0.5
Velocity Of Emission:
Exit Velocity In Feet
Per Second
Adjustment In
Lbs./Hour/Acre
0 -
20 -0.03
40 -0.09
60 -0.16
80 -0.24
100 -0.5
Temperature Of Emission:
Temperature In
Degrees Fahrenheit
Adjustment In
Lbs./Hour/Acre
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 532/618
200 -
300 -0.001
400 -0.002
500 -0.003
1,000 -0.01
1,500 -0.04
2,000 -0.1
E. Toxic Matter:
1. Maximum Emissions: Release of any airborne toxic matter shall not exceed the permitted standards in table 11D-6 of this section at the locations
specified therein.
2. Measurement: Measurement of toxic matter shall be at ground level or habitable elevation and shall be the average of any twenty four (24) hour
sampling period.
3. Table 11D-6:
TABLE 11D-6
PERMITTED EMISSION OF TOXIC MATTER
District Maximum Fraction Of Threshold Limit Value Location Where Applicable
I 1/30 At lot lines
Threshold limit values adopted by American Conference Of Government And Industrial Hygienists.
F. Odor:
1. Maximum Emissions: Odorous material released shall not exceed the odor threshold concentration beyond the lot line.
2. Measurement:
a. Odor shall be measured by odor threshold concentrations with the American Society For Testing And Materials method D1391-57 "Standard
Method For Measurement Of Odor In Atmospheres (Dilution Method)" or its equivalent.
b. Odor shall be measured at ground level or habitable elevation.
G. Fire And Explosion:
1. General Requirements:
a. Other Regulations Applicable: In addition to the requirements herein, all materials regulated in this subsection shall be utilized, stored,
manufactured, and handled in accordance with the village fire protection ordinance and the standards of the National Fire Protection Association.
b. Building Requirements:
(1) All flammable solid, liquid, or gaseous materials must, where permitted, be stored, manufactured, or utilized in completely enclosed buildings
that:
(A) Have fire resistive construction of no less than two (2) hours.
(B) Are protected with an automatic fire extinguishing system.
(C) Are set back at least forty feet (40') from all lot lines.
(2) Flammable solid materials that are incombustible to moderate burning and flammable liquids with a closed cup flashpoint of one hundred eighty
seven degrees Fahrenheit (187°F) or greater are exempt from this requirement.
2. Detonable Materials:
a. Detonable materials are all materials or products that decompose by detonation, including, among other materials:
(1) All primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates, and tetracene.
(2) All high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN, and picric acid.
(3) Propellants and components thereof such as dry nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, and hydrazine and its derivatives.
(4) Pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate, and potassium nitrate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 533/618
(5) Blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine.
(6) Unstable organic compounds such as acetylides, tetrazoles, and ozonides.
(7) Strong unstable oxidizing agents such as perchloric acid, perchlorates, and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than thirty five percent
(35%).
(8) Nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products, and reactor elements such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239.
b. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of detonable materials shall be permitted only as licensed by the village or as incidental to a principal use
subject to the requirements of table 11D-7 of this section.
c. Table 11D-7:
TABLE 11D-7
STANDARDS FOR DETONABLE MATERIALS
District
Storage, Utilization Or Manufacture Of 5 Lbs. Or Less
Storage Or Utilization Of Over 5 Lbs.
Manufacture Of Over 5 Pounds
I Permitted use Conditional use Prohibited
3. Flammable Solid Materials: The utilization, storage, and manufacture of flammable solid materials are permitted subject to the provisions concerning
building requirements above.
4. Flammable Liquids And Gases: The storage, utilization, and manufacture of flammable liquids or gases that produce flammable or explosive vapors
shall be limited to the quantities specified in tables 11D-8 and 11D-9 of this section.
a. Table 11D-8:
TABLE 11D-8
STANDARDS FOR FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
IN I LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Maximum Gallons
Closed Cup Flashpoint In Degrees Fahrenheit Aboveground Belowground
Under 24 Conditional use 2,000
24 - 104 Conditional use 20,000
105 - 186 Conditional use 100,000
Over 186 Conditional use 100,000
Total all flammable liquids Conditional use 100,000
Storage of unfinished products in original sealed containers of 60 gallons or less is exempt from the above standards.
b. Table 11D-9:
TABLE 11D-9
STANDARDS FOR FLAMMABLE GASES
Maximum Standard Cubic Feet1
District Aboveground Belowground
I Conditional use 300,000
Note:
1. At 60 degrees Fahrenheit and 29.9 inches Hg.
H. Glare: No operation shall produce direct or indirect illumination greater than 0.5 foot-candle in any residence district.
I. Heat: No heat from operations or processes shall be sensed at any lot line to the extent of raising the temperature of air or materials more than five
degrees Fahrenheit (5°F).
J. Radiation:
1. No operation shall be permitted that causes any individual outside of the lot lines to be exposed to any radiation exceeding the lowest concentration
permitted for the general population by federal and state laws and regulations in effect as of the date of application for a certificate of occupancy.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 534/618
2. Radioactive materials shall be contained in a fireproof container at or below ground level if they are stored, utilized, or manufactured in a quantity
exceeding one hundred thousand (100,000) times the quantity listed in section 3, paragraph b, of the radiation installation registration law of the state
of Illinois, or any amendment thereto.
K. Administration And Enforcement Procedures:
1. Purpose: The procedures to follow are intended to enforce the performance standards herein, to protect businesses from arbitrary enforcement, and
to protect the public from unnecessary enforcement costs.
2. New Uses: An application for a building permit shall include a certification by a licensed engineer, licensed architect, or scientific laboratory that the
use involved in the application is able to meet all applicable performance standards to the extent that this can be judged based on the submitted
building plans.
3. Existing Uses:
a. In enforcing performance standards on existing uses, the zoning administrator may issue a written notice of violation to an alleged violator.
b. The zoning administrator shall, before issuing such notice, make technical determinations of violation when such determinations can be made
using equipment and trained personnel normally available to the village or obtainable without extraordinary expense.
c. In other cases, however, technical complexity or extraordinary expense makes it unreasonable for the village to maintain personnel or equipment
for making determinations of violation prior to issuing a notice of violation. In such cases, a notice of violation may be issued when the zoning
administrator has other reason to believe there is probable violation.
4. Notice Of Violation:
a. The zoning administrator shall give notice of violation by any means that ensures a signed receipt for such notice to the party responsible for the
alleged violation.
b. The notice shall describe the alleged violation and the results of technical determinations or the other reasons why the zoning administrator
believes there is a violation. The notice shall require either an answer or correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the zoning
administrator and within a time limit he or she shall specify in the notice.
c. The notice shall also state that failure to provide an answer or correct the alleged violation within this time limit shall constitute admission of a
violation.
d. The notice shall further state that, if technical determinations have not already been made, upon request of the alleged violator, such
determinations will be made. If a violation is found as a result of such determinations, the cost of the determinations will be assessed against the
properties or parties responsible in addition to any other penalties provided. If no violation is found, the village will pay the cost of the
determinations. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-11D-9: ADULT USE STANDARDS:
Adult regulated uses shall comply with the following standards:
A. Advertising And Displays: Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials depicting or describing specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities, or displaying instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities shall not
be shown or exhibited so as to be visible from other areas open to the general public.
B. Nonview Of Premises: All building openings, entries, and windows for an adult business shall be located, covered, or screened in such a manner as to
prevent a view into the interior of an adult regulated use from any area open to the general public.
C. Signs Prohibiting Minors: All entrances to an adult regulated use shall be clearly and legibly posted by a notice indicating that minors are prohibited
from entering the premises.
D. Sound Amplification Prohibited: No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by an adult regulated use for the amplification of sound to a level
discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building in which the adult regulated use is conducted.
E. Prohibited Premises: No residential structure or any other nonconforming structure shall be converted for use as an adult regulated use after the
effective date hereof.
F. Security Program: An on site security program, including required interior and exterior lighting plans, shall be prepared and implemented. The security
program shall include the following:
1. The presence of an on site manager during all business hours.
2. All off street parking areas and building entries serving the adult regulated use shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system
designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of greater than one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkway. In
the event the adult regulated use shares its parking with other businesses, this requirement shall only apply within a radius of one hundred feet (100')
from any entrance into the adult regulated use.
3. All interior portions of the adult regulated use, except those areas devoted to mini-motion or motion pictures, shall be illuminated during all hours of
operation with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of not less than two (2) foot-candles of light at the
floor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 535/618
G. Maintenance Requirements; Building Colors And Textures Restricted: All exterior areas of adult regulated use businesses, including building,
landscaping and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner. Buildings and structures shall not be painted or surfaced with colors
or textures or any design that would simulate a sign or advertising message.
H. Closing Hours: An adult regulated use shall not remain open for business, or permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance,
make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of
any day. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-1D-10: MEDICAL CANNABIS USE STANDARDS:
A. Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center Operational Standards:
1. Compliance With All State Statutes, Regulations And Rules: All medical cannabis cultivation centers shall comply with all state statutes, rules, and
regulations pertaining to the operation of a medical cannabis cultivation center.
2. Location Requirements: A medical cannabis cultivation center must be located two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') from a preexisting public or
private preschool or elementary or secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day childcare facility, or an area
zoned for residential use.
B. Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization Operational Standards:
1. Compliance With All State Statutes, Regulations, And Rules: All medical cannabis dispensing organizations shall comply with all state statutes,
rules, and regulations pertaining to the operation of a medical cannabis dispensing organization.
2. Location Requirements: A medical cannabis dispensing organization must be located one thousand feet (1,000') from a preexisting public or private
preschool or elementary or secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, or part day childcare facility. A registered
dispensing organization may not be located in a house, apartment, condominium, or an area zoned for residential use. (Ord. 2014-62, 10-16-2014)
Chapter 12
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. COS CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
11-12A-1: PURPOSE:
The COS district is intended:
A. To control development in areas subject to flooding and high groundwater levels and thereby prevent property damage in these areas and in their
surroundings.
B. To protect areas of special environmental sensitivity by directing development to other portions of a site.
C. To preserve natural drainageways for economical disposal of stormwater.
D. To ensure that adverse soil conditions are overcome prior to development. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-12A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses supersede the permitted uses in the applicable underlying zoning districts:
Accessory uses, but not accessory buildings or structures, to all permitted uses in the COS district.
Bridle paths.
Golf fairways, but not clubhouses or other accessory buildings.
Hiking trails.
Nurseries for trees and shrubbery.
Parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, wildlife, and other publicly owned open space without buildings or structures. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-12A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 536/618
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the COS
district:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in the COS district, and accessory buildings and structures to all permitted uses in the
COS district.
Dams, flowages, ponds, and relocation of watercourses.
Dredging.
Filling.
Golf course, country club, park, playground, or forest preserve buildings. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-12A-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
A. Specific district requirements, other than use (such as, but not limited to, lot area, floor area ratio, height and minimum required yards), shall be those
established on a site plan to be approved by the village board after consideration and recommendation by the plan commission, provided such
requirements are consistent with the purpose of the conservation open space district, and provided further, that any potential adverse impact on the
surrounding properties resulting from the establishment and operation of the proposed use and/or structure is minimized by design, architectural
treatment, screening, landscaping, and/or placement on the site. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
B. For purposes of calculating the lot area, lot area per dwelling unit, or floor area ratio, the land and water area located in the COS district within any
development may be added on a prorated basis to the area of each lot in the same development located outside the COS district. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-
1999)
11-12A-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-12A-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-12A-7: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
ARTICLE B. PIB PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL BUILDINGS DISTRICT
11-12B-1: PURPOSE:
The public and institutional buildings district is intended to provide for attractive and well designed sites for public and institutional buildings in an
environment characterized by controlled ingress and egress to streets and providing the screening and landscaping necessary to create a proper
relationship with adjacent uses. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-12B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Uses permitted in the public and institutional buildings district shall be restricted to those which require a pleasant, hazard free and nuisance free
environment and to not create either a nuisance or hazard to other property, individuals, or the public in general, as follows:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all permitted uses in the PIB district, and accessory buildings and structures to all permitted uses in the
PIB district.
Cemeteries.
Library, public.
Municipal buildings and structures.
Museum or art gallery.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and other publicly owned open space.
Post offices.
Temporary leasing of public school property. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 537/618
11-12B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Upon recommendation by the plan commission, after public hearing on petition pertaining thereto, in accordance with the requirements set forth for such
hearing in chapter 3, article C of this title, the corporate authorities of the village may, by conditional use permit, allow the following uses in the public and
institutional buildings district:
Accessory uses, buildings, and structures to all conditional uses in the PIB district, and accessory buildings and structures to all permitted uses in the
PIB district.
Child daycare.
Convention and exhibit halls.
Educational institutions.
Hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, group homes and mental health centers.
Public utility and service uses.
Religious institutions. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-12B-4: BULK, SPACE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS:
Specific district requirements, other than use (such as but not limited to: lot area, floor area ratio, height and minimum required yards and setbacks) shall
be those established on a site plan to be approved by the village board after consideration and recommendation by the plan commission, provided such
requirements are consistent with the purpose of the public and institutional buildings district, and provided further, that any potential adverse impact on the
surrounding properties resulting from the establishment and operation of the proposed use and/or structure is minimized by design, architectural treatment,
screening, landscaping, and/or placement on the site. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code)
11-12B-5: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
As set forth in chapter 4 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-12B-6: PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
As set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-12B-7: SIGNS:
As set forth in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
Chapter 13
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
11-13-1: PURPOSE; OBJECTIVES; INTENT:
A. The provisions of this chapter are intended for special situations in which:
1. Adequate space, light, air, and other objectives of this title relating to the public health, safety, and welfare can be achieved without the literal
application of the detailed requirements of this title and the village subdivision requirements otherwise applicable.
2. Special amenities and benefits to the community beyond those required by this title and other village ordinances can be achieved by allowing more
flexible design than is otherwise permitted by this title and the village subdivision regulations.
B. These objectives can be achieved where a substantial area of land is planned for development as an integrated unit and where its design is subject to
more detailed review and approval by the village than is normally required.
C. The objective of a planned unit development (PUD) is accordingly not simply to allow exceptions to otherwise applicable regulations. It is instead to
encourage a higher level of design and amenity than it is possible to achieve under the usual land development requirements.
D. It is, therefore, the intent of the village to suspend the application of detailed zoning and subdivision standards only where such special amenity is
achieved. In this way, the village may grant the creative developer a desirable flexibility and, at the same time, not only protect but enhance the welfare
of the residents and other users of a development and the rest of the community. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-13-2: QUALIFICATION FOR FILING AS A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 538/618
A. A planned unit development may be developed in any district in which planned unit developments are allowed as conditional uses.
B. No development shall be filed as a planned unit development unless it:
1. Is at least three (3) acres in size; and
2. Is initially under unified ownership or control.
C. A planned unit development may be residential, commercial, office, industrial, or a combination thereof. Flexibility to suspend requirements imposed
elsewhere is not conferred upon the PUD applicant as a matter of right but is, in all cases, subject to a finding by the village that the objectives of these
provisions will be served thereby. (Ord. 2012-70, 11-15-2012)
11-13-3: SPECIAL INCENTIVES:
To further a superior level of design and amenity in new development, the following incentives are offered in planned unit developments:
A. Variable Density And Dimensional Zoning Standards:
1. Standards for minimum lot area, lot width, building height, floor area ratio, yard dimensions, off street parking and loading, size of business, fences,
and signs may vary from those established elsewhere in this title.
2. The applicable standard for minimum lot area per dwelling unit may be reduced, or the standard for maximum dwelling units per acre increased, a
maximum of twenty percent (20%).
B. Mixed Land Uses:
1. Land uses other than those allowed as permitted or conditional uses in the applicable zoning districts may be permitted on up to thirty percent (30%)
of the net site area of a planned unit development.
2. Uses otherwise allowed only in commercial, office, or industrial districts may only be allowed in resident districts; provided:
a. That, unless they are allowed in the C-1 district, they do not front upon or have access from collector or minor streets serving residential areas;
and
b. That they are not otherwise incompatible with nearby residential uses; and
c. That they conform to the general business district regulations and general industrial district regulations applying to the district in which they are
normally allowed.
C. More Than One Principal Building Per Lot: In a planned unit development, more than one principal building may be located on a single lot.
D. Variable Subdivision Design Standards: Design standards for subdivisions and subdivision improvements, such as streets, blocks, sidewalks and
parkways, and open space dedication, may vary from those established in village subdivision regulations. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-13-4: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Site Plan Review: Whether or not a land subdivision is involved, preliminary and final plans for the development shall be filed and approved by the
village in conformance with the provisions of sections 11-13-6, 11-13-7 and 11-13-8 of this chapter.
B. Required Common Open Space: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the gross site area shall be used for permanent common open space, as defined
in section 11-2-2 of this title as "open space, common".
C. Quality Of Design:
1. To be granted the flexibility permitted under these regulations, a PUD must evidence a level of design and amenity exceeding that typical of
conventional development.
2. Among the features that may evidence such amenity are:
a. Amount and quality of landscaping;
b. Amount, quality, and interconnectedness of common open space;
c. Provision of pedestrian or bicycle paths separated from streets;
d. Preservation of drainageways and other natural features;
e. Common recreational facilities;
f. Enclosed, underground, depressed, or outstandingly landscaped parking areas;
g. Varied building setbacks or other measures to reduce monotony in design; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 539/618
h. Other features as determined by the plan commission.
D. Underground Utilities: All utility lines within a planned unit development are required to be underground. Appurtenances to utility systems that are
effectively screened may be permitted aboveground if the village finds that they will not be detrimental to the character of the development.
E. Phasing Of Development:
1. Land designated for future construction phases and other land not intended for immediate improvement shall be landscaped or otherwise maintained
with a neat and orderly appearance as specified by the plan commission.
2. No building permit shall be issued for construction of any commercial development intended to be economically supported primarily by the residential
or other business uses within the PUD before development of an amount of the supporting development specified by the plan commission has been
completed. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-13-5: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
A. Optional Prefiling Conference:
1. Prior to filing a preliminary plan, an applicant may request a prefiling conference with the plan commission. An application for the conference,
together with the filing fee as determined from time to time by the village board, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator.
2. In the event a preliminary plan is subsequently filed, the filing fee will be credited toward the preliminary plan filing fee.
3. At the conference, the applicant may outline his proposed project and submit preliminary information such as a concept plan. The plan commission
shall advise the applicant concerning in what respects his proposal conforms to applicable village plans and ordinances and to desired standards of
design.
B. Preliminary Plan:
1. Filing: The applicant shall file a preliminary plan meeting the requirements of section 11-13-6 of this chapter.
2. Staff Review:
a. The zoning administrator shall, within five (5) days of receipt of a complete and accurate preliminary plan filing, transmit such filing to the staff
development committee of the village. This transmittal shall be accompanied by a notice of a meeting to be held to review the filing within fifteen
(15) days of its receipt. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
b. The staff development committee shall be chaired by the zoning administrator and shall also include the village engineer, the director of public
works, the fire chief, and the chair of the plan commission or his or her designee. The committee may seek technical assistance from such other
sources as it deems necessary. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
c. The committee may advise and assist the applicant in meeting village objectives but shall have no power to approve or disapprove any filing or in
any way restrict the applicant's right to seek formal approval thereof.
d. The development committee shall, within thirty (30) days after the meeting, complete its review and file with the plan commission the complete
preliminary plan filing, together with a written report noting any deficiencies in compliance with the requirements for a preliminary plan or for a
planned unit development and any recommendations for improvement of the plan to better reflect the objectives of the planned unit development
procedure.
3. Plan Commission Review: At its next scheduled committee of the whole meeting after filing of the development committee report, the plan
commission shall review the preliminary plan and the report. The commission shall then give written notice to the applicant of any deficiencies in the
plan or any desired improvements.
4. Public Hearing: When any deficiencies found by the plan commission have been corrected and appropriate documents filed with the zoning
administrator, the plan commission shall set a date for a public hearing before the commission. There shall be compliance with the requirements for
conditional uses (chapter 3, article C of this title).
5. Plan Commission Action:
a. Within sixty (60) days after the public hearing, the plan commission shall forward a written report to the village board. The report shall include
findings of fact as provided in section 11-13-8 of this chapter, together with a recommendation for approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of
the preliminary plan and the roll call vote of the commission on such recommendation.
b. The commission's recommendation may include any modification of normal zoning district or subdivision regulation requirement that is authorized
by the provisions of this title governing planned unit developments.
6. Village Board Action: The village board shall, within thirty (30) days after it receives the plan commission report, approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove the preliminary plan.
7. Resubmission: If the preliminary plan or any part thereof is disapproved, it shall not be resubmitted during a period of one year from the date of
disapproval except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found valid by the plan commission.
C. Final Plan:
1. Filing: Approval of the preliminary plan shall become void unless the applicant submits a final plan meeting the requirements of section 11-13-7 of
this chapter within twelve (12) months of the date of approval of the preliminary plan, or within any extension beyond this period granted by the
village board. The final plan may be filed in phases, but the plan required within this period shall include no less than twenty five percent (25%) of the
land area included in the preliminary plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 540/618
2. Staff Review: The village staff development committee shall review the final plan in accordance with the aforementioned procedures for staff review
of the preliminary plan.
3. Plan Commission Action: Within sixty (60) days of receiving the final plan and report from the development committee, the plan commission shall
review the final plan and forward a report consisting of findings of fact and a recommendation for action on the plan to the village board.
4. Village Board Action: The village board shall, within thirty (30) days after it receives the plan commission report, approve the final plan by ordinance
or disapprove the plan.
5. Recording Final Plan: The final plan, as approved by the village board, shall be filed with the county recorder of deeds as the final plat for the PUD.
No permit allowing the construction of any improvement shall be issued before the final plat is recorded. The applicant shall pay all recording costs.
(Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
6. Amendments To Approved Final Plan:
a. No change or addition may be made to an approved final plan without approval of an amendment thereto by the village board.
b. An applicant seeking approval of an amendment shall file an application therefor with the zoning administrator. The application shall describe the
amendment sought and provide such other information as the zoning administrator may require.
c. If the zoning administrator determines that the amendment sought is a substantial change, as defined in subsection C6d of this section, all
procedures set forth herein for the approval of preliminary plans and final plans shall be followed. If the applicant disagrees with the zoning
administrator's determination, he may appeal and request consideration by the plan commission, who shall make a final determination within sixty
(60) days of filing the appeal.
If the zoning administrator determines that the amendment sought is not a substantial change, the application shall be forwarded to the plan
commission for their consideration. A public hearing is not required. The plan commission shall, within sixty (60) days of receiving the application
for amendment, file a written report with the village board including findings of fact and a recommendation for action on the amendment.
d. A substantial change to a planned unit development shall be any of the following changes from the previously approved final plan:
(1) A change that causes the development to fall short of meeting the requirements of any applicable zoning district to any greater degree than
already provided on the previously approved plan.
(2) Any change in land use type or housing type.
(3) A change in the location of any structure, off street parking or loading area, common open space area, or any area or right of way to be
conveyed to or reserved for the public body by more than ten feet (10') in any direction, or a change in the spacing between any two (2)
structures by more than ten percent (10%).
(4) A change of more than ten percent (10%) in any nonlocational quantitative specification of the previously approved plan, including any
dimension of any lot, yard, structure or pedestrian or vehicular thoroughfare; any residential density; amount of common open space acreage;
utility line capacity; amount of floor area of nonresidential development; amount of land to be conveyed to or reserved for any public body; size
or capacity of any off street parking or loading area; or amount or dimensions of existing or proposed tree or ground cover, landscaping, or
screening.
e. The village board shall, within thirty (30) days after it receives the plan commission report, approve or disapprove the amendment. The amended
plat shall be recorded in accordance with the provisions herein governing recording of a final plat. (Ord. 2012-70, 11-15-2012)
7. Revocation Of Approval Of Final Plan:
a. The village board may revoke its approval of a final plan for a planned unit development or any phase thereof in any of the following
circumstances:
(1) If construction does not begin within one year after approval of the plan.
(2) If construction is not completed within the time specified in the approved construction schedule or any extension thereof granted by the village
board.
(3) If there is not compliance with applicable provisions of this title.
b. In any such instance, the plan commission shall give the applicant fifteen (15) days' notice to appear before the commission to answer any charge
of noncompliance.
c. If the commission finds that the applicant is not in compliance, it may recommend revocation of approval if the planned unit development is not
brought into compliance within a period it specifies. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-13-6: PRELIMINARY PLAN FILING REQUIREMENTS:
No preliminary plan of a planned unit development (PUD) shall be approved until the applicant has submitted all of the following to the zoning
administrator:
A. Completed Application: A completed application form.
B. Fees: A fee as required from time to time by the village board, plus an improvement plan filing fee in accordance with the provisions of subsection 12-2-
3B of this code.
C. Statement Of Objectives: The applicant's written statement documenting the particular ways in which the flexibility requested through planned unit
development procedures will result in a design quality and amenity for the proposed development that furthers the public welfare to a degree not
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 541/618
possible under other provisions of this title and the village subdivision control requirements.
D. Ownership Interest: A disclosure of ownership interest as provided under section 11-3-5 of this title.
E. Preliminary Development Plan: A plan (15 copies) at a scale determined by the zoning administrator that shows for each development phase and for
the planned unit development as a whole:
1. Boundaries: The surveyed boundaries of the planned unit development in relation to surrounding properties, of each development phase thereof,
and of any easements therein, and the dimensions, area, and location of all lots within the development; current school district and municipal
boundary lines on or immediately adjacent to the site.
2. Land Use:
a. The location, acreage, type, and configuration of all land uses; the location, dimensions, type, and orientation of all structures, including buildings,
signs, screening, and fences; and the amount of floor space contained in each building.
b. Plus figures that show for each land use type within each development phase the total acreage, number of lots, floor area ratio, dwelling units per
acre, and amount of site area devoted to thoroughfares, off street parking, off street loading, open space, recreation, and each housing type.
3. Circulation, Parking And Loading: The proposed number, location, alignment, design and construction standards, and dimensions of all public and
private thoroughfares, sidewalks, railroad rights of way, pedestrianways, and bicycle paths and all off street parking and loading spaces and
associated aisles, driveways, and entrances and exits.
4. Open Space: The number, location, acreage, dimensions, proposed ownership, and provisions for maintenance of parks, playgrounds, swimming
pools, tennis courts, and other recreational and nonrecreational common open spaces.
5. Existing Natural Features: The topography of the site at two foot (2') intervals, drainage patterns, existing waterways, floodplains, wooded areas,
scenic views, marsh areas, areas with soil problems, isolated preservable trees six inches (6") or more in diameter at one foot (1') above ground
level, and other existing environmental features; data on subsurface soil, rock, and groundwater conditions if required by the village engineer.
6. Utilities And Drainage: The size, purpose, and location of existing and proposed public and private utilities (including water, sanitary and storm
sewers, gas, electric, telephone, and street lighting), utility easements, and drainage facilities on or within one hundred feet (100') of the site. The
locations of existing and proposed hydrants, catch basins, manholes, and valves. The dimensions and locations of proposed wet or dry stormwater
detention or retention areas, other artificial water features, or any proposed modifications to existing watercourses or water bodies.
7. Housing: The number of housing units proposed by housing type, number of bedrooms, and floor area and the estimated residential population for
each type of housing.
8. Landscaping And Grading: The number, type, location, and size of all proposed plant materials, ground cover, and berming, including existing plant
materials that are to remain on the site; the nature of any earthmoving to be done on the site.
9. Public Facilities: The dimensions and locations of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for school sites, fire stations, or other public or
quasi-public uses.
10. General Information: The name of the development; its location by section and township; legal descriptions of the land contained within the
development and each phase thereof; names and addresses of the owners, beneficiaries, or option holders of all property therein and of the
developer, site planner, and engineer; scale; north arrow; and date of preparation.
F. Community Impact Statement: A community impact statement as provided on forms supplied by the village.
G. Open Space Statement: The applicant's written statement regarding the location and character of all proposed common open space, including the
advantages the land at each location offers for open space and recreation use and the ways in which open land at each location might be used by the
community.
H. Architectural Renderings: Architectural renderings showing the substantial design intent for proposed structures but not necessarily the final design
detail.
I. Traffic Analysis: If requested by the plan commission, a professional analysis indicating the estimated traffic to be generated by the completed
development per week, per twenty four (24) hour day, and during morning and evening peak hours; the impact of this traffic on existing traffic loads in
the vicinity; and street construction or traffic control measures needed to accommodate the new traffic generated.
J. Phasing Schedule: A chronological schedule showing the expected beginning and ending dates for all proposed stages of construction or improvement
of all structures, improvements, common open space areas, circulation ways, and utilities and showing interim use and maintenance of areas not under
construction in each phase.
K. Homeowners' Association And Covenants:
1. Organizational details of all proposed property owners or condominium associations.
2. A draft of any proposed protective covenants governing land use, open space, or other aspects of the development; a copy of any proposed
documents governing the maintenance of open spaces and common areas.
L. School Capacity: Evidence of the capacity of all affected public school districts to handle the enrollment likely to be generated by the PUD.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 542/618
M. Feasibility: Evidence of the petitioner's capability to implement the type of development proposed; if requested by the village, a market analysis or other
evidence of economic justification of any of the uses proposed. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-13-7: FINAL PLAN FILING REQUIREMENTS:
The final plan for a planned unit development to be submitted to the zoning administrator shall consist of the following:
A. Completed Application: A completed application form.
B. Fees: A fee as required from time to time by the village board, plus an improvement plan filing fee in accordance with the provisions of subsection 12-2-
3B of this code.
C. Final Plat: Final plat of subdivision and supporting documents (15 copies) as required by the village subdivision regulations, including final engineering
plans and specifications.
D. Final Development Plan: The final development plan (15 copies) conforming to the preliminary development plan approved by the village board and
including final engineering plans and specifications.
E. Homeowners' Association And Covenants: Final versions of all covenants, organization of homeowners' or condominium associations, or any other
documents regulating land use or providing for maintenance of common areas.
F. Construction Schedule: A final schedule showing the dates of beginning and final completion of all structures and improvements.
G. Public Ownership Documents: Any deeds or easement agreements required or approved by the village board conveying ownership interest in any
parcel in the development to the village or any other public body.
H. Financial Guarantees: Performance bonds, escrow deposits, irrevocable letters of credit, or other financial sureties approved by the village sufficient to
guarantee the installation and improvement of all public or common improvements, including common open spaces, provided on the final plan. (Ord.
99-02, 1-7-1999)
11-13-8: FINDINGS OF FACT:
Before recommending approval of a preliminary plan for a planned unit development (PUD), the plan commission shall make the following findings:
A. Superior Design: That the preliminary plan represents a more creative approach to the unified planning of development and incorporates a higher
standard of integrated design and amenity than could be achieved under otherwise applicable zoning district and subdivision regulations, and that
solely on this basis, modifications to the use and design standards established by these regulations are warranted.
B. Meets PUD Requirements: That the preliminary plan meets the requirements for planned unit developments set forth in this chapter, and that no
modifications to the use and design standards otherwise applicable are allowed other than those permitted herein. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
C. Consistent With Village Plan: That the preliminary plan is consistent with the village official comprehensive plan. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. 2011
Code)
D. Public Welfare: That the preliminary plan will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare.
E. Compatible With Environs: That neither the preliminary plan nor any portion thereof will be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other properties in its
vicinity, seriously impair property values or environmental quality in the neighborhood, nor impede the orderly development of surrounding property.
F. Natural Features: That the design of the preliminary plan is consistent with the preservation of natural features of the site such as floodplains, wooded
areas, natural drainageways, or other areas of sensitive or valuable environmental character.
G. Circulation: That streets, sidewalks, pedestrianways, bicycle paths, off street parking, and off street loading, as appropriate to the planned land uses,
are provided. That they are adequate in location, size, capacity, and design to ensure safe and efficient circulation of automobiles, trucks, bicycles,
pedestrians, firetrucks, garbage trucks, and snowplows as appropriate without blocking traffic, creating unnecessary pedestrian-vehicular conflict,
creating unnecessary through traffic within the preliminary plan, or unduly interfering with the safety or capacity of adjacent thoroughfares.
H. Open Spaces And Landscaping:
1. That the quality and quantity of common open spaces and landscaping provided are consistent with the higher standards of design and amenity
required of a preliminary plan. That the size, shape, and location of a substantial portion of total common open space provided in residential areas
render it usable for recreation purposes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 543/618
2. That open space between all buildings is adequate to allow for light and air, access by firefighting equipment, and for privacy where walls have
windows, terraces, or adjacent patios. That open space along the perimeter of the development is sufficient to protect existing and permitted future
uses of adjacent property from adverse effects from the development.
I. Covenants: That, where individual parcels are to be later sold, adequate provision has been made in the form of deed restrictions, homeowners' or
condominium associations, and the like for:
1. The preservation and maintenance of any open spaces, thoroughfares, utilities, water retention or detention areas, and other common elements not
to be dedicated to the village.
2. The control of the use and exterior design of individual structures; such provision to be binding on all future ownership.
J. Land Use: That adjacent land uses within the preliminary plan are compatible with each other, and that PUD land uses adjoining properties not part of
the preliminary plan are compatible with land uses permitted on those properties. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
K. Services: That the land uses, intensities, and phasing of the preliminary plan are consistent with the anticipated ability of the village, the school districts,
and other public bodies to provide and economically support police and fire protection, water supply, sewage disposal, schools, and other public
facilities and services without placing undue additional burden on existing residents and businesses. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999; amd. Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-
2014)
L. Phasing: That each proposed development phase of the PUD can, together with any phases that preceded it, exist as an independent unit that meets all
of the foregoing criteria and all other applicable regulations herein even if no subsequent phase should ever be completed. (Ord. 99-02, 1-7-1999)
Title 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
12-1-1: PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION:
Because each new subdivision accepted by the village becomes a permanent unit in the basic physical structure of the future community, and to which the
future community will, of necessity, be forced to adhere, all subdivisions hereafter planned within the incorporated limits of the village and within the
unincorporated areas lying one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond which are in the jurisdiction of the village plan commission, shall, in all respects, be in full
compliance with the regulations of this title. These regulations are designed to provide for the orderly and harmonious development of the village for the
coordination of streets within new subdivisions with other existing or planned streets, and to secure a uniform system of utilities and services, and
otherwise to promote realization of the official plan of the village, and to guide, regulate and control the design, construction, use and maintenance of any
development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated in the village. (1978 Code
§ 7-1-1)
12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALLEY: The right of way which affords secondary means of access to properties abutting upon a street and located along the side of or in the rear of such
properties.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one or more streets and parks, cemeteries, shorelines of waterways, other permanent
open spaces or corporate limit lines.
BUFFER PLANTING STRIP: A narrow strip of land adjoining a piece of property or right of way on which trees, shrubbery, hedges or other plantings are
planted close enough together to prohibit the passage of persons or vehicles between the pieces of property or the property and the adjoining right of way
and is used for screening purposes only.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the village for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land so designated on the plat of the subdivision or prescribed by village ordinance,
between which and the adjacent street the erection of an enclosed structure or a fence or hedge is prohibited except as provided in subsection 11-4-8D1
of this code.
CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: Formally attesting that the specific inspections and tests where required have been performed and that such tests comply
with the applicable requirements of this title.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to a primary street, including the principal entrance streets of a development and
the principal circulating streets within such a development.
CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the method of "average end areas".
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 544/618
EASEMENT: A grant by property owners for the use of a portion of the owners' land by the general public, a corporation, a certain person or persons or
other legal entity for a specific purpose or purposes.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FINAL GRADE: The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after the grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
FINAL PLAT: A map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material as described in section 12-3-9 of this title.
GRADING: Excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
HALF STREET: A street bordering on one or more property lines of a tract of land in which the subdivider has allocated only one-half (1/2) of the ultimate
right of way width.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for
building development. For the purposes of this title, a half acre lot shall have twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, and an acre lot shall have forty
thousand (40,000) square feet of area within its boundaries.
LOT, BUTT: A lot at the end of a block and located between two (2) corner lots.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) substantially parallel streets and which is not a corner lot.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to a primary street, and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
MINOR STREET: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting properties and local needs of a neighborhood.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
OFFICIAL PLAN: Refers to the composite of the function and geographic elements of the comprehensive village plan, or any segment thereof, in the form
of plans, maps, charts, ordinances and textual material as adopted by the village.
OWNER: Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought to be
subdivided under this title.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PARKWAY: An unpaved strip of land situated between the roadway and the sidewalk or the parkway site.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right of way access across or within a block, for use by pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a pedestrianway or crosswalk or
however otherwise designated.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the state of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States Of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing.
PLAN COMMISSION: The plan commission of the village.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A tentative map or plan of proposed subdivision described in section 12-3-7 of this title.
PROTECTIVE COVENANT: A contract entered into between private parties and constitutes a restriction on the use of all private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of property owners, and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to impair
stability of values.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, planting strip, off
street parking area, or other facility for which the village may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation.
PUBLIC STREET: Any primary, secondary or minor street which is shown on the subdivision plat and is to be dedicated for public use. Its primary purpose
is to provide vehicular and pedestrian access to the adjoining properties.
REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps; complete extraction or killing by spraying.
RESERVATION STRIP: A strip of undeveloped land which is wider than any easement which may be located thereon, designed to act as a buffer zone
between developed property and rights of way of railroads, major arterial streets, etc. Reservation strips shall be prohibited.
ROADWAY: That portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, as measured from the outside to outside edges of the curb or combination curb and
gutter lines.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing improvements.
STREET LINE: The street right of way line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 545/618
STRIPPING: Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including tree removal, clearings and storage or removal of topsoil.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person commencing proceedings under this title for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION: The division of land into two (2) or more parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or of building
development, including all changes in streets or lot lines. For the purposes of this title, however, the division of land into parcels or tracts of one-half (1/2)
acre or more in size and not involving any new streets or easements of access, or sale or exchange of existing parcels or tracts of land, or the division of
lots and blocks in a recorded subdivision are exempted from the provisions of this title; provided further, however, that the frontage of a corner lot shall not
be reversed from that as platted without the proposal therefor being first submitted in writing to and approved by the corporate authorities of the village.
The division of a lot or lots of record having frontage on existing improved streets shall not be deemed to be a subdivision; provided, that such division
does not create more than two (2) parcels of land which meet all the requirements of the zoning ordinance, and that no new street is sought thereby to be
dedicated or is contemplated or projected through such lands. All of such divisions of lots or lots of record shall be shown on a certified plat of survey
which shall be filed with the director of community development in triplicate. The term subdivision includes resubdivision and, where it is appropriate to the
context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The basic land planning principles and specifications established as guides for the preparation of subdividing
plans, indicating, among other things, the minimum and maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in the plans.
SWALE: A gentle, shallow, unobstructed drainageway for the drainage of stormwater, with a minimum grade of one-half of one percent (0.5%) and with
side slopes of one foot (1') in six feet (6') maximum.
VACANT: Land of which there are no structures or only structures which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
VILLAGE: The village of Glendale Heights, DuPage County, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The village president and the village board of trustees.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The village engineer, or his duly authorized representative. (1978 Code § 7-1-2; amd. 2011 Code)
12-1-3: SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVIDING:
The plan commission shall not approve the subdivision of land if, upon adequate investigation conducted by the plan commission and in the opinion of the
village engineer, it has been determined that, in the best interests of the public, the site is not suitable for subdivision and development of the kind
proposed. (1978 Code § 7-1-7)
12-1-4: BUILDING WITHIN PROPOSED MAJOR STREET EXTENSIONS PROHIBITED:
No permanent building or structure shall be erected within the extended street lines or proposed extensions of major streets shown on the major street
plan adopted as a part of the official plan of the village. (1978 Code § 7-1-6)
12-1-5: SEWER AND WATER OWNERSHIP:
All sewer and water facilities constructed under the provisions of this title and accepted by the village shall become the property of the village. (1978 Code
§ 7-1-17)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
12-2-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The village engineer shall be the enforcement officer of this title and he may call upon any department or official of the village for such information and
assistance as he may deem necessary for the observance or enforcement of this title, and it shall be the duty of such department or officer to furnish such
information and assistance whenever required. (1978 Code § 7-1-3)
12-2-2: BUILDING AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
A. Compliance Required Before Issuance Of Building Permit: No building permit shall be issued by any governing official for the construction of any
building, structure or improvement to land or any lot within any subdivision which has been approved for platting until there has been compliance with
all requirements of this title. (1978 Code § 7-1-15)
B. Prerequisites To Issuance Of Occupancy Permit: No occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the use of any structure within a
subdivision approved for platting or replatting until required utility facilities have been installed and made ready to service the property; and that
roadways providing access to the subject lot have been constructed or are in the course of construction and are suitable for vehicular traffic. This
requirement is in addition to occupancy requirements and restrictions in other provisions of this code. (1978 Code § 7-1-16)
12-2-3: FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 546/618
A. Plat Filing Fees: An applicant shall be charged a nonrefundable fee for each proposed subdivision for which approval is sought to cover the costs
incurred by the village in checking and considering the plans and plat. Such fee shall be paid in cash to the village clerk, and the plans and plat for any
proposed subdivision, preliminary or otherwise, shall not be considered without the receipt of the village clerk being first exhibited showing the payment
of the fee required hereunder. The amount of the fee required by this subsection shall be as set forth in title 1, chapter 15 of this code. (Ord. 2011-84,
10-20-2011; amd. Ord. 2014-63, 10-16-2014)
B. Improvement Plan Filing Fee:
1. A fee in an amount equal to two percent (2%) of the total cost of all land improvements required to be installed under the provisions of this title, as
determined by the village engineer, shall be paid by the applicant for each proposed subdivision or planned development at the time preliminary
plans and specifications for such land improvements are submitted. Such fee shall be paid in cash to the village clerk to be used for payment of the
costs incurred by the village for administrative, engineering and legal review of the plans and specifications for land improvements, of subdivision or
planned development plats, and of such other documents and agreements as are submitted by the applicant or as are required as a part of the
approval of the subdivision or planned development; all of which costs shall be paid by the owner or subdivider or developer. Said fee shall also be
used to pay the cost of inspections by the village engineer, director of community development, or other authorized village inspector, incurred during
the course of construction of all said required land improvements. (1978 Code § 7-1-8; amd. 2011 Code)
2. No plans and specifications for land improvements and no subdivision or planned development plat, preliminary or otherwise, shall be considered
until the applicant has first exhibited a receipt of the village clerk showing payment of the fee required herein.
3. Following completion of construction of all required land improvements and of the administrative engineering and legal review and inspection
services rendered with respect to said subdivision or planned development, the village clerk shall refund to the applicant such portion of said fee
amount which exceeds the cost of administrative engineering and legal services.
4. In any case, where the exact cost of installing the required land improvements differs from the village engineer's estimate or where the
administrative, engineering and legal services pertaining to the particular subdivision or planned development exceed, or are estimated to exceed,
the amount of the fee deposited herein, an adjustment shall be made accordingly to bring such fee deposit in line with the actual improvement cost or
with the actual or estimated cost of said review and inspection services, whichever is larger. (1978 Code § 7-1-8)
12-2-4: GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE:
No approval of a final plat of subdivision shall be made by the plan commission or the village president and board of trustees unless a performance bond,
cash or escrow account, established in accordance with the provisions of this title, has been presented. This bond, cash or escrow account will secure the
satisfactory completion of all improvements in accordance with the description, plans, profiles and specifications submitted by the subdivider and approved
by the plan commission. The bond, or portion of bond, shall be released only after acceptance of the improvements by the corporate authorities. (1978
Code § 7-1-9)
12-2-5: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MINIMIZING BOND EXPENSE:
It is the intention of this title to encourage building in the village consistent with the protection of the public interest without placing undue financial hardship
on subdividers for bond expenses. Therefore, the following examples of procedure are given to clarify the intent of the title and to provide suggestions to
subdividers for economizing on bond expenses. They are given for illustrative purposes only and in no way limit or change the force or intent of any part of
this title.
A. If a subdivider intends to subdivide a large plot of land, it will be more economical for him if he requests approval for a plat concerning only the amount
of land that he intends to develop in the near future. In obtaining this plat approval, the subdivider would supply to the plan commission the general
plan for the entire area to be developed. This procedure will eliminate the necessity for the subdivider furnishing bonds for improvements which are to
be installed several years in the future.
B. If a subdivider has obtained a plat approval for a subdivision and has posted a bond to cover the cost of the improvements and, after developing part of
the plat, decided to discontinue the development, the village board may release the bond for the undeveloped area, provided the improvements already
installed constitute a properly operating and functional system, and provided, that the subdivider vacates the undeveloped part of the plat.
C. If a subdivider desires to post a cash bond to cover the cost of improvements, it is possible that up to seventy percent (70%) of the portion of the cash
bond provided for the completion of the improvement can be refunded to the subdivider as improvements are completed, permitting the subdivider to
use the money to pay his subcontractors for the installation of improvements. (1978 Code § 7-1-10)
12-2-6: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Inspections:
1. All improvements shall be subject to inspection on behalf of the village during the course of construction by the village engineer or other village
officer duly appointed by the village president.
2. The inspector shall have authority over materials of construction, methods of construction and workmanship to ensure compliance with working
drawings and specifications. The contractor shall provide for reasonable tests and proof of quality of materials as requested by the inspector. Upon
due cause, the inspector may require that work be suspended and the due cause shall include weather conditions, questionable materials of
construction, methods of construction, workmanship or nonadherence to specifications and drawings. Inspection costs shall be borne by the
subdivider.
3. Approval by the inspector or absence of inspection shall in no way relieve the subdivider of full responsibility for adherence by his contractors to
specifications and working drawings nor for high standards of materials, methods and workmanship.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 547/618
4. Approval by the inspector shall not be deemed acceptance by the village of the improvements. Acceptance shall be only by action of the village
board of trustees, and acceptance shall be contingent upon a favorable inspection report.
5. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider or his contractor to notify the village clerk when work on improvements is to be performed. The initial
notification that a particular improvement is to be started shall be in writing and shall reach the village clerk two (2) days in advance of the date of
starting work. If the work on a particular improvement is interrupted, the subdivider or his contractor shall notify the village clerk or the inspector in
writing at least twenty four (24) hours prior to returning to work. (1978 Code § 7-1-11)
B. Acceptance:
1. Initial Acceptance:
a. Upon completion of an improvement, the village engineer will certify completion of the improvement to the village clerk, certifying that the
improvement required to be installed in or upon the subdivision in connection with the approval of the plat of subdivision by the village board of
trustees has been fully completed and the construction or installation thereof approved by him. A certificate for each type of improvement shall be
required, although several certificates may be presented at the same time. Acceptance of the improvement by the board of trustees shall be by
resolution. Approval of the final plat, or the approval of the annexation of unincorporated territory by the board of trustees, does not constitute an
acceptance by the village of such streets or other improvements designated on the plat or constructed or installed upon the subdivision site,
irrespective of any act by any officer, agent or employee of the village.
b. A single improvement shall not be accepted in part. It shall be complete throughout the subdivision as indicated in the final plat and working
drawings, such as the subgrade base course and surface course of a street shall be considered as a single improvement.
c. Acceptance of an improvement by the board of trustees shall constitute a release of ninety percent (90%) of the applicable portion of the
performance bond or applicable portion of the balance of a cash deposit. The remaining ten percent (10%) of the applicable portion of the bond will
be held for the duration of the maintenance period unless it is replaced with a maintenance warranty bond of equal value and validity.
2. Responsibility For Maintenance; Bond Required: As further assurance of serviceable construction and to provide for repair of damage resulting from
subsequent construction operations of the subdivider or his contractors, the subdivider shall be responsible for all maintenance of an improvement,
including grading, for a period of not less than twelve (12) months following completion of construction of that improvement and acceptance thereof
by the village; provided, in addition, that the subdivider shall be responsible for all maintenance of roadways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, parkway
strips, storm drains and hydrants of water facilities until all construction work has been completed. Construction work shall be deemed to include all
necessary backfill and grading. The subdivider or developer shall furnish to the village a maintenance bond pertaining to said improvements in an
amount and with a surety that are acceptable to the village, and said bond shall remain in force throughout the twelve (12) month maintenance
period.
3. Final Acceptance: At the end of the maintenance period of completion of construction, all necessary repairs will be made and be inspected by the
village engineer. The village engineer will certify to the village clerk that all necessary repairs have been completed and that the improvement is
complete and in good repair in accordance with the village standards and requirements. The village attorneys will certify that satisfactory and proper
conveyances of title to property have been made by the subdivider to the village. Final acceptance of the improvement by the board of trustees shall
be by resolution. Upon final acceptance, all bonds or cash deposits shall be refunded. (1978 Code § 7-1-12)
C. Protection And Repair Of Existing Improvements: The subdivider, his contractors and suppliers shall be jointly and severally responsible that existing
improvements and the property of the village are not damaged or rendered less useful or unsightly by the operations of the subdivider, his contractors
or suppliers. This provision is intended to include damages or nuisances with respect to the land, improvements of landscaping of the village, damage
to existing streets, sidewalks, curb and gutter, or parkways by passage thereover of equipment or trucks or by excavation for any purpose; the spillage
or tracking of earth, sand or rocks into the streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or into catch basins; and damage to water mains, sanitary sewer
culverts or storm sewers. To reduce or localize the possibility of damage to streets by heavy trucking, the village engineer or director of public works
may instruct the subdivider as to the streets to be used for access to the subdivision by equipment or trucks, and the subdivider shall be responsible for
enforcement of this instruction upon his contractors and suppliers. The subdivider shall make provisions to prevent washing of earth or sand onto
sidewalks, streets, curbs and gutters and into catch basins by stormwater. Where deemed advisable, the village engineer or director of public works
shall have the power to require, either prior to commencement of construction or after construction is in progress, that the subdivider post an
appropriate bond to guarantee repair of damages or abatement of nuisances. Where the need for a bond becomes apparent after construction is in
progress, the village board shall have the power to order construction discontinued until the appropriate bond has been posted. Expenses incurred by
the village in repairing damages and cleaning streets, catch basins and sewers shall be deducted from the bond or shall be charged to the builder.
(1978 Code § 7-1-12; amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
D. Time For Completion Of Improvements: Unless otherwise specified in this title, or unless otherwise agreed to between the plan commission and the
subdivider, with the approval of the village board of trustees, all improvements required herein shall be completed within two (2) years of the date of
acceptance of the final plat by the board of trustees. (1978 Code § 7-1-12)
12-2-7: PLATS TO BE RECORDED:
All plats of subdivisions or resubdivisions, after the same have been submitted and approved as provided in this title, shall be recorded with the county
recorder of deeds, and then be filed and kept by the village clerk among the records of the village. (1978 Code § 7-1-14)
12-2-8: VARIATIONS:
The plan commission may recommend variations from these requirements in specific cases which, in its opinion, do not affect the general plan or the
intent of this title, or which would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to. Such recommendations shall be communicated to the village board of
trustees in writing, substantiating the recommended variations. The board of trustees may approve variations from these requirements in specific cases
which, in its opinion, do not adversely affect the general plan or the spirit of this title. (1978 Code § 7-1-13; amd. 2011 Code)
12-2-9: AMENDMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 548/618
The plan commission shall, from time to time, propose and recommend in writing to the village board of trustees such changes or additions to the
provisions and regulations herein contained as the plan commission may deem necessary or advisable. Such changes or additions shall become effective
after the board of trustees passes an amendment to this title. (1978 Code § 7-1-18)
Chapter 3
PLATS AND PROCEDURES
12-3-1: APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PREREQUISITE TO VALIDITY:
No plat of any subdivision shall be valid or entitled to record unless and until it has been approved by the village board, upon favorable recommendation of
the plan commission if within the corporate limits of the village, or if outside the corporate limits and within the area under the jurisdiction of the village,
provided by statute. (1978 Code § 7-2-1-1)
12-3-2: GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PLATS:
Before subdividing any tract or parcel of land in the village and in the unincorporated areas one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the village limits which
are in the jurisdiction of the plan commission, an owner or subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat and a final plat to be acted upon by the village in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (1978 Code § 7-2-1-2)
12-3-3: APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION OF SMALL TRACTS:
When there is presented to the village board of trustees for approval, a plat for the subdivision or resubdivision of a small tract of land within the corporate
limits, if the board of trustees, after consideration thereof and recommendation thereon by the plan commission, is of the opinion that the intent and
purpose of this title is not violated, the board of trustees may approve such plat without requiring further procedure other than the filing of three (3) copies
of the plat with the village clerk. (1978 Code § 7-2-1-3)
12-3-4: STORMWATER DETENTION AND DRAINAGE PLAN:
Prior to the approval by the plan commission of the final plat of subdivision, the owner shall have prepared a stormwater detention and drainage plan of the
area covered by the subdivision plat on which is indicated the proposed method of stormwater detention and disposing of stormwater from the lots and
blocks in the area. The plan shall indicate the approximate size and location of stormwater detention facilities and of each home to be constructed on each
lot, the foundation or first floor elevation, the elevation of the proposed pavement and sidewalk and the elevation of the finished grade at each corner of
each lot. The plan shall also indicate the manner in which the stormwater runoff is to discharge from the lot line sewer system or storm drainage
easements. Where a change in elevation of one foot (1') or more exists on a lot line, a retaining wall shall be required, and downspouts from buildings shall
be connected into the sewer system. (1978 Code § 7-2-1-4; amd. 2011 Code)
12-3-5: EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN:
Prior to the approval by the plan commission of the final plat of subdivision, the owner shall have prepared an erosion and sedimentation control plan of
the area covered by the subdivision plat on which is indicated the proposed measures to be taken to control erosion and sedimentation to assure that
sediment is not transported from the area during development and thereafter by a storm of ten (10) year frequency or less. The plan shall indicate all
erosion and sedimentation control measures necessary to be implemented throughout all phases of construction and permanently after completion of
development of the subdivision; the seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of
lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quality of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures; the provisions for
maintenance of control facilities, including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance and the persons or entity having legal responsibility for
maintenance of control facilities both during and after development is completed; and the proposed phasing of development of the subdivision; including
commencement dates, duration and sequency of stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction and final grading and landscaping, together with
the planned installation of temporary sediment control measures or devices, storm drainage facilities, street, sidewalk and parking area paving, and
permanent vegetative cover. Such plan shall be prepared in accordance with the "Procedures And Standards For Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control
In Northeastern Illinois", adopted by the DuPage County soil and water conservation district, as amended from time to time, which procedures and
standards are incorporated herein by reference. (1978 Code § 7-2-1-5)
12-3-6: PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION:
It is recommended, before submitting a preliminary plat for official filing, that the subdivider consult with the village or meet with the plan commission for
advice and assistance. This step requires an application to be completed and a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to be paid. The filing of a plat with
the village is not necessary, but a preliminary sketch may be included. In the event an application for the public hearing is subsequently filed, the two
hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fee will be credited toward the public hearing fee. (1978 Code § 7-2-2-1; amd. 2011 Code)
12-3-7: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Preparation Of Plat; Contents: Three (3) prints of a preliminary plat, with necessary supporting sheets which shall constitute a part thereof, showing the
proposed plan of subdivision shall be submitted to the village clerk on behalf of the village board, along with the required filing fee. Such plat shall show
and give the following information insofar as possible:
1. Identification And Description:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 549/618
a. The proposed name of the subdivision.
b. The location by township, section, town and range, or by other legal description.
c. The names and addresses of the owners, the developer and the designer who made the plat, and the title under which the proposed subdivision is
to be recorded.
d. The scale of the plat which shall not be smaller than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100').
e. The date of preparation.
f. The north point.
2. Delineation Of Existing Conditions:
a. The boundary lines of the proposed subdivision indicated by a solid heavy line and a notation of the approximate total acreage encompassed
thereby.
b. The location, widths and names of all existing streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights of way, easements, parks and other public
spaces, permanent buildings and structures, and section and corporation lines within and adjacent to the tract.
c. The exact locations of existing sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground facilities within the tract and to a distance
of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract, and the invert grade elevations of catch basins, manholes and culverts.
d. The boundary lines of adjacent properties for a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') from the proposed subdivision. Ownership of
these properties shall be shown wherever possible.
e. The existing zoning classifications of the proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts.
f. Topographic data within the tract and on adjacent properties for a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract including
existent contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2'), except in such unusual topographical conditions which demand one foot (1')
intervals as determined and required by the village engineer. The location of watercourses, marshes, floodplains, drainage patterns and facilities,
vegetative cover and other significant natural or manmade features shall be indicated. Soil boring data and seepage tests may be required at
locations and depths as determined by the village engineer.
g. The locations of or reference to locations of existing monuments or survey markers used in preparation of surveys, and the grade elevation of
each monument and marker.
h. The owner's and engineer's certification regarding the effect of construction of such subdivision on the drainage of surface waters, using language
as set forth in subsection 12-3-9C of this chapter.
i. A general description of predominant soil types on the tracts, their location and their limitations for the proposed use.
3. Delineation Of Proposed Conditions:
a. The street system, including right of way widths and street names, with proposed through streets shown extending to the boundaries of the
subdivision. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment or are a continuation of existing streets already named shall bear the name of the
existing street. In no case shall the name for the proposed streets duplicate or be confused with existing street names in the village or within one
and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits thereof, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, road, boulevard, drive, place or court, or
an abbreviation thereof.
b. The location and width of alleys, pedestrianways and utility easements. Drainage easements are the only ones which need to be shown in detail.
Other easements may be shown in a tentative location.
c. The layout, numbers and typical dimensions of blocks and lots scaled to the nearest foot, and the proposed land use for each lot, parcel or tract.
d. The building setback lines, indicating dimensions.
e. The proposed village zoning districts for subdivisions to be annexed into the village prior to filing the final plat or to be rezoned from its existing
classification prior to filing the final plat.
f. The areas, other than those listed in subsections A3a, A3b and A3c of this section, intended to be dedicated or received for community facilities,
indicating for each the approximate acreage. Such areas shall be designated by letter or number.
g. The lots or parcels of land not suitable for construction, where known, and not intended for dedication or temporarily reserved for public use.
h. An outline of protective covenants if applicable.
i. A general description of the type, kind, character and extent of required improvements proposed to be constructed or installed.
j. Such other information or data that the plan commission may require for the full and complete consideration of the proposed plan of the
subdivision.
k. The areas and acreage proposed to be excavated, graded and filled, sodded or seeded and vegetatively stabilized or left undisturbed. (1978 Code
§ 7-2-2-2)
B. Plan Commission Action:
1. All preliminary plats filed with the village clerk shall be deemed to be automatically referred to the plan commission for its consideration and approval
or disapproval. Plats shall be submitted at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the meeting at which they are to be considered.
2. The plan commission shall rule on the preliminary plat within sixty (60) days following receipt of the plat from the village clerk. The plan commission
may require such changes or revisions as are deemed necessary in the interests and needs of the community, in keeping with the provisions of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 550/618
title. In the event that the plan involves special problems or is in conflict with the plan commission's planning studies, the plan commission shall notify
the owner or subdivider as to the time and place of the plan commission meeting at which he shall be afforded an opportunity of being heard. (1978
Code § 7-2-2-3)
C. Qualifications For Tentative Conditional Approval Of Plat:
1. The approval of a preliminary plat by the plan commission and the village board is strictly tentative involving merely the general acceptability of the
layout as submitted.
2. The plan commission may require such changes or revisions as are deemed necessary in the interest and needs of the community, in keeping with
the provisions of this title.
3. No land will be approved for subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains inadequate drainage facilities unless such areas
become a unified part of contiguous lots or parcels not subject to flooding; however, if the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the
opinion of the village engineer, make such land completely safe for residential or commercial occupancy providing adequate drainage, subdivision of
such land may be approved.
4. Conditional approval shall be effective for not more than twelve (12) months following the date of approval by the village board unless, upon written
application by the subdivider, a written extension of time is granted by the plan commission. Where less than the entire land as shown on the
preliminary plat is contained in the initial final plat to be filed for record, such recordations shall automatically extend the approval of the unrecorded
balance of the preliminary plat for the successive twelve (12) month period. If the final plat has not been recorded within this time limit, the
preliminary plat must again be submitted to the plan commission for approval.
5. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute a waiver of any improvement requirements set by ordinance of the village subsequent to this
approval but prior to submission of the final plat. (1978 Code § 7-2-2-4)
D. Notice Of Conditional Approval: Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the plan commission, the following statement, signed by the chair, shall be
placed on each print and map comprising the preliminary plat:
NOTICE OF CONDITIONAL APPROVAL
Notice is hereby given that this preliminary plat has received the conditional approval of the Plan Commission of the Village of Glendale Heights,
subject to , and that the Plan Commission is now ready to receive the final plat for consideration.
Date
Chairman, Plan Commission of the Village of Glendale Heights
(1978 Code § 7-2-2-5)
E. Village Board Action: Within thirty (30) days after approval of the preliminary plat by the plan commission, it shall be either approved or disapproved by
the village board. (1978 Code § 7-2-2-6)
F. Distribution Of Copies: The prints comprising the preliminary plat shall, upon approval, be distributed as follows:
1. One print shall be retained by the plan commission.
2. One print shall be retained by the village engineer.
3. One print shall be returned to the subdivider. (1978 Code § 7-2-2-7)
G. Disapproval Of Plat; Resubmittal: If the preliminary plat and plans for specifications required by this chapter are finally disapproved by the plan
commission, one print of the proposed preliminary plat and one copy of the proposed plans and specifications for land improvements shall be retained
by the plan commission and the remaining copy returned to the subdivider with a written statement of the reasons for such disapproval. If this plan is
refiled within six (6) months and is essentially a revision of the previously disapproved plan, one-half (1/2) of the filing fee shall be waived. If it is
essentially a new plan or is not presented within the six (6) month time limit, the payment of the full filing fee shall be required. (1978 Code § 7-2-2-8)
12-3-8: REVIEW AND REVISION OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Subsequent to conditional approval of the preliminary plat, but prior to submission of the final plat, the developing engineer and the village engineer
shall cooperate on consideration of the proposed plans, specifications and engineering calculations of such features as the water supply and water
distribution system; sanitary sewerage system, including mains and sewerage disposal or treatment facilities; stormwater drainage system; gas,
telephone and electric service easements; street lighting; street name signs; fire hydrants; grading, gradients and widths of roadways and sidewalks,
the paving of roadways and sidewalks; and proposed detailed grading plats of blocks and lots.
B. Prior to review of the final plat by the plan commission, the village engineer and other public officials having jurisdiction shall approve or make
recommendations for revisions in the proposed plans and specifications, and they shall certify approval of final plans and specifications prior to
approval of the final plat by the plan commission. (1978 Code § 7-2-3-1)
12-3-9: FINAL PLAT:
A. Submission Of Plat:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 551/618
1. Within twelve (12) months after receiving the last required approval of the preliminary plat and supporting documents by the plan commission and
the village board, or a period of time beyond twelve (12) months that may be granted by the plan commission upon formal request in writing, there
shall be submitted to the plan commission a final plat of all or a part of the area included in the approved preliminary plat. The original tracing of the
final plat plus all copies required by the village, along with all construction plans and specifications and other supporting documents, shall be
submitted to the plan commission.
2. The final plat shall retain the design characteristics of the approved preliminary plat. The plat and supporting documents shall be submitted to the
plan commission through the village engineer. The village engineer will immediately notify the subdivider when, upon checking the documents, he
finds that all of the requirements of this chapter have not been met so that the necessary changes can be made or missing documents supplied. In
no case shall the village engineer forward the final plat to the plan commission until all the required supporting documents have been submitted.
(1978 Code § 7-2-3-1)
B. Contents Of Plat: The final plat shall show the following:
1. Identification And Description:
a. The proposed name of the subdivision.
b. The location by township, section, town and range or by other legal description.
c. The names and addresses of the owner, the developer and the designer who made the plat, and the title under which the proposed subdivision is
to be recorded. This plat shall be certificated by a registered land surveyor of the state.
d. The scale of the plat, not smaller than one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100').
e. The date of preparation.
f. The north point.
2. Delineation:
a. The boundary of the plat based on an accurate traverse, with angular and linear dimensions. The error of closure of such boundary line survey
shall not exceed standards established by the village engineer.
b. The exact locations, widths and names of all streets within and adjoining the plat, and the exact locations and widths of all alleys and crosswalks.
Proposed street names shall be in conformity with the street naming plan of the village.
c. The true angles and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments, not less than two (2) of which shall be accurately
described on the plat.
d. The locations of all permanent lot markers as actually installed, or to be installed. Lot markers shall be installed in accordance with village
standards.
e. The municipal, township or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
f. The radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangents, bearings and lengths of all curves.
g. All easements of rights of way for public service utilities or other purposes. All easements shall also be drainage easements.
h. All lot and block numbers with their lines accurately dimensioned in feet and hundredths, and where an angle occurs in any lot line between lot
corners, the measurement of the angle shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds.
i. The building setback lines accurately shown and dimensioned in feet and hundredths.
j. Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon, and of any
area to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of all property owners. When the tract dedicated or reserved for public use is not within
the corporate limits of the village, the certificate of dedication shall provide that the future official act of annexation of such tract to the village shall
constitute a transfer of title to the village for such public use.
3. Certificates:
a. Appropriate certificates shall be submitted as follows with the final two (2) certificates certified last and in the order listed:
(1) Owner's certificate.
(2) Notary certificate.
(3) County clerk certificate.
(4) Certificate as to special assessments.
(5) Surveyor's certificate.
(6) Plan commission certificate.
(7) Village board certificate.
b. Certification on final plats of subdivisions located in the unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the village limits shall be
those required by the county subdivision regulations, except where the village regulations are more restrictive; the applicable village subdivision
certifications shall also be required.
4. Size Of Plat: In order to comply with requirements for recording, each plat shall be at least eight and one-half inches by fourteen inches (81/2" x 14")
but no more than thirty inches by thirty six inches (30" x 36") in size. (1978 Code § 7-2-3-2)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 552/618
C. Supporting Documents:
1. The following supporting documents shall be submitted:
a. A statement signed by the subdivider setting forth the public improvements he proposes to make in the subdivision and agreeing to make such
improvements at his own expense, including all costs of inspection by the village engineer during construction, within the time limit agreed to by
the subdivider and the plan commission, and to maintain such improvements for one year after their formal acceptance by the village board. This
agreement shall provide for the method of selection of the contractors engaged to construct the improvements, require their approval by the village
engineer and require them to submit evidence and indemnify the village against any loss or damage to persons or property during the course of
the work. Such agreement is subject to approval of the final plat by the village board. Protective covenants which meet the approval of the plan
commission shall be lettered on the final plat or appropriately referenced thereon.
b. Specifications and drawings including profiles, cross sections and details as applicable, of all proposed public improvements. Elevations shall be
referenced to the standard village datum. Evidence shall be submitted by virtue of engineering calculations that the local utilities can satisfactorily
serve the area by the utility easements shown.
c. Complete estimates of costs of all proposed public improvements, including costs of engineering and inspection.
d. A statement signed by the village engineer approving the specifications, drawings and estimates of costs.
e. A duly executed performance bond by the subdivider, with corporate sureties to be approved by the village board of trustees. The bond shall be
filed with the village clerk in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the estimate of the costs of construction of all improvements. The
bond shall be certified by the village attorney as good, valid and enforceable by the village, securing the satisfactory completion of all
improvements in accordance with the description, plans, profiles and specifications submitted by the subdivider and approved by the plan
commission.
f. In lieu of the performance bond provided in subsection C1e of this section, the subdivider may deposit cash or establish an escrow account in the
amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimate for the total cost of the improvements with the village treasurer, which money is to be
disbursed by him from time to time upon receipt of payment estimates signed by the village engineer, the developer and the village president. The
maximum amount to be disbursed shall be ninety percent (90%). The remaining ten percent (10%) shall be held as a maintenance bond or can be
replaced by a surety bond to be held until the end of the maintenance period.
g. Written evidence from the proper governmental agencies of their willingness to approve of the acceptability of locations which are reserved for
public use but not dedicated.
h. A house numbering address map.
i. Statements of protective covenants which meet with the approval of the plan commission.
j. A certificate signed by a registered professional engineer and the owner of the land or his attorney which shall read as follows:
STATE OF ILLINOIS)
) SS
COUNTY OF DUPAGE)
To the best of our knowledge and belief, the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of such subdivision or any part
thereof, or, that if such surface water drainage will be changed, adequate provision has been made for collection and diversion of such surface
waters into public areas, or drains which the subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters will not be deposited on the property of
adjoining land owners in such concentrations as may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the subdivision.
Dated this day of , 20 .
ENGINEER
OWNER OR ATTORNEY
2. Such supporting documents, as set forth above, shall not be required for subdivisions located in the unincorporated areas one and one-half (11/2)
miles beyond the village limits when there is evidence that the supporting documents have been submitted to and approved by the county officials;
except, where the village standards for public improvements are of higher quality than county standards, such applicable supporting documents shall
be required by the village. (1978 Code § 7-2-3-3)
D. Approvals Required:
1. Plan Commission:
a. The plan commission shall rule on the final plat within sixty (60) days following receipt of the plat from the subdivider. In the event of a special
problem, the plan commission may notify the owner or subdivider as to the time and place of the plan commission meeting at which he will be
afforded an opportunity of being heard; however, should the plan commission require an amendment of the final plat, the time for ruling on the final
plat with amendments may be extended thirty (30) days after receipt of such amendments from the subdivider.
b. When the plan commission has approved the final plat, with amendments if any, it shall be signed by the chair and attested by the recording
secretary on the form provided.
c. After approval by the plan commission, the final plat shall be transmitted to the village board, together with a letter of transmittal calling attention to
all variations, if any, approved by the plan commission and its reasons for approving them, and conveying to the village board such other
information as the plan commission may deem necessary. The plan commission shall also transmit to the village board the supporting documents
submitted with the final plat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 553/618
2. Village Board: When the village board is satisfied with the final plat and the supporting documents submitted therewith, it shall, by resolution,
approve the plat and authorize the president to sign the approval form provided. Such approval shall be attested by the village clerk and sealed with
the corporate seal of the village. (1978 Code § 7-2-3-4)
E. Distribution Of Copies: Upon approval of the final plat by the village board, the signed copies of the final plat and supporting documents shall be
distributed as follows:
1. The original tracing and all necessary copies shall be forwarded to the village clerk for recording purposes;
2. One print shall be returned to the subdivider for his files; and
3. One print shall be retained in the plan commission files. (1978 Code § 7-2-3-5)
F. Recording Final Plat: When there has been compliance with all requirements prior to recording, the village clerk shall record the final plat, along with all
necessary copies, with the county recorder. The village clerk shall also file one true and exact copy with the county board of election commissioners.
The original recorded plat shall be retained by the village clerk on file. (1978 Code § 7-2-3-6)
Chapter 4
DESIGN STANDARDS
12-4-1: SIDEWALKS, PARKWAYS AND PEDESTRIANWAYS:
A. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of streets in all subdivisions unless waived by the village board on recommendation by the plan commission.
Parkways shall be provided between all sidewalks and the adjacent streets.
B. Pedestrianways shall be at least twelve feet (12') wide where permitted. Sidewalks located within such pedestrianways shall be as specified in this
chapter, except they shall not be less than five feet (5') nor more than seven feet (7') in width with a barrier installed of a nature which will prohibit
vehicular traffic. (1978 Code § 7-3-1)
12-4-2: EASEMENTS:
A. Utility Easements:
1. There shall be dedicated easements, a minimum of ten feet (10') in width, one-half (1/2) on each adjoining lot, for drainage, electric and telephone
utility poles, wires and conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water or other utility pipes or lines, along the rear of each lot and along the side lot
lines where necessary. The easements shall be so laid out that a proper continuity may be had for such utilities from lot to lot and from block to block.
(1978 Code § 7-3-2; amd. 2011 Code)
2. No buildings or structures shall be constructed on or over the easements.
3. Generally, electric and telephone facilities are to be located on the north and east portions of the easement and other facilities on the south and west
portions.
4. At deflection points in these easements, if overhead utility lines are contemplated, additional easements may be established for pole line anchors.
5. A statement, in an approved form, granting the right to ingress and egress for such installation and maintenance of utilities, sewers, water mains or
maintenance of watercourses shall be shown on the plat.
6. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the easements.
B. Drainage Easements: Where subdivisions or lots abut a natural watercourse, a right of way shall be dedicated to the village for drainage and future
maintenance of such watercourse. The right of way shall have a width of not less than fifty feet (50') on either side, measured from the centerline of the
watercourse. The width of the dedicated right of way along such watercourse may be reduced from the aforementioned fifty feet (50') as local
conditions dictate and as recommended by the village engineer and the plan commission. (1978 Code § 7-3-2)
12-4-3: STREET SYSTEM:
A. Compliance With Official Plan: The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the official plan, and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets; to reasonable circulation of traffic within the subdivision and adjoining lands; to topographic
conditions; to runoff of stormwater; to public convenience and safety; and in their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
(1978 Code § 7-3-3-1)
B. Access; Private Streets Prohibited:
1. A public street shall be provided to afford convenient access to all property within the subdivision. No private street or thoroughfare shall be
permitted. Where, in the opinion of the plan commission, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, the proposed streets shall
be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property. (1978 Code § 7-3-3-2)
2. Provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access to residential property abutting limited access streets either:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 554/618
a. By providing marginal access streets; or
b. By backing lots to the thoroughfare and providing access by a collector, minor or cul-de-sac street one lot depth removed and with a visual barrier
established in a nonaccess reservation strip along the rear property line abutting the thoroughfare.
These standards are established for the purpose of providing protection to residential property and to separate through and local traffic. (1978 Code
§ 7-3-3-3)
C. Extension Of Existing Streets: The proposed street system shall extend existing adjoining streets unless the extension thereof would not be practical
and is approved by the plan commission. (1978 Code § 7-3-3-4)
D. Street Names: Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with existing streets already named shall bear the name of such existing street. In no
case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate or be confused with existing street names in the village or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the
corporate limits thereof, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, road, boulevard, drive, place or court, or an abbreviation thereof. (1978
Code § 7-3-3-5)
E. Right Of Way Widths:
1. The minimum right of way width of a street, measured between the lines of property abutting upon the right of way, shall not be less than the
following: (1978 Code § 7-3-3-6)
Type Of Street Residential Subdivision Industrial, Commercial, Business Subdivision
Primary, as shown on the official plan or as designated by
federal, state or county officials having jurisdiction
In accordance with federal, state, county and village requirements, whichever has the
greater width and design standard requirements; generally 100 feet
Collector streets 80 feet 80 feet
Minor streets 66 feet 70 feet
Cul-de-sec streets and minor streets less than 600 feet in
length
60 feet 70 feet
(with 100 foot property line diameter or turnaround)
Marginal access streets, one-way only 40 feet 50 feet
Alleys, where permitted (see also subsection M2 of this
section and subsection 12-5-8I of this title)
20 feet 24 feet
(1978 Code § 7-3-3-6; amd. 2011 Code)
2. The entire right of way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the right of way. When the subdivision is located on
only one side of an existing right of way which is less than the required width, the subdivider shall dedicate additional right of way to meet the
requirements, but not to exceed one-half (1/2) of the total required width. (1978 Code § 7-3-3-6)
F. Cul-De-Sacs:
1. Cul-de-sac streets in single-family residential districts shall not be more than five hundred feet (500') in length, measured along their centerlines from
the streets of origin to the ends of their rights of way, or may be longer than five hundred feet (500'), provided not more than twenty (20) lots abut
upon their right of way lines.
2. In multiple-family residential districts, such streets shall not exceed three hundred feet (300') in length.
3. Each cul-de-sac street shall have a terminus of nearly circular shape with a minimum diameter of one hundred twenty feet (120'). The terminus shall
be connected with each right of way line of the approach segment of the street by a reverse curvature having a radius of not less than thirty feet
(30'). (1978 Code § 7-3-3-7)
G. Curves And Intersections:
1. Curves in streets shall be permitted, provided no curve shall be greater than that approved by the village engineer as reasonably safe for traffic at
the particular location of the curve, but with a radius of not less than the following:
Primary and collector streets 300 feet
Minor streets 150 feet
2. The minimum length of tangents between reverse curves shall be as follows:
Cul-de-sac streets Not allowed
Minor streets 50 feet
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 555/618
Collector streets 100 feet
Primary streets 200 feet
3. Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical curves. The minimum length in feet of curves shall not be less than the
following:
Minor and cul-de-sac streets 20 feet for each 1 percent algebraic difference of grade, but in no case less than 100 feet
Primary and collector streets 30 feet for each 1 percent algebraic difference of grade, but in no case less than 100 feet
4. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall not be permitted if the same can be reasonably avoided.
5. Minor streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
6. Street intersections and confluences shall be planned in a manner that will provide safe and efficient traffic flow. Streets shall intersect at or near
right angles, and an intersection of more than two (2) streets shall be avoided unless specific conditions of design indicate otherwise. No street shall
intersect any other street at less than sixty degrees (60°). (1978 Code § 7-3-3-8)
H. Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited. Wherever an existing or dedicated half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the
street shall be platted within such tract. A half street, where included, shall be graded at one level, and the regrading or new construction on a half
street shall conform to the grade and pavement of the adjacent half street. Where the adjacent half street is unimproved, the developer of the plat being
subdivided shall complete the construction of the full width of the street. (1978 Code § 7-3-3-9)
I. Longitudinal Gradients: Longitudinal gradients of streets shall be at least four-tenths of one percent (0.4%) and shall not exceed eight percent (8%) on
primary streets and ten percent (10%) on minor streets. (1978 Code § 7-3-3-10)
J. Location In Relation To Railroad Rights Of Way: Streets platted along railroad rights of way shall be so laid out that the nearest street line of such street
shall not be less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') from the nearest line of such railroad right of way. The five feet (5') closest to the right of way
shall be a buffer planting strip easement. (1978 Code § 7-3-3-11)
K. Grade And Topography: Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography, and all streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many as possible
of the building sites at or above the grades of streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible with the original topography. Topography
permitting, a combination of street grade curves shall be avoided. (1978 Code § 7-3-3-12)
L. Side Streets: Side streets shall be completed to the back lot line of adjacent developed property. (1978 Code § 7-3-3-13)
M. Alleys:
1. Alleys shall be provided at the rear of all lots or tracts intended for business, commercial or industrial use and, where necessary, for multiple-family
building use, but shall not be provided in single-family residential blocks. If the subdivider produces evidence that other access streets are available
and that an alley is not required for loading, unloading and fire protection, then this provision providing for alleys may be waived upon the
recommendation of the plan commission to the village board.
2. Alleys shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide where permitted in multiple-family residential areas. Alleys shall be at least twenty four feet (24') wide in
all commercial, industrial and business areas unless such areas are otherwise provided with off street loading space.
3. Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead ends as
determined by the plan commission. (1978 Code § 7-3-3-14)
12-4-4: BLOCK STANDARDS:
A. Length:
1. Residential: In residential subdivisions, the maximum lengths of blocks shall be one thousand two hundred (1,200) linear feet. No block shall be less
than four hundred (400) linear feet in length unless approved by the plan commission. Pedestrianways leading to parks, schools or other common
destinations may be required by the plan commission. (1978 Code § 7-3-4-1)
2. Business, Commercial And Industrial: In business, commercial and industrial subdivisions, block lengths shall be as approved by the plan
commission, in accordance with the proposed function and location of each subdivision. (1978 Code § 7-3-4-2)
B. Shape And Size: The shape of blocks shall be dictated by topographic features, the basic street system and traffic pattern, lot depths and areas
designated for public and other nonresidential land uses. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots except where fronting on major
streets or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case, a single tier of lots may be approved. (1978 Code § 7-3-4-3)
C. Subdivisions Bordering Railroad Rights Of Way Or Arterial Streets: Where a subdivision borders upon or is traversed by a railroad right of way or
arterial street, the plan commission may require a street, on one or both sides of such right of way or street, approximately parallel to and at a distance
removed suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, such as for park purposes, deep residential lots with a visual barrier established in a
nonaccess buffer planting strip along the rear property line and off street parking, business or other uses as permitted by the village zoning ordinance.
(1978 Code § 7-3-4-4)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 556/618
12-4-5: LOT STANDARDS:
A. Size And Shape:
1. In general, lots should be as nearly rectangular in shape as practicable.
2. Width and area of lots shall conform with the lot width and area requirements set forth in the village zoning ordinance or that of the county for
subdivisions located in the unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the village limits. In the case of corner lots, the plan
commission may make variations to encourage the proper development of intersection design and traffic safety, and corner lots may be increased in
width to twenty percent (20%) over the width of the typical internal lot, and must provide for appropriate building setback distances and orientation to
both streets. No lot shall be less than sixty feet (60') wide at the building setback line.
3. Depths of lots shall not be less than one hundred feet (100') except where continuations of existing streets extended do not permit compliance with
this subsection.
4. Width, area and depth of lots in an industrial, commercial or business subdivision shall be as approved by the plan commission in accordance with
the proposed function and location of each subdivision, but shall be adequate to provide for off street service and parking facilities required by the
type and use of the development contemplated.
5. Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream shall have an additional depth or shall be as required by the plan commission in
order to provide acceptable building sites. (1978 Code § 7-3-5-1)
B. Lot Lines: All lots shall abut upon a public street. Side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street line or substantially so. (1978 Code § 7-
3-5-2)
C. Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots are not permitted except where lots back upon a thoroughfare, upon a body of water in separate or
undivided ownership, or as specifically approved by the plan commission in industrial, commercial and business subdivisions. (1978 Code § 7-3-5-3)
D. Location Of Easements: In all subdivisions, due regard shall be given to the preservation of natural features, and easements shall be located where
they will not interfere with large trees, watercourses, historical and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to
the property. (1978 Code § 7-3-5-4)
E. Setback Lines: Setback lines shall be as required by the zoning ordinance from all street lines. In the case of corner lots, the minimum setback line shall
apply along both the front street and the side street thereof. The minimum twenty five foot (25') setback requirements shall apply in all zoning districts
including all classes of residential, business, commercial, industrial and unrestricted districts. However, where a greater building setback line is required
by other ordinances of the village or the county, such greater setback requirements shall apply. (1978 Code § 7-3-5-5)
Chapter 5
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
12-5-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
No subdivision of land shall be approved unless the improvements required by this chapter are provided for and satisfactory assurance of the completion
of the improvements is furnished to the village board of trustees by the owner. Plans and specifications covering the construction of public improvements
shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer of the state. All improvements shall be made under the supervision of the village engineer and
shall be subject to final inspection by him at the time of completion and before their acceptance by the village board. Any changes in the details of
construction made during the course of construction must be approved by the village engineer, and all maps showing these improvements must be revised
accordingly before the changes can be made. An accurate set of as built drawings showing all changes made in the plat shall be submitted upon the
completion of all construction and prior to final acceptance of the subdivision. (1978 Code § 7-4-1-1)
12-5-2: SOIL INVESTIGATION AND PHYSICAL TESTS:
A. If the proposed subdivision contains questionable soil and, in the opinion of the village engineer, soil investigations, borings or other soil tests are
necessary to determine the nature and extent of such questionable material, the owner shall retain the services of a competent testing laboratory to
perform the needed investigations. Such testing laboratories shall be subject to the approval of the village engineer.
B. Copies of the complete reports by the testing laboratory shall be filed with the village board of trustees and the village engineer.
C. All costs connected with the tests, borings or interpretations of results of such work shall be borne by the owner or developer. (1978 Code § 7-4-5)
12-5-3: CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS:
A. Compliance Required: Engineering plans and specifications that do not comply with the standards of this section will not be approved.
B. Interpretation:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 557/618
1. Wherever an article, material standard or equipment is defined by describing a proprietary product, or by using the name of a manufacturer or
vendor, the term "or approved equal", if not inserted, shall be implied. The specific article, material standard or equipment mentioned shall be
understood as indicating the type, function, minimum standard or design, efficiency, and quality desired and shall not be construed in such a manner
as to exclude manufacturer's products of comparable quality, design and efficiency. All materials shall meet approval before they are incorporated
into the public improvement.
2. In case of conflict on certain material and design requirements, these specifications and standards shall take precedence and shall govern. (1978
Code § 7-6-1)
C. Streets:
1. Soil Survey: Soil survey data for the proposed site shall be compiled by a recognized testing laboratory and include soil classification and strata,
Illinois bearing ratio maximum density (proctor) and plasticity index. Borings shall be made to at least the depth of the underground utilities and all
boring locations noted.
2. Pavement Design: Width of rights of way, width of pavement and horizontal and vertical alignment shall be in accordance with this title or as
stipulated by the plan commission. The proposed pavement thickness shall be designed in strict accordance with section 7 of the state of Illinois
design manual. Engineering design data to be shown on the plans shall include:
a. Class I, class II, or class III roads and streets, as the case may be, with anticipated structural design traffic and design period.
b. Minimum soil support IBR value.
c. Traffic factor and design thickness.
d. Base course and surface course, type and thickness with the pavement material design coefficients listed. If proposed material coefficients are not
shown in the design manual, justification for the coefficients used must be included.
e. Subbase fill areas and proposed method of ensuring the minimum in place compactive effort.
3. Curbing: Unless otherwise allowed by the village board, barrier type curb and gutter conforming to state of Illinois standard 2130-3 shall be used
throughout.
4. Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with these subdivision regulations.
5. Streetlights: Street lighting shall be designed to provide a minimum maintained illumination of 0.4 foot-candle on residential streets, 0.9 foot-candle
on collector streets, and 2.0 foot-candles on major streets in accordance with current IES design practices. The streetlight standard shall be served
by underground circuits with 120/240 volt single phase, triplexed, cross linked, polyethylene, six hundred (600) volt, direct burial cable. Pedestal to
lamp runs shall be no smaller than no. 6 AWG. Direct burial cable shall run in rights of way or easements only, and a minimum of thirty two inches
(32") deep. All light standards shall be mounted on a concrete pedestal of sufficient design dimensions, and be equipped with individual photoelectric
controls. If the street lighting system will be served and switched from a single source, the entire system, excluding the transformer that serves as the
source of power, shall be designed and provided by the developer. Such systems shall be controlled by a pad mounted metal clad switching device
to include, but not be limited to, a photoelectric switching system, a main controlling switch and a Commonwealth Edison approved metering device.
The system shall be guaranteed for one year and shall be deeded to the village. Luminaries and poles may be of a style chosen by the developer for
aesthetic reasons, but must be of top quality. Engineering design, calculations, specifications and all materials shall be reviewed and approved by
the village engineer.
6. Landscaping: All parkways within the dedicated street areas or public areas shall be graded and covered with a minimum of four inches (4") of
topsoil. Trees shall be planted in parkways in accordance with this title. (1978 Code § 7-6-2)
7. Specifications: Earthwork, pavement, curb and gutter, sidewalks, streetlights and landscaping shall be designed, constructed and measured for
payment in accordance with the state of Illinois department of transportation, division of highways "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", latest edition, and this title. Surface course for roadways shall not be placed until all construction activity in the vicinity has been
substantially completed. The village engineer will provide instruction on when surface course is to be placed. (Ord. 97-74, 12-4-1997; amd. 2011
Code)
8. Table:
MINIMUM PAVEMENT DESIGNS
Street Or
Road
Classification
Optional Pavement Sections
Bit. Agg. Mix Base1
Class I Surface5
Pozzuolanic Base2
Class I Surface5
Cement Agg. Base3
Class I Surface5 PCC Nonreinforced4
IBR
Value
Base
Thickness
(Inches)
Binder
(Inches)
Surface
(Inches)
Base
Thickness
(Inches)
Binder
(Inches)
Surface
(Inches)
Base
Thickness
(Inches)
Binder
(Inches)
Surface
(Inches)
Concrete
Thickness
(Inches)
Subbas
Thicknes
(Inches)
Minor street
less than 400
vehicles per
day
2.5 6 11/2 1 6 11/2 1 6 11/2 1 6 2
30' B/C-B/C 3.0 6 11/2 1 6 11/2 1 6 11/2 1 6 2
4" roll type or
B-6.12 curb
and gutter
3.5 6 11/2 1 6 11/2 1 6 11/2 1 6 2
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 558/618
Connector
street up to
1,000 vehicles
per day
2.5 61/2 11/2 11/2 71/2 11/2 11/2 71/2 11/2 11/2 6 4
30' or 36' B/CB/
C
3.0 6 11/2 11/2 7 11/2 11/2 7 11/2 11/2 6 4
4" roll type or
B-6.12 curb
and gutter
3.5 6 11/2 1 7 11/2 11/2 7 11/2 11/2 6 4
Collector
street up to
3,500 vehicles
per day
2.5 8 11/2 11/2 9 11/2 11/2 9 11/2 11/2 7 4
36' or 42' B/CB/
C
3.0 8 11/2 11/2 9 11/2 11/2 9 11/2 11/2 7 4
B-6.12 curb
and gutter
3.5 8 11/2 11/2 9 11/2 11/2 9 11/2 11/2 7 4
Notes:
1. Bituminous aggregate base course shall have a minimum Marshall stability of 1,500.
2. Pozzuolanic base course shall have a minimum 7 day compressive strength of 400 psi and consist of crushed stone or gravel aggregate only.
Slag will not be allowed.
3. Cement aggregate base course shall have a minimum 7 day compressive strength of 400 psi.
4. PCC (nonreinforced) streets shall have sawed transverse contraction no greater than 20 feet apart with a minimum compressive strength at 14
days of 3,500 psi. Subbase shall consist of gravel or crushed stone (CA-6).
5. Class I service shall consist of a binder course and surface course I-11 of the thickness shown.
6. Type A or B granular base shall be constructed in layers not more than 6 inches and compacted to not less than 100 percent of the standard
laboratory density in accordance with AASHO T-99.
All materials and construction shall meet the requirements of the state of Illinois department of transportation "Standard Specifications For Road
And Bridge Construction", adopted July 2, 1973, and all special provisions thereof.
9. Figure:
VILLAGE OF GLENDALE HEIGHTS
STANDARD SECTION FOR ROLL TYPE CURB AND GUTTER
Note:
Frame and grate for inlet or catch basin shall be Neenah R-3501-P or approved equal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 559/618
(1978 Code § 7-4-5)
D. Topography; Stormwater Discharge; Lot Grading:
1. Topographic Mapping: Topographic mapping based on a one foot (1') contour interval shall be supplied for the entire subdivision and the adjacent
property one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract. Datum used shall be USGS with the benchmark clearly identified and shown.
2. Stormwater Releases: The allowable release rate for stormwater discharge from a development shall comply with this title; retention or detention
basins, when and where needed, shall meet the approval of the village engineer with respect to capacity, outflow rate, outlet structure, landscaping
and other aesthetic considerations. All calculations, design storms, hydraulic and hydrologic criteria shall be submitted with the plans and
specifications.
3. Inlets, Catch Basins And Manholes: Inlets will be required at maximum four hundred foot (400') intervals at low points and at corners and shall be
connected only to catch basins; catch basins shall be connected to manholes. Inlets shall be a minimum two foot (2') diameter, catch basins three
foot (3') and manholes four foot (4') diameter (5 feet on sewers over 21 inches in diameter); all to be precast concrete. Manholes shall be provided
with steps. Manhole frame and closed lid shall be Neenah R-1015-B or East Jordan 1051. Inlets and catch basins shall be located in the curb line
and shall have Neenah R-3080 frames and grates. For roll type curb and gutter, if allowed, a Neenah R-3501-0 frame and grate shall be used.
Manholes, inlets and catch basins shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to acceptance.
4. Storm Sewer Pipe: Storm sewers shall be RCP of the appropriate class, and sized according to this title and good engineering practice. Other pipe
materials may be used in specific instances with the approval of the village engineer.
5. Ditches: Open ditches or swales will be allowed only in specific instances and will be subject to the approval of the village engineer.
6. Lot Grading: Each lot and block shall be graded to drain runoff away from the building foundation. Minimum front lot slope shall be two percent (2%);
minimum back lot slope shall be one percent (1%). All corner lot and building line elevations shall be established on the plans as well as top of
foundation elevation for all proposed buildings. Benchmark shall be based on USGS datum clearly identified and locations shown on the plans. (1978
Code § 7-6-3)
7. Flood Control: The provisions of title 13 of this code, as they pertain to floodplain building or filling, shall be adhered to. (1978 Code § 7-6-3; amd.
2011 Code)
8. Sump Pump Installations: Sump pump installations shall be accomplished in such manner so as to prevent the discharge or overflow of stormwater
onto adjoining property or upon any street or public way. No sump pump shall be installed and connected to a sanitary sewer. Building construction
on parcels that are proximate to a storm sewer shall cause footing drains from such structure to be connected to the storm sewer system. Building
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 560/618
construction on parcels that are proximate to a retention pond may be required to have footing drains from such structure discharged into a retention
pond. Where footing drain tile expels into a sump, the sump shall be equipped with a pump that shall be so installed and connected so as to
discharge either into a storm sewer or a retention pond. (1978 Code § 7-6-3)
9. Specifications: Excavation, installation of storm sewers and culverts; construction of manholes, catch basins, and inlets; grading and ditching; and
landscaping shall be designed, constructed and measured for payment in accordance with the state of Illinois department of transportation, division
of highways "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", latest edition, and this title. (Ord. 97-74, 12-4-1997; amd. 2011 Code)
E. Water System:
1. Water Main Pipe: Pipe used in water main construction shall be cement lined ductile cast iron conforming to ASA specification A 21.51 (AWWA C-
151) with mechanical or push on joints. Each joint shall have two (2) serrated brass wedges driven into the opening between the plain end and the
bell until snug for electrical thawing. Minimum cover shall be five feet (5'). Ductile cast iron retainer glands shall be used instead of reaction backing.
All valves shall have four foot (4') inside diameter vaults; all ten inch (10") and larger valves shall have five foot (5') inside diameter vaults. Frames
and covers shall be Neenah R-1765 or equal. The word "WATER" shall appear on the cover in raised letters. All valves shall be (Mueller A2380-22)
nonrising stems, mechanical joint ends, two hundred (200) psi working pressure, four hundred (400) psi test pressure and shall be installed with
retainer glands. All valves shall open to the left.
2. Hydrants: Hydrants shall be Traverse City TVC 5-3-FM yellow in color with two and one-half inch (21/2") hose nozzles and steamer connection.
Threads on nozzles and operating nuts shall be national standard. Hydrants shall open to the left and shall be so marked. All hydrants shall be
backfilled with one-half (1/2) cubic yard of no. 2 stone and properly backed with reaction backing against a solid wall. Hydrants shall be spaced in
accordance with this title.
3. Building Services:
a. Residential building services shall be three-fourths inch (3/4") type K copper utilizing a three-fourths inch (3/4") corporation stop (Mueller 15000)
with Mueller type thread inlet cc flare outlet or equal.
b. All services two inches (2") and larger shall be installed with tapped sleeve and valve. Tapping sleeve shall be Mueller H 615 MJ or equal. Tapping
valve shall be Mueller H 667 with O-ring seal and two inch (2") square operating nut, and installed in a concrete vault as detailed in subsection E1
of this section.
c. All three-fourths inch (3/4") and one inch (1") services shall have a ten inch (10") expansion loop; the curb stop shall be a Mueller H 15154 ori-seal,
and the curb box a Mueller H 10302 with one and one-half inch (11/2") upper sections in the Minneapolis pattern. Curb stop and curb box shall be
installed eight feet (8') from the property line. All underground connections shall be copper flare.
4. Valve Boxes: Valve boxes for hydrant auxiliary valves shall be two (2) piece CI screw type Mueller H 10360 or equal.
5. Testing And Disinfection: Water mains shall be pressure tested for two (2) hours at a static pressure of one hundred fifty (150) psi with allowable
leakage not to exceed thirty (30) gallons per inch of diameter per twenty four (24) hours per miles of pipe. Water main shall be disinfected in
accordance with AWWA specification C-601 and as required by the state of Illinois. (1978 Code § 7-6-4)
6. Specifications: Water main, hydrants, valve and vaults, and services shall be designed, constructed and measured for payment in accordance with
the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", fifth edition 1996, and this title. All materials shall meet the latest
revised AWWA specifications. (Ord. 97-74, 12-4-1997)
F. Sanitary Sewers: Requirements for sanitary sewers are as provided in title 9, chapter 3 of this code. (2011 Code)
G. Trench Backfill:
1. All trenches for underground utilities falling under and within two feet (2') of a proposed paved surface shall be backfilled with granular material
consisting of state of Illinois gradation CA-6 or stone screenings conforming to the following gradients:
Sieve Size Percentage Passing
11/2 inch 100
1 inch 95 . 5
1/2 inch 75 . 15
4 45 . 10
16 25 . 15
200 8 . 4
2. Trench backfill shall be placed in uniform layers not exceeding twelve inches (12") (loose measure) and compacted with mechanical equipment to
ninety five percent (95%) of maximum density in accordance with AASHO T-99. This compactive effort is expected, and in place tests confirming this
density may be required if compaction to ninety five percent (95%) maximum density is doubtful. Trench backfill shall be measured for payment in
cubic yards. (1978 Code § 7-6-6)
H. Inspections: Twenty four (24) hours' notice shall be given to the village engineer and public works department prior to construction of the various public
improvements. Public works shall be notified of all street or drainage improvement construction and/or testing and of all water main and sanitary sewer
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 561/618
improvement construction and/or testing. The village engineer shall be given separate notice of all construction and/or testing. (1978 Code § 7-6-6;
amd. 2011 Code; Ord. 2014-15, 3-20-2014)
I. Submission Of Plans And Specifications: Plans and specifications must be accompanied by the final plat, design data as required, and a detailed
estimate of the total construction costs.
J. Final Acceptance: In addition to the requirements and conditions as set forth in this title for final acceptance, a complete set of as built drawings shall be
submitted showing all changes in the plan, complete with a measured and dimensioned listing of sanitary service locations. No final approval will be
given until the work site is left in a neat and workmanlike condition. (1978 Code § 7-6-6)
K. Contractor Requirements: All construction contracts entered into with the village and all other contracts entered into by and between any person for the
construction or installation of public improvements including streets, sidewalks, curb and gutters, water main, sanitary and storm sewers, streetlights,
water reservoirs, drainage retention or detention areas, public buildings, water hydrants, park and parkway tree removal or replacement, and any other
improvement for public use shall, as a minimum, contain the following contractor requirements: (1978 Code § 7-6-7)
1. The contractor shall file a copy of the project plans and specifications with the village director of community development. (1978 Code § 7-6-7; amd.
2011 Code)
2. The contractor shall obtain and keep in effect throughout the contract period a performance and a labor and material bond in the contract amount.
3. The contractor shall furnish a one year maintenance bond in an amount determined by the village to ensure the timely repair or replacement of faulty
workmanship or materials. (1978 Code § 7-6-7)
4. The contractor shall maintain in force throughout the contract period public liability insurance in an amount sufficient to protect the contractor and the
village against risks of damage or injury (including death) to persons or property wherever located, resulting from any action or operation under the
contract or in connection with the work. The limits of liability shall not be less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury to one
person or a maximum sum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injuries in any one accident and not less than one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) for damage to property in any one occurrence. Such insurance shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the
state of Illinois, and such insurance shall further provide that it shall not be canceled unless ten (10) days' advance notice in writing to the village
shall be made. A copy of the insurance policy or a certificate thereof shall be filed with the village director of community development.
5. The contractor shall maintain in force throughout the contract period automobile liability insurance covering all owned or rented vehicles and moving
equipment used in connection with the work, and insuring the contractor and the village for all damages or personal injury growing out of such use in
the maximum limit of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) in any one occurrence and for all damages to personal property in the maximum
limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any one occurrence. Such insurance shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the
state of Illinois, and such insurance shall provide that it shall not be canceled unless ten (10) days' advance notice in writing to the village shall be
made. A copy of the insurance policy, or a certificate thereof, shall be filed with the village director of community development.
6. The contractor shall maintain in force throughout the contract period workers' compensation and employers' liability insurance in an amount sufficient
to protect the contractor and the village from any liability or damage for injury (including death) to any of the contractor's employees, including any
liability or damage which may arise by virtue of any statute or law in force or which may hereafter be enacted. Such insurance shall be issued by a
company authorized to do business in the state of Illinois, and a copy or a certificate thereof shall be filed with the village director of community
development.
7. The contractor shall provide the indemnity bond required by section 4-4-2 of this code.
8. The contractor shall comply with the prevailing wage rate as found and determined by the village, from time to time, pursuant to 740 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 170/.01 et seq.
9. The contractor shall comply with equal employment opportunity provisions and nondiscrimination provisions to ensure that the contractor will not
discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, order of protection
status, marital status, physical or mental disability, military status, sexual orientation, unfavorable discharge from the military, or citizenship status,
and further, that the contractor will examine all job classifications to determine if minority persons or women are underutilized and will take
appropriate affirmative action to rectify any such underutilization. (1978 Code § 7-6-7; amd. 2011 Code)
10. The contractor shall use proper warning guards and safety devices with respect to the construction area and particularly with respect to open
trenches and the storage of construction materials. (1978 Code § 7-6-7)
11. The contractor shall keep a daily record with respect to all injuries or incidents of damage occurring in, on or near the construction site or as a result
of the contractor's construction activities, and such information shall be supplied to the village director of community development within twenty four
(24) hours after the day of occurrence.
12. No trees, fire hydrants, utility poles, shrubs or hedges, traffic signs, or other public structures shall be removed, replaced, damaged or destroyed
unless and until approval for such removal, replacement, damage or destruction has first been obtained from the village and forwarded to the
contractor, in writing, under the signature of the village director of community development or of the village engineer.
13. The contractor shall conduct his construction activities so as not to interfere with, break, cut, or otherwise damage any public curb, or public road
pavement, or any utility services located alongside of or under or within any public road or public right of way area, unless and until approval for such
action is first obtained from the village, and a letter of such approval is delivered to the contractor under the signature of the village director of
community development or of the village engineer. (1978 Code § 7-6-7; amd. 2011 Code)
14. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements, the contractor shall be responsible for taking immediate steps to correct any damage or injury done to
public structures, utility services, roadways, or public buildings as well as any damage or injury occasioned to private property as a result of the
contractor's activities pursuant to construction of public improvements.
15. The contractor shall comply with the Illinois statutory provisions regarding a preference to Illinois citizens on public works projects, and shall employ
only Illinois laborers on any such public project or improvement, which provision requiring that such labor be used shall be set forth and contained in
the construction contract. (1978 Code § 7-6-7)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 562/618
12-5-4: STORMWATER DRAINAGE:
A. An adequate system of stormwater drainage designed for five (5) year rain shall be constructed and installed, consisting of pipes, tiles, manholes, inlets,
catch basins and other necessary facilities, that will adequately drain the entire subdivision, protect roadway pavement and prevent the accumulation of
stormwater at any place under normal conditions. Open ditches shall be avoided if possible. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and
independent of the sanitary sewer system. Materials and methods of construction shall conform to specifications adopted by resolution by the village
president and board of trustees. Such drainage system shall be subject to approval by the village engineer.
B. All street pavements in the subdivision shall be provided with drainage inlets discharging directly into a storm sewer system which shall conduct such
stormwater to an established watercourse or outfall sewer. Inlets shall be placed on each side of the pavement in the gutter lines at all low points at
street intersections (except when such intersection is located at the high point) and at intervals along the gutter line not exceeding four hundred feet
(400') between inlets and shall be connected only to catch basins. The catch basins shall be connected only to manholes.
C. All street pavements in subdivisions shall be bounded with combination portland cement concrete curb and gutter. The curb and gutter may be deleted
only with the permission of the plan commission.
D. Design of storm sewers shall be based on a flow computed on the basis of the following formula:
Q = CIA
Where:
Q
is stormwater runoff in cubic feet per second from the drainage areas.
C
is a coefficient representing the ratio of runoff to rainfall. C shall not be less than 0.35 for residential, 0.50 for multi-family and 0.75 for business
areas in small or short drainage systems.
I
is the intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a duration equal to the time of concentration. The value of I will depend on the rainfall intensity
curve for the village vicinity in a 10-year storm frequency.
A
is the drainage area in acres including all tributary areas.
E. Minimum velocity shall be two feet (2') per second, and the maximum velocity shall be ten feet (10') per second.
F. The minimum sewer size shall be ten inches (10").
G. Provisions must be made in the design of the storm sewer for the runoff which will come on the subject land from tributary lands through natural
watercourses. In calculating the runoff from tributary lands, consideration shall be given to the character of the developed land in determining the C
factor. For undeveloped land, the C factor shall be no less than 0.35. Such designs shall provide adequate capacity for receiving such drainage from
tributary areas on a basis of the ultimate development of such tributary areas. No increase in stormwater runoff shall be directed to any existing
watercourse or drainage system unless the village engineer shall have determined that the receiving watercourse or drainage system shall have
adequate capacity to receive such increased flow.
H. All storm sewers and connection pipes between inlets, catch basins and storm sewers which are constructed beneath existing or proposed paving
improvements shall be backfilled in lifts of twelve inches (12") with stone screenings or trench backfill, as defined in the state standard specifications.
Reinforced RCP pipe shall be used in all pavements.
I. Backyard swales may be permitted subject to the following:
1. No continuous swale shall have a length exceeding eight hundred feet (800') unless approved by the village engineer.
2. The minimum grade of flow line shall be five-tenths of one percent (0.5%).
3. At no point in the swale shall the flow line be more than three feet (3') below the finished grade of the topsoil at the foundation of the building
opposite the swale.
4. No change in alignment of a backyard swale shall exceed forty five degrees (45°).
5. All such swales or drainage easement areas shall be sodded.
J. Lots and blocks shall be so sloped in final grading that stormwater runoff will be away from the building foundation and from the rear of the lot to the
proposed pavement or sewer systems. Where swales are allowed, only the runoff from the rear yard shall drain toward the swales. Grading will be
done so as to keep runoff from running onto adjoining lots to a minimum.
K. No sump pump shall be so installed and connected so as to discharge stormwater runoff onto adjoining property or upon any street or public way, nor
shall any such sump pump be connected to a sanitary sewer. Building construction on parcels which are proximate to storm sewers shall cause footing
drains from such structures to be connected to the storm sewer system. Building construction on parcels which are proximate to a retention pond may
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 563/618
be required to cause footing drains from such structures to be discharged into the retention pond rather than to be connected to a storm sewer system.
(1978 Code § 7-4-6)
12-5-5: SEWER SYSTEM:
A. A complete system of sanitary sewer lines, including sewer stub terminals at the outside curb lines for each lot, shall be constructed throughout the
entire subdivision, with connections to the sewer system serving the village. All necessary house connections shall be installed to make future
excavations in the paved portions of the street unnecessary. Such sanitary sewers shall be subject to the approval of the village engineer and the state
department of public health.
B. Upon the consent of the plan commission and the village board of trustees, subdivisions outside the village limits where no sewer outlet is available may
be provided with individual sewerage disposal facilities such as septic tanks and tile seepage fields, which shall conform to the requirements of the
county after standard seepage tests and other investigations indicate that the ground and topographic conditions in the subdivision are suitable for
such individual sewerage disposal facilities, depending upon the seepage of the effluent therefrom into the soil. Such seepage tests shall be conducted
by a registered professional engineer of the state who shall submit to the village for approval a detailed report outlining the locations and results of all
such tests he has performed. Evidence shall be submitted that such systems are designed in a manner that each lot may, in the future, be served by
the village sewerage system. If, after septic tanks have been utilized in any subdivision, a sewer system is installed so that the system is available to
the lots therein, it shall thereafter be unlawful to utilize septic tanks for the disposal of sewerage, and all properties utilizing septic tanks shall
discontinue their use and make connection to the sanitary sewer for disposal of sewage.
C. Where lots cannot, economically or for other reasons, be connected with the public sewerage system, provisions must be made for sanitary sewerage
facilities approved by the village engineer and the plan commission.
D. Sanitary sewers shall be constructed of PVC, truss pipe or asbestos cement pipe only and shall have a minimum inside diameter of eight inches (8")
with locked in place rubber gaskets and with slopseal or equivalent joints only. All pipe used in sewer construction shall meet current ASTM and village
specifications. Manholes shall be provided at each change in direction or in pipe size, and otherwise at straight line intervals of not more than four
hundred feet (400'). Monolithic drop manholes shall be required where invert elevations differ more than two and one-half feet (21/2'). House sewer
service stubs having an internal diameter of not less than six inches (6") shall be installed to each lot through the use of Y connections prior to the
construction of street pavements. Materials and methods of construction shall conform to specifications adopted by resolution by the village president
and board of trustees. There shall be a minimum gradient of one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot from the house to the Y.
E. The design of sanitary sewers shall be based on a flow of not less than one hundred (100) gallons. The sewer shall be constructed at such a grade as
to ensure a minimum velocity of flow of two feet (2') per second and a maximum velocity of flow of eight feet (8') per second. Sewer and water services,
if in the same trench, shall be separated by at least one foot (1') vertically, the water being higher; otherwise, separate trenches must be used.
F. Sewers shall be placed on public rights of way and shall at no time be placed beneath and paralleling paving improvements except by special
permission of the village board of trustees. If it is found necessary to construct such sewers or services beneath pavements, or if such sewers or
services shall cross beneath existing or proposed pavements, all trenches caused thereby shall be filled with "stone screenings" or "trench backfill"
placed in twelve inch (12") lifts as defined by the state standard specifications.
G. The design of a sanitary sewer system within a subdivision shall anticipate and provide capacity for all other sanitary sewerage from adjacent lands.
Such designs shall provide adequate capacity for receiving such sewerage from these areas on a basis of the ultimate development of such areas.
H. All sanitary sewer mains shall be television inspected before approval and acceptance by the village board of trustees. (1978 Code § 7-4-7)
12-5-6: WATER SYSTEM:
A. All subdivisions within the village shall be served by an interconnected water distribution system serving all lots with water. Such system shall become a
part of the water distribution system serving the village. The design of the system shall be in accordance with the requirements of the state department
of health. Materials and methods of construction shall conform to the specifications adopted by resolution by the village president and board of
trustees. Where such water supply is not provided in subdivisions with lots with one acre or more in areas outside the corporate limits of the village,
conclusive evidence shall be presented by the subdivider, on the basis of suitable tests and surveys, that an adequate underground water supply is
readily available for service to individual lots. Evidence shall be submitted that such systems are designed in a manner that each lot may in the future
be served by the village water supply system. The location of such individual wells shall be established in accordance with the requirements of the
county and the county health department. If, after a private water supply system has been utilized in any subdivision, a public water system is installed
so that the same is available to the subdivision and the lots therein, it shall thereafter be unlawful to utilize the private water supply system, and all
properties utilizing private systems shall discontinue their use and make connection to the public water supply system.
B. Water distribution facilities shall include pipe, fittings, hydrants, valves, valve basins, water services and other needful appurtenances. The water mains
shall be constructed of ductile iron, not less than six inches (6") in diameter. The mains shall be arranged so as to avoid dead ends whenever possible,
and if dead ends cannot be avoided, a fire hydrant shall be installed to permit flushing. House water service connections shall be provided to serve
each lot in the subdivision and shall be constructed of type K copper pipe having an internal diameter of not less than three-fourths inch (3/4"). Such
services shall be equipped with all necessary fittings such as a curb stop and shall be installed before the roadway pavement is constructed. Right
hand gate valves and valve basins shall be installed on the water distribution system at intervals of not more than one thousand two hundred feet
(1,200') on continuous runs and shall also be placed so that not more than three (3) valves shall be required to be operated to shut down any section of
the mains.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 564/618
C. Water mains shall be constructed of ductile iron. At the owner's option, the pipe shall have either mechanical joint or approved double sealing, single
gasket type joints, such as "Bell-Tite", "Tyton" or "Fast-Tite". All fittings shall be mechanical joints. Such material shall conform to the applicable
specifications of the federal government or the American Standards Association.
D. All water mains and services shall be placed on public rights of way or easements, and at no time shall they be placed beneath and paralleling
proposed or existing pavement, except by special permission of the village board of trustees. If construction beneath proposed or existing pavement or
if the crossing of such pavement by water main construction is found to be necessary, all trenches caused thereby shall be backfilled with "stone
screenings" or "trench backfill" placed as defined in the state standard specifications. All mains and services shall be installed at a depth of at least five
feet (5') underground. (1978 Code § 7-4-8)
12-5-6-1: WATER MAIN CONNECTIONS:
A. House services shall be constructed to connect with the utility service mains within any street to serve each adjoining lot, tract or building site. Such
service stubs shall be extended from the main to a point no closer than one foot (1') and no more than two feet (2') beyond the outside lines of
proposed alley pavement. All such house service stubs shall be located at the approximate centerline of each lot, and no deviation shall be made from
this requirement except upon prior approval of the village engineer.
B. Upon completion of the construction in place of all such underground utilities, house service connections and utility mains, an accurate map, in
duplicate, showing the exact location of all such mains, together with manholes, shutoff valves, buffalo boxes, Y connections and other similar facilities,
by distances in feet from street lines and side lot lines, shall be filed with the village clerk. (1978 Code § 7-4-9)
12-5-6-2: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Fire hydrants shall be in compliance with the provisions of section 10-2-2, amendment 903.3.5.3, of this code. (2011 Code)
12-5-7: OTHER UTILITIES:
A. Easements: All utility lines for telephone, gas and electric service shall be located within rear lot line or side lot line easement areas or within dedicated
public ways, and shall be placed entirely underground throughout the subdivision in a manner which will not conflict with other underground services.
All transformer boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. All underground utility installations which traverse privately
owned property shall be protected by easements. In easements generally, electric and telephone facilities are to be located on the north and east
portions of the easements and other facilities on the south and west portions. (1978 Code § 7-4-11)
B. Permits For Utility Services; Fee: Permits shall be obtained from the governing body for the installation of communication, electric power, gas or other
utility service in public or private rights of way or easements, as shown on the final plat, and the required fee paid before any installation is started. The
fee shall be determined by resolution by the village president and board of trustees, and shall approximate, as closely as practicable, the cost to the
village of making necessary inspections, but which shall in no event exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per lot. (1978 Code § 7-4-12; amd. 2011
Code)
12-5-8: STREETS:
A. Paved Streets; Width: All streets shall be improved with paved roadways to an overall width, measured from back to back of curb, where required, in
accordance with the following minimum dimensions:
Type Of Street Residential Areas Industrial, Business And Commercial Areas
Primary streets In accordance with federal, state, county and village requirements, whichever has the greater width and design standard
requirements; generally 48 feet
Collector streets 36 feet 40 feet
Minor streets 30 feet 36 feet
Cul-de-sac streets
30 feet 36 feet
Turnaround radius
40 feet 50 feet
Half street Not permitted Not permitted
Marginal access
streets
One-way only
24 feet
30 feet
(1978 Code § 7-4-13-1)
B. Soil Stability: No public pavement or sidewalk within the village shall be constructed on soil which is unstable or which, in the opinion of the village
engineer, is otherwise unsuitable for pavement or sidewalk construction. Wherever unstable ground is encountered either before preparation of detailed
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 565/618
plans or during the construction phase of the proposed improvements, such unstable materials shall be removed in their entirety and shall be replaced
with satisfactory material which shall be adequately compacted to the satisfaction of the village engineer. (1978 Code § 7-4-13-2)
C. Underground Utilities:
1. Installation: After the grading of the streets is completed and approved and before the base course of the roadway pavement is laid, all of the
underground work such as sewer, water and gas mains, house service connections therewith and any underground conduits for electric and
telephone lines shall be completely installed in place and approved. (1978 Code § 7-4-13-3)
2. Backfilling Trenches: The surface course of roadway pavement shall not be laid until the backfilling of all trenches dug for the installation of utility
services has completely settled or compacted to the satisfaction of the village engineer. Before the surface course of the roadway pavement is laid,
all depressions in the base course shall be properly filled and brought to the required grade so as to create a level surface. (1978 Code § 7-4-13-4)
D. Surface And Base Requirements; Manner Of Construction:
1. All streets within the subdivision shall be improved with a durable hard surface roadway. The pavement shall be equal to or superior to a pavement
constructed in compliance with the specifications approved by the division of highways of the state of Illinois (the "Standard Specifications For Road
And Bridge Construction") for the type of pavement designated as class I-II in such specifications and shall be sufficient, in the opinion of the village
engineer, to withstand the traffic that the roadways will presumably be subjected to.
2. Before any paving work is commenced, all plans, profiles and specifications shall be approved by the village engineer as meeting the specifications.
3. Unless otherwise indicated, all streets shall be built upon a base of crushed stone or gravel and shall have a total compacted thickness of eight
inches (8") in residential areas and of ten inches (10") in industrial, business or commercial areas.
4. Pavements in residential areas shall consist of one of the following listed materials:
a. Eight inch (8") thick gravel or crushed stone base course, type A or type B, in two (2) 4-inch lifts and a wearing surface of bituminous concrete
binder and surface courses having a minimum compacted thickness of two and one-half inches (21/2"). Upon the completion of the base course,
the base shall be primed, and no sooner than twenty four (24) hours thereafter, the bituminous concrete binder, having a compacted thickness of
not less than one and one-half inches (11/2"), shall be applied. After the building construction immediately adjacent to the newly completed
pavement has reached a point where heavy construction traffic is no longer required, the previously applied binder shall be inspected by the village
engineer and all base course and binder failures repaired. After such binder and base course repairs have been completed, the bituminous
concrete surface, having a compacted thickness of not less than one inch (1"), shall be constructed. The binder and surface courses, as required
herein, shall conform to the current specifications for road and bridge construction adopted by the state division of highways and supplements
thereto; for bituminous concrete binder and surface courses, fine dense graded aggregate type, subclass I-II, B-5 or C-2.
b. Six inch (6") thick portland cement concrete pavement. Such pavement shall be constructed of portland cement concrete having a minimum
twenty eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch and shall contain not less than five
percent (5%) nor more than seven percent (7%) entrained air. The cement content per cubic yard of concrete shall contain not less than six (6)
bags of portland cement. Slump shall not be less than two inches (2") nor more than four inches (4").
c. A six inch (6") thick plant mix pozzuolanic base course, a wearing surface of bituminous concrete binder and surface of compacted thickness of
two and one-half inches (21/2") shall be required. Upon the completion of the base course, the base shall be primed within seventy two (72) hours;
thereafter, the bituminous concrete binder having a compacted thickness of not less than one-half inch (1/2") shall be applied. After the building
construction immediately adjacent to the newly completed pavement has reached a point where heavy construction traffic is no longer required,
the previously applied binder shall be inspected by the village engineer, and all base course and binder failures repaired. After such binder and
base course repairs have been completed, the bituminous surface course, having a compacted thickness of not less than one inch (1"), shall be
constructed. The binder and surface courses as required herein shall conform to the current specifications for road and bridge construction
adopted by the state division of highways, and supplements thereto; for bituminous concrete binder and surface courses, fine dense graded
aggregate type, subclass I-II, B-5 or C-2.
d. A seven inch (7") thick plant mix soil cement base course and a wearing surface of bituminous concrete binder, and surface courses having a
minimum compacted thickness of two and one-half inches (21/2") shall be required. Upon the completion of the cement treated base, the base
shall be primed, and not less than twenty four (24) hours thereafter, the bituminous concrete binder, having a compacted thickness of not less than
one and one-half inches (11/2"), shall be applied. After the building construction immediately adjacent to the newly completed pavement has
reached a point where heavy construction traffic is no longer required, the previously applied binder shall be inspected by the village engineer, who
shall report all base course and binder failures. After such binder and base course repairs have been completed, the bituminous surface course,
having a compacted thickness of not less than one inch (1"), shall be constructed. The plant mix soil cement base binder and surface courses, as
required herein, shall conform to the current specifications for road and bridge construction adopted by the state division of highways, and
supplements thereto; for bituminous concrete binder and surface courses, fine dense graded aggregate type, subclass I-II, B-5 or C-2.
5. Pavements in industrial, commercial and/or business areas shall consist of one of the following listed materials which shall be considered as
minimum requirements. Where, in the judgment of the Village Engineer, a higher type pavement is necessary, it shall be installed as required by
prevailing conditions. Materials and the method of construction for the following shall conform to those set forth under subsection D4 of this section:
a. Twelve inch (12") thick gravel or crushed stone, type A or type B, and a wearing surface of bituminous binder and surface courses having a
minimum compacted thickness of three inches (3") shall be required.
b. Eight inch (8") thick portland cement concrete pavement shall be required.
c. Eight inch (8") thick plant mix pozzuolanic base course and a wearing surface of bituminous concrete binder and surface course having a
minimum compacted thickness of three inches (3") shall be required.
d. Nine inch (9") thick plant mix soil cement base course and a wearing surface of bituminous concrete binder and surface courses having a
minimum compacted thickness of three inches (3") shall be required. (1978 Code § 7-4-13-5)
E. Curbs And Gutters:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 566/618
1. A combination curb and gutter shall be provided on all streets in subdivisions. Such curb and gutter shall be constructed of portland cement concrete
of the standard plain faced type with the curb rising six inches (6") above the gutter line and the overall curb and gutter width being not less than
eighteen inches (18"). The thickness of the gutter flag shall not be less than the combined thickness of the proposed street pavement and base.
Curbs may be constructed integrally if portland cement concrete pavement is used. Concrete used for curb and gutter construction shall have a
minimum twenty eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch and shall contain not less than
five percent (5%) nor more than seven percent (7%) entrained air. The cement content per cubic yard of concrete shall contain not less than six (6)
bags of portland cement. Slump shall not be less than two inches (2") nor more than four inches (4").
2. All curb returns at street intersections shall have a radius of not less than twenty feet (20') and, at important intersections, not less than twenty five
feet (25'). In industrially and commercially zoned areas, the radius of curb returns shall not be less than twenty five feet (25') and shall be increased
to thirty feet (30') at important intersections. (1978 Code § 7-4-13-6)
F. Driveway Approaches And Driveways: A paved driveway approach between curb and sidewalk or between street paving and lot line shall be provided at
each residential lot one acre or less. Such approach shall be not less than fourteen feet (14') wide at the curb, and so designed as to meet the
driveway. It shall be constructed of gravel or crushed stone having a thickness of not less than six inches (6") and shall be surfaced with three inches
(3") of bituminous concrete, or may be constructed of gravel or crushed stone having a thickness of not less than four inches (4"), and shall be surfaced
with six inches (6") of portland cement concrete, in accordance with current standard specifications for road and bridge construction adopted by the
Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, and supplements thereto. Driveway approaches may be constructed of decorative
materials, including bricks, decorative pavers, or stamped or dyed portland cement concrete or bituminous concrete. However, if the Village must
replace driveway approaches for reasons of maintenance or improvements, the approach shall not be replaced with decorative materials. Driveways
shall be extended in accordance with subsection 11-5-7D of this Code. (Ord. 2018-103, 12-13-2018)
G. Street Signs: Appropriate street name signs shall be erected at each intersection within the subdivision. The type of sign shall conform to those used
throughout the Village. They shall be installed at a height of not less than seven feet (7') nor more than ten feet (10') and shall be placed not less than
one foot (1') nor more than ten feet (10') from the edge of the pavement. (1978 Code § 7-4-13-8)
H. Sidewalks And Pedestrianways:
1. In all subdivisions, sidewalks shall be provided to serve each lot. The Plan Commission may require that sidewalks be provided other than required
above where considered necessary to public safety due to anticipated concentration of pedestrian traffic.
2. Portland cement concrete sidewalks shall be constructed to a width of four feet (4') in residential areas, not less than four feet (4') in multiple-family
residential and industrial areas, and not less than five feet (5') in business and commercial areas, and at a thickness of not less than four inches (4").
Sidewalks shall be located within the street right-of-way, with the near edge offset one foot (1') from the abutting property line. Concrete for such
sidewalks shall have a minimum twenty eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch and
shall contain not less than five percent (5%) nor more than seven percent (7%) entrained air. The cement content per cubic yard of concrete shall
contain not less than six (6) bags of portland cement. Slump shall not be less than two inches (2") nor more than four inches (4").
3. Pedestrianways and walks shall be improved to a width of not less than five feet (5') in accordance with the specifications in subsection H2 of this
section. The open areas bordering the walk shall be landscaped in accordance with plans approved by the plan commission. (1978 Code § 7-4-13-9)
I. Alleys: All alley roadways shall be paved, and such pavement shall be equal to the requirements for streets and shall be sufficient, in the opinion of the
village engineer, to withstand the traffic the roadways will presumably be required to accommodate. Center of roadway drainage shall be provided. The
method of construction and materials shall conform to specifications adopted by the village president and board of trustees. Alleys in multiple-family
residential areas, where permitted, shall be at least twenty feet (20') in width. Alleys in business, commercial and industrial areas shall be at least
twenty four feet (24') in width. (1978 Code § 7-4-13-10)
J. Street Lighting:
1. General Requirements:
a. Introduction: All developments, regardless of size, within the corporate limits or under the control of the village shall be required to install street
lighting facilities for the illumination of all roadways within dedicated rights of way required to serve the development. All required street lighting
and appurtenances shall be designed and installed in accordance with this subsection J1 and the following:
(1) The "American Standard Practice For Roadway Lighting", current edition.
(2) The national electrical code, current edition.
b. Description: The street lighting system consists of the poles, mast arms, luminaires, wire and all other materials and work necessary to complete
the street lighting installation. The street lighting system is to be constructed within the rights of way or easements.
c. Design Criteria:
(1) Local, Subcollector And Collector Streets: Required illumination on local, subcollector and collector streets is dependent on the zoning district
in which the project is located. Required luminaire and uniformity ratios for the various districts are detailed in chart A of this section. All light
standards shall be aluminum. For the purpose of identification, all streets shall be designated as either local, subcollector or collector.
(2) Secondary Arterial Streets And Major Arterial Streets: Required luminaire and uniformity ratios for secondary arterial and major arterial streets
are detailed in chart A of this section. All light standards shall be breakaway aluminum poles. For the purpose of identification, major arterial and
secondary arterial streets shall be designated as such.
d. Location: Streetlights shall be located on one side of the street unless, in the judgment of the village engineer, it is impractical to do so. They shall
be two and one-half feet (2.5') back from the back of curb.
e. Pole Spacing: Unless otherwise directed by the village engineer, at least one luminaire, oriented at right angles to the roadway centerline, shall be
provided at each four-way intersection at about the point of tangency of the return on the far side of the street in the major direction of traffic. For T
intersections, a luminaire shall be provided on the centerline extended on the intersecting roadway at the top of the T. Luminaires shall be provided
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 567/618
at all cul-de-sacs and bends in the roadway as specified by the village engineer. Spacing of poles (light standards) at all other locations shall be
outlined in chart A of this section.
f. Design Requirement And Approval: The complete lighting system shall be designed by a registered professional engineer of the state and shall be
submitted to the village engineer for approval. In special cases, the village engineer may designate larger lamps, higher poles, or vary the spacing
as he deems necessary to meet special conditions.
g. Equipment Standardization: In the interest of encouraging uniform appearance, standardization of replacement parts and familiarization of
maintenance personnel with the equipment, the village may specify certain equipment to be incorporated when appropriate in work required under
this chapter.
(1) Light Standards: Aluminum light standards shall be of type approved by the village engineer. Required mounting height and bracket lengths are
given in chart A of this section.
(2) Mast Arm Brackets:
(A) Mast arm brackets for lighting improvements to be accepted by the village for maintenance shall have a minimum spread of approximately
eight feet (8'), unless otherwise specified by the village engineer, and shall be the upsweep type with wire inlet and necessary bracing. The
brackets shall be manufactured from aluminum alloy and shall be capable of accommodating the slip filter arrangement of the luminaire.
(B) The mast arm clamps and fitting shall be heat treated aluminum castings, and shall be free of all imperfections to ensure an even grip on the
standard and to provide easy mounting of the mast arms.
(C) Where drawn seamless tubing is used for the mast arm, it shall conform to ASTM specifications 10-58T and GS10A-T-6.
(D) Aluminum for the mast arm clamps and fittings shall conform to ASTM specifications S5A-F or B26-50T.
(E) Mast arm brackets for lighting improvements to be installed in a planned unit and other private developments shall be of the type and length
approved by the village engineer.
(3) Luminaires And Lamps: Luminaires shall be complete with constant voltage ballasts, wired for one hundred twenty (120) volt operation. The
luminaires shall provide lighting distribution equivalent to IES type 11 unless otherwise stated by the village engineer and shall be reconnectable
for two hundred forty (240) volt operation if required. Luminaires in residential areas shall be semicutoff and shall be provided with a house
shield if necessary. Lamps shall be high pressure sodium vapor. Lamp wattage is given in chart A of this section.
(4) Ballast: Ballast shall be high quality grain oriented strip steel, high power factor, constant wattage and shall have a primary voltage rating of
120/240 volts. They shall be suitable for outdoor service and capable of starting the lamp at twenty degrees Fahrenheit (20°F).
h. Power Supply:
(1) Street lighting projects shall include a grounded steel and fiber conduit riser weather head installed on a Commonwealth Edison Company pole
at a location designated by the company and in strict conformance with its requirements. Where power is supplied from a Commonwealth
Edison transformer, the power circuit being installed shall terminate eighteen inches (18") from the Commonwealth Edison transformer twenty
four inches (24") below grade. In both cases, sufficient cable shall be provided for the connection by Commonwealth Edison Company.
(2) Power for street lighting may be either metered or nonmetered as required by Commonwealth Edison Company or as may be required by the
village engineer. Complete wiring schematics shall be provided as part of the plans submitted to the village engineer for approval.
(A) Nonmetered Power: A light pole, designated as the service pole shall be provided, equipped as follows:
(i) A circuit disconnect box eight feet by six inches by four inches (8' x 6" x 4") or larger, cast aluminum with tamperproof screwed cover, one
and one-half inch (11/2") back hub, thermal magnetic breaker, back mounted screw hub for ground lug and approximately ten feet (10')
above the ground.
(ii) A pole top adaptor.
(iii) A one hundred twenty (120) or two hundred forty (240) volt coil GE no. 420 G005 relay, or approved equal, if the wattage is over eight
hundred (800) VA electrically held with self-protecting fuses and receptacle on top for the photocell.
(iv) A photoelectric cell, 120/240 volts, with twist lock receptacles tubeless type, GE polyvolt, or equal.
(B) Metered Power:
(i) When power is to be metered, a control center shall be provided. The control center shall comply with the following requirements:
Foundation shall be a state of Illinois type A, traffic signal controller foundation, modified as required.
Enclosure shall be Grouse Hinds Company number 46886 traffic signal type cast aluminum meter cabinet. Equipment to be installed in the
enclosure shall include:
An electrically held contactor of proper size for the system with two hundred forty (240) volt coil; a thermal magnetic main circuit breaker of
adequate size.
A 500W 240/120 transformer, GB duplex convenience outlet and porcelain lamp holder with pull chain.
Wiring for four (4) circuit breakers and four (4) circuit breakers of required size.
A meter socket to be mounted on the rear of the enclosure.
(ii) A photoelectric cell, one thousand eight hundred (1,800) volt ampere capacity, shall be installed, complete with pole tap adapter and
receptacle on the light post nearest to the control center, interconnected with the control center with a 3-wire no. 12 color coded circuit,
conforming with the requirements of subsection J1i of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 568/618
(iii) The circuit from the power source to the control center shall be installed in continuous rigid steel conduit.
i. Cable:
(1) Underground cable shall be single conductor copper, commercial grade for direct burial, RHW or XLP type RR, six hundred (600) volt insulation
with one sixty-fourth inch (1/64") or more neoprene jacket.
(2) Cable within the pole from the handhole to the luminaire shall be standard type THHN, six hundred (600) volt insulation, no. 10AWC. Two (2)
"iron" fuse holder and fuses shall be installed inside the handhole of each pole. Cable shall be color coded as follows:
Neutral White
Phase wire no. 1 Black
Phase wire no. 2 Red
(3) Except for pole wire, minimum wire size is no. 8 AWG. All splices shall be made in poles or handholes. All conductors shall be copper.
(4) All systems shall pass a 5-megohm installation resistance test. Circuits shall be 3-wire, 120/240 volts, or 2-wire, two hundred forty (240) volts,
as required. All circuits shall be designed for a voltage drop not greater than that required for the proper operation of the lamps and, in any case,
not to exceed ten percent (10%). Each circuit shall use the same wire size throughout.
j. Conduit:
(1) Cable for street lighting in the right of way of arterial streets shall be installed in conduits, either galvanized rigid steel or PVC schedule no. 40
running from pole to pole, pole to handhole, or handhole to handhole. At locations other than in the right of way of arterial streets, at the design
engineer's option, an assembly of cable-duct or unit-duct for underground application may be used; except, that conduit, either GRC or PVC
schedule no. 40 shall be installed under present and future streets.
(2) When conduit is to be installed under existing pavement, it shall be pushed in place.
k. Grounding: In addition to the power circuit, a direct buried bare equipment ground wire shall be provided, interconnecting all poles, controllers and
ground rods. Ground rods shall be provided at the controller Commonwealth Edison pole and at the one-third (1/3) points and end of each circuit.
Ground rods shall be three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter and eight feet (8') long with steel core and heavy exterior layer of pure copper, driven into
the ground.
l. Aluminum Light Pole Foundations: Aluminum pole foundations shall be constructed of class X concrete, as described in the "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", Illinois department of transportation. Required details are shown in figure 1 of this section.
m. Handholes: Handholes are required at the ends of all isolated rigid steel conduit and at intermediate locations between light poles on rigid steel
conduit systems to facilitate pulling cable. Handholes shall be constructed of class X concrete as described in the "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction", Illinois department of transportation. Required details are shown in figure 2 of this section.
n. Splices: All underground cable shall be continuous. Necessary splices shall be made in poles or handholes and shall have the location recorded
on the plans. Underground splices in handholes shall be made by using 3M Scotch cast kits or approved equal. Connection to Commonwealth
Edison feeder lines must include a fuse box for shutoff to Commonwealth Edison power supply. Said fuse box shall be of the type approved by the
village engineer.
o. Installation Requirements:
(1) All poles shall be vertical. The pole shall be considered plumb when the centerline of the pole is within one inch (1") per ten feet (10') of true
vertical when viewed from any direction. Any leaning poles shall be straightened by the contractor when requested by the village engineer at any
time during a minimum of one year period after installation and before village acceptance of the subdivision improvements.
(2) Luminaires shall be installed as part of the pole erection process and shall be individually leveled after installation.
(3) Steel conduit and cable duct shall be installed eighteen inches (18") behind street curbing in a twenty four inch (24") deep trench unless
otherwise approved by the village engineer.
(4) Backfill shall be select earth, carefully compacted, except under future streets, where it shall be selected granular backfill.
p. Workmanship: As a minimum requirement, the specifications for the construction of street lighting facilities shall not be less stringent than the
"Standard Specifications For Traffic Signals", as adopted by the Illinois department of transportation.
q. Existing Utility Poles: Existing utility poles can be used as a light standard wherever applicable, provided Commonwealth Edison and/or Illinois Bell
give their approval.
r. As Built Drawings:
(1) Upon completion of the installation and testing by the village, the contractor must present two (2) marked sets of as built drawings to the village
engineer. The drawings must show the exact location(s) of the luminaire(s), wattage and voltage, type of luminaire (mercury vaporincandescent-
high pressure sodium, etc.) and the street lighting cable connection route to the Commonwealth Edison source (transformerpedestal-
pole). Also indicate all lot numbers and legal house address numbers if known.
(2) One approved set of the as built drawings will be sent by the village to the Commonwealth Edison Company. This correspondence shall be a
formal approval authorization for the Commonwealth Edison Company to connect the installation.
s. Warranty: The contractor and his surety shall guarantee and warrant that the equipment material and workmanship, regardless of the
manufacturer, will, for a period of one year from the date of final acceptance, satisfactorily serve the purpose for which they were installed. Any
defective material or workmanship shall be repaired or replaced by said contractor to the satisfaction of the village without cost to the village. (1978
Code § 7-4-13-11)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 569/618
t. Approval Of Other Materials: Approval of all materials to be used, other than those specified in this subsection J1, shall be through the village
engineer. (1978 Code § 7-4-13-11; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Lighting Off Street Parking Areas:
a. Definitions: Definitions and terms used in this subsection J2 shall be defined by the Illumination Engineering Society in the 1977 edition of the IES
Lighting Handbook.
b. Shielding; Spillage Control:
(1) All lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas shall be so shielded or otherwise optically controlled so as to provide glareless illumination
in such a manner as not to create a nuisance on adjacent property.
(2) All off street parking areas with lighting shall limit light spillage onto adjacent property. Maximum horizontal foot-candles, as given off by the
neighboring property, as measured in the following districts, shall not exceed the following:
Foot-Candles Lux
Single-family districts 0.1 1.0
Multiple-family residential districts 0.2 2.0
Business districts 2.0 21.5
Light industrial districts 5.0 53.8
Park, school and institutional districts 5.0 53.8
c. Luminaires:
(1) All luminaires erected twenty feet (20') to forty feet (40') above ground level:
(A) Shall be flat bottom optically controlled sharp cutoffs, as approved by the village engineer;
(B) Shall not be installed with diffusing refractors; and
(C) Shall maintain a ratio of three to one (3:1) or less of luminaire spacing to luminaire mounting heights.
(2) All luminaires erected zero to twenty feet (20') above ground level:
(A) Shall be of translucent materials and not transparent materials, as approved by the village engineer; and
(B) Shall not be installed with diffusing refractors.
(3) Luminaires shall not be erected higher than forty feet (40') above ground level.
d. Horizontal Foot-Candles And Uniformity Ratios: All off street parking areas shall be lighted using the horizontal foot-candles and uniformity ratios
as listed below:
Multi-Family Industrial Commercial
Horizontal foot-candles 1.2 1.6 2.0
Uniformity ratio 1:3 1:3 1:3
e. Nonconforming Off Street Parking Areas: All present nonconforming off street parking areas shall be equipped with the lighting required by this
subsection J2 upon the obsolescence or replacement of the existing lighting.
3. Chart A:
CHART A
VILLAGE OF GLENDALE HEIGHTS
STREET LIGHTING STANDARDS
Major Arterial
45 mph
Secondary Arterial
45 mph
Secondary
Arterial
45 - 65 mph
Collectors
35 mph
Sum-Collector 30
mph
Locals
30 mph
Co
R I C R I C R I C R I C R I C R I C RRe
I-In
CCo
Horizontal
footcandles
1.0 1.4 2.0 0.6 0.9 1.2 0.4 0.6 0.9 0.4 0.6 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.6
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 570/618
Uniformity
ratio
1:3 1:3 1:3 1:3 1:3 1:3 1:6 1:4 1:3 1:6 1:4 1:3 1:10
1:8 1:3 1:10
1:8 1:6
Pole Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Alum
Sta
Mounting
Height
35'
47'6"
35'
47'6"
35'
47'6"
30' 30' 30' 30'
or
26'
30'
or
26'
30'
or
26'
26' 26' 26' 26' 26' 26' 26' 26' 26' Sta
22' 22' 22' 22' 22' 22' 22' 22' 22' Alt
Bracket
arm
15'
20'
15'
20'
15'
20'
12' 12' 12' 12' 12' 12' 8' 8' 8' 8' 8' 8' 8' 8' 8' Sta
6' 6' 6' 6' 6' 6' 6' 6' 6' Alt
Luminaire
250
400
HPSV
250
400
HPSV
250
400
HPSV
150
HPSV
250
HPSV
250
HPSV
150
or
100
250
or
150
250
or
150
100 150 150 100 150 150 100 150 150 HP
Spacing 150
200
125
150
75
100
165 165 124 165 165 124 165 165 124 300 300 124 300 300 165
State or county maintained Village maintained
4. Figures:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 571/618
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 572/618
(1978 Code § 7-4-13-11)
12-5-9: LOTS AND BLOCKS:
A. Definition: "Grading" shall consist of the necessary clearing and grubbing, excavating, filling, spreading and compacting of the areas to be filled in
accordance with this section and in conformity with the lines, grades, slope and typical cross sections as shown on the final plans. (1978 Code § 7-4-
14-1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 573/618
B. Construction On Topsoil Prohibited: No permanent construction shall be made on topsoil. (1978 Code § 7-4-14-2)
C. Removal Of Trees, Stumps And Debris: All tree stumps, masonry, rocks and other obstructions shall be removed to a depth of two feet (2') below
finished grade. All trees, brush, vegetable matter and other rubbish shall be removed, piled and burned or otherwise disposed of so as to leave a neat
and finished appearance to the areas that have been disturbed. (1978 Code § 7-4-14-3)
D. Fills:
1. Free Of Deleterious Substances: Material used for fill shall be free from vegetable matter and other deleterious substances and shall not contain
large rocks or lumps.
2. Manner Of Filling:
a. The selected fill material, where necessary to replace unsuitable material, shall be placed in layers which, when compacted, shall not exceed eight
inches (8"). Each layer shall be spread evenly and shall be thoroughly blade mixed during spreading to ensure uniformity of material in each layer.
The moisture content of fill material shall be such that the fill can be compacted to a maximum practical density.
b. No material shall be placed, spread or rolled while the ground or fill is frozen or thawing or during unfavorable weather conditions. When the work
is interrupted by heavy rain, fill operations shall not be resumed until the moisture content and density of the fill are as specified in this subsection.
(1978 Code § 7-4-14-4)
E. Protection From Surface Water Runoff: The developer shall take care to protect the runoff of stormwater from the raw and unexcavated areas into the
developed and occupied areas. (1978 Code § 7-4-14-5)
F. Sodding Required: All slopes having a pitch ratio of one foot (1') or more for every two feet (2') of slope shall be sodded. (1978 Code § 7-4-14-6)
G. Grading Parkways: All parkways within the dedicated street areas or public areas shall be graded and covered with a minimum of four inches (4") of
topsoil. (1978 Code § 7-4-14-7)
H. Maintenance And Acceptance Period For Final Grading: All final grading shall be subject to the twelve (12) month maintenance and acceptance period
provided in this title. (1978 Code § 7-4-14-8)
12-5-10: TREES AND LANDSCAPING:
For tree and landscaping requirements, see sections 8-5-1 and 11-4-15 of this code. (2011 Code)
12-5-11: EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
A. Development should be related to the topography and soils of the site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes where high
cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
B. Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left undisturbed
wherever possible.
C. The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest practical time during development.
D. Sediment basins, debris basins, or silt traps or filters should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing
development.
E. The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs and benefits involved.
F. In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics and requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered.
G. Provision should be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
Drainageways should be designed so that the final gradients and the resultant velocities of discharges will not create additional erosion, and should be
protected against erosion and sedimentation during development.
H. Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as practical during development.
I. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be in accordance with the standards and requirements contained in "Procedures And Standards For
Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Northeastern Illinois", adopted by the DuPage County soil and water conservation district, as amended from
time to time, and incorporated herein by reference. (1978 Code § 7-4-16)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 574/618
12-5-12: MONUMENTS:
A. Permanent monuments shall be one inch (1") iron pipe, twenty four inches (24") in length. Permanent monuments shall be set at each corner or angle
on the outside boundaries of the subdivision and at each intersection of street centerlines.
B. Lot monuments shall be three-fourths inch (3/4") pipe, eighteen inches (18") in length. Lot markers shall be placed at each corner of each lot. All stakes
and monuments shall be set at proper elevations so that they will be flush with the ground when the finish grading is completed.
C. The surveyor shall furnish the village engineer a certificate stating that all monuments are in place and properly located upon the completion of
installation of the required improvements. (1978 Code § 7-4-3)
12-5-13: LOT NOT CONDUCIVE TO BUILDING:
If, upon the completion of all public and private improvements in a subdivision, it is found that the construction of buildings is not feasible due to
unsatisfactory subsurface conditions, or for any other reason, and such lots are left vacant by the owner, the lots and parkways shall be improved by
grading, spreading four inches (4") of topsoil and fully seeded. The owner of the adjacent property shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
parkways. (1978 Code § 7-4-4)
Chapter 6
DEDICATION OF LANDS FOR VARIOUS SITES; FEES IN LIEU
12-6-1: DEDICATION, CASH CONTRIBUTION OR COMBINATION REQUIRED:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will be required to
dedicate land for park and recreational purposes to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, or cash contribution in lieu
of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the village, in accordance with the criteria and formula set out in this chapter and,
unless agreement is entered into as required by section 12-6-13 of this chapter, land for school sites, the fire protection district and the library district to
serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, or cash contribution in lieu of land dedication, or a combination of both, at the
option of the village, in accordance with the criteria and formula set out in this chapter. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
12-6-2: CRITERIA FOR PARK AND RECREATION LAND DEDICATION:
A. Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for dedication.
The total requirement shall be ten (10) acres per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population. The required acres may be allocated by the board of
trustees in its discretion.
B. Location: The village comprehensive plan shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A central location which will serve equally the entire
development is most desirable. In large developments, these sites can be located throughout the development according to established standards for
park area distances.
C. Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas:
1. When subdividers or developers provide their own open space for recreation areas and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local
public recreational services. Depending on the size of the development, a portion of the park and recreational area in subdivisions or planned unit
developments may, at the option of the village board, be provided in the form of "private" open space in lieu of dedicated "public" open space. The
extent of same shall be determined by the village board, based upon the needs of the projected residents and in conformance with the total park and
recreation land for the general area.
2. In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational facilities, including equipment, by the developer as part of his obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of
facilities to be installed, must be approved by the village, and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or developer must
guarantee that these private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal documents.
Private "swimming clubs" are included in this provision. When an adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to
compute the total park land dedication that would have been required from the subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the credit
to be given. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996)
12-6-3: CRITERIA FOR SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION:
A. Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to be generated by a subdivision or planned unit development shall bear directly
upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of: 1)
estimated number of children to be served in each such school classification from the subdivision or PUD over the 2) maximum recommended number
of students to be served in each such school classification as stated herein, and then applying such ratio to the 3) said minimum recommended number
of acres for a school site of each such school classification as stated herein. The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to have
sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated increased children in each such school classification. The estimated number of children to be
served in each school classification from the subdivision or PUD shall be calculated in accordance with section 12-6-7 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 575/618
B. School Classification And Size Of School Site: Classifications and size of school sites within the village shall be determined in accordance with the
following criteria:
School Classification Grades
Maximum Number Of Students For Each Such
School Classification
Minimum Number Of Acres Of Land For Each Site
For Such Classification
Elementary schools, grades
kindergarten through 5th (K-5)
600 15
Junior high schools, grades 6th through
8th (6-8)
900 30
High schools, grades 9th through 12th
(9-12)
1,500 75
C. Location: The village comprehensive plan and/or the standards adopted by the affected school district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. No
land shall be accepted for dedication unless said land is determined by the village board to be suitable for the proposed use. The subdivider or
developer shall be responsible for delivering the site in such condition as shall render it suitable for the proposed use. The village board may require
such land to be conveyed by deed or dedication to the village or such other public agency as the board may determine. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996)
12-6-4: FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT CONTRIBUTIONS:
A. Whereas, there are no land requirements and/or needs to the Glenside fire protection district and/or the Bloomingdale fire district. The Glenside fire
protection district and/or the Bloomingdale fire district shall receive from the developer a onetime payment of an amount to be calculated by the
following formula:
1. Residential: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per dwelling unit.
2. Commercial/industrial: Five cents ($0.05) per square foot of building.
B. This cash contribution shall be collected by the Glenside fire protection district and/or the Bloomingdale fire district at the time of construction of the
dwelling unit or commercial/industrial building. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996)
12-6-5: LIBRARY DISTRICT CONTRIBUTIONS:
A. Whereas, there are no land requirements and/or needs to the library district. The library district shall receive from the developer a onetime payment of
an amount equal to an annual payment of real estate taxes to which the library district is entitled as calculated by the following formula:
Example:
30,032 1. Population of the library area (census figure)
670,434.00 2. Total library income (property tax extension) (1994)
22.32 3. Per capita support for library (divide library income by population)
2.9 4. Determine size of average household (using census)
22.32 x 2.9 5. Calculate fee (multiply per capita amount by size of average household)
$64.73 6. Fee (as derived by above formula)
B. This cash contribution is to be collected by the library district as per construction of each dwelling unit. Said contribution is to be used solely for the
purpose of servicing the additional population generated by the development making the contribution. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996)
12-6-6: CRITERIA FOR CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF LAND DEDICATION:
A. The village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required when so determined by the public
body that would be the recipient of the land, subject to final village approval. The cash contribution in lieu of land dedication shall be held in trust by the
village, or other public body designated by the village, solely for the acquisition of land as hereinbefore classified, which will be available to serve the
immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development, or for the improvement of other existing school, park, library or fire
protection land which already serves such needs. The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be held in trust by the village, or other public body
designated by the village, solely for use in the acquisition of land to serve the immediate or future needs of the population from that subdivision or
development or for the improvement to any existing site which already serves such needs. Improvement under this section shall be liberally construed
and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the development of parking lots; sidewalks; traffic signals; arterial streets; collector streets; internal
roadways; connections with sewer, water and electrical lines, and streetlights, including the village system development charge; playgrounds;
recreation grounds; and athletic fields. Improvement shall further include the construction of buildings; additions to existing buildings; remodeled or
renovated noninstructional spaces in classrooms; and the purchase of prefabricated classroom units to be used at a school site. If any improvement
provided for herein shall require voter referendum approval under existing statutory authority before such funds may be lawfully expended, then, and in
those cases, such approval shall be first obtained. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of land dedication is not expended for the purposes set
forth herein within fifteen (15) years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded, together with accrued interest thereon, to the developer who made
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 576/618
such contribution. Said cash contribution in lieu of park, school, library and fire protection district shall be deposited with the appropriate governmental
body before the issuance to the developer of its first building permit for such subdivision or development. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996)
B. The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved as specified herein, that
otherwise would have been dedicated as park and recreation, library, school or fire protection sites. It has been determined that the present fair market
value of such improved land in and surrounding the village is seventy five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) per acre, and such figure shall be used in
making any calculation herein unless the subdivider or developer files a written objection thereto. In the event of any such objection, the developer shall
submit an appraisal showing the fair market value of such improved land in the area of his development or other evidence thereof, and final
determination of said fair market value per acre of such improved land shall be made by the village board based upon such information submitted by
the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the village board by the library district, park district, school district, or
fire protection district. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
12-6-7: DENSITY FORMULA:
A. The population density represents current and short range projected trends in family size for a new construction and shall be used in calculating the
amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contribution in lieu thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or
developer. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
B. In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the table of estimated ultimate population listed herein, he shall submit his own
demographics study showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the subdivision or planned unit development, and in that event,
final determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the village board based upon such demographic information
submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the village board by the park district, school district, fire
protection district or others. It is recognized that population density, age distribution and local conditions change over the years, and the specific
formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment, if necessary.
(Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996)
12-6-8: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND:
Where the comprehensive plan of the village calls for a larger amount of land in a particular proposed subdivision or planned unit development than the
developer is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer's contribution shall, if so determined by the village board, be reserved for
subsequent purchase by the village or other public body designated by the village; provided, that such acquisition is made within one year from the date of
approval of the final plat. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996)
12-6-9: COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS:
For all subdivisions and planned unit developments public open space, fire protection, school site or library site which is to be dedicated should, where
possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable recreation areas or school sites without hardship on a
particular developer. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
12-6-10: TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING:
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site, as well as its surroundings, must be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites
dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from surrounding land. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996)
12-6-11: IMPROVED SITES:
All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage, streetlights, and curb
and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision made therefor. The sidewalks normally included within the definition of
"improved sites" may be delayed due to the delay time between dedication of any such school sites and construction of school facilities thereon. (Ord. 96-
32, 4-18-1996)
12-6-12: TITLE TO SITES:
A. All sites shall be conveyed to the village either by warranty or trustees' deed. The subdivider or developer shall be responsible for conveying good,
merchantable title to such sites, and shall be responsible for payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance, including any agricultural
rollback taxes which might be extended or levied against such sites, for any tax years or periods prior to the time of conveyance.
B. When, in the opinion of the unit of local government holding title to any parcel of land dedicated under this chapter, any such parcel has become
unnecessary or unsuitable or inconvenient, such parcel may be sold as provided by applicable statutory authority, and the proceeds shall be held in
trust by said unit of local government, solely for such uses as are provided in section 12-6-6 of this chapter, and said proceeds shall be subject to the
fifteen (15) year expenditure requirements from and after the date when said land is converted to cash proceeds. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996)
12-6-13: AGREEMENTS WITH SCHOOL, LIBRARY AND FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICTS:
All subdividers and developers shall be required to contact directly the relevant school district, library and fire protection district to reach agreement for the
dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu thereof in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or such amounts as are agreed upon between the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 577/618
parties. The provisions of this chapter shall be implemented only in the event that no agreement is reached between the developer or subdivider and the
respective governmental bodies. (Ord. 96-32, 4-18-1996)
12-6-14: EMERALD ASH BORER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
All subdividers and developers shall be required to comply with the emerald ash borer management plan, revised 2013, which sets forth requirements for
the management, preservation, and installation of trees within the village. (Ord. 2013-50, 9-5-2013)
Title 13
FLOOD CONTROL
Chapter 1
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS AND STORMWATER DETENTION
13-1-1: COUNTY REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Pursuant to Illinois Compiled Statutes, the village hereby adopts by reference the "DuPage County, Countywide Stormwater And Floodplain Ordinance",
as periodically amended and available from the county, which ordinance is on file in the office of the village clerk for public use and inspection. (2011
Code)
Chapter 2
DEVELOPMENT IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
13-2-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the village by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2.
The purpose of this chapter is to maintain the village eligibility in the national flood insurance program; to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding
including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and
enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise utilization of water and related land resources. This
chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
A. To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18g, of an act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the state of
Illinois, approved June 10, 1911, as amended; (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
B. To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
C. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
D. To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
E. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations;
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance program;
G. To comply with the rules and regulations of the national flood insurance program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended;
H. To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water resources;
I. To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of watercourses and floodplains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats; and
J. To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order to moderate floodwater and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development. (Prior ord.)
13-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 578/618
ACT: An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of the state of Illinois, 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4.9 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be
allowed are as specified in section 13-2-7 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-
year frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 13-2-5 of this chapter.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured
home, a mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully, ravine,
wash, or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening, relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation.
Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form of
channel modification typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g., straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural
flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A REGULATORY FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction approval by IDNR/OWR and the federal emergency
management agency of a proposed change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant hereto, gives assurances to the property owner
that once an appropriate use is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon review and
acceptance of as built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that the federal emergency management agency will revise base flood
elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective flood hazard boundary map, once the as built plans are
submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing or
diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not included.
DEVELOPMENT: A. Any manmade change to real estate, including:
1. Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or any addition to a building.
2. Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days.
3. Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects.
4. Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
5. Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
6. Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.
7. Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
B. Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase in
elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has
been elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per the Illinois Compiled Statutes including state, federal or local units of
government.
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79, effective as of October 1, 1986. This incorporation does not include
any later editions or amendments.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland waves, or the unusual and
rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or
exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 579/618
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): A map prepared by the federal emergency management agency that depicts the special flood hazard area
(SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood, plus three feet (3') of freeboard at any given
location in the SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA). The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood. The SFHAs of the village are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map of the village prepared by the federal emergency
management agency and dated January 1, 1982 (as may be amended). The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated DuPage County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared
for DuPage County by the federal emergency management agency and dated April 15, 1982.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduces or eliminates flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is used to certify that a building has been
designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave action and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analyses which determine expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources, office of water resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective
flood hazard boundary map or FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries
or floodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
NGVD: Reference surface set by the national geodetic survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all existing adjustments in 1929.
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels, means those channels formed by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by
man. A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed
or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the stream
caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to
existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this
definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not
public agencies.
PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS: All streams and lakes capable of being navigated by watercraft.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the state of Illinois under the Illinois land surveyor act, 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes
330/1 et seq.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state of Illinois under the Illinois professional engineering practice act, 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 325/1 et seq.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel, including on stream lakes, and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated
by IDNR/OWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot
increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in velocities. The regulatory floodways
are designated for Armitage Creek on the regulatory floodplain map prepared by FEMA and dated December 16, 2004. The regulatory floodways for those
parts of unincorporated DuPage County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village that may be annexed into the village are designated for
Armitage Creek on the flood boundary and floodway map prepared by FEMA and dated December 16, 2004. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary
on any site, the regulatory floodway boundary should be scaled off the regulatory floodway map and located on a site plan, using reference marks
common to both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the regulatory floodway boundary, the division should be
contacted for the interpretation.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 580/618
changes to the dimension of a structure.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A "retention facility" stores stormwater runoff without a gravity release. A "detention facility" provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified channel. This
term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land surface, flowing over the surface or the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soil, debris, and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): Any base flood area subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified
channel or ponding and shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map as zone A, AO, AR, AE, A99, AH, VE, V, X, or D.
STRUCTURE: The results of a manmade change to the land constructed on or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement
of a building or any addition to a building; installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured home; or installing a travel trailer
on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either: a) before the improvement or repair is started; or b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not,
however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or b) any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic places or a state
inventory of historic places.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa. (Prior
ord.; amd. Ord. 2004-49, 6-17-2004; 2011 Code)
13-2-3: DUTIES OF VILLAGE ENGINEER:
A. The village engineer shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in section 13-2-4 of this chapter.
B. To fulfill those duties, the village engineer first should use the criteria listed in section 13-2-5 of this chapter to determine whether the development site
is located within a floodplain. The village engineer must determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a regulatory floodway, or within
an SFHA or floodplain on which no floodway has been identified. If the site is within a flood fringe, the village engineer shall require that the minimum
requirements of section 13-2-6 of this chapter be met. If the site is within a floodway, the village engineer shall require that the minimum requirements
of section 13-2-7 of this chapter be met. If the site is located within an SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and
approved, the village engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of section 13-2-8 of this chapter be met.
C. In addition, the general requirements of section 13-2-9 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of sections 13-2-6,
13-2-7 and 13-2-8 of this chapter. The village engineer shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section 13-2-10 of this
chapter.
D. If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the village engineer shall review the requirements of section 13-2-11 of this chapter to make sure they are
met. In addition, the village engineer shall complete all notification requirements.
E. In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this chapter, the village engineer may take any and all actions as outlined in
section 13-2-13 of this chapter. (Prior ord.)
13-2-4: DUTIES OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
The village engineer and director of community development shall be responsible for the general administration and enforcement of this chapter which
shall include the following:
A. Determining Floodplain Designation: Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a special flood hazard area (SFHA). If they are
in an SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which drains more
than one square mile.
B. Professional Engineer Review: If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted which
drains more than one square mile, then the permit shall be referred to a registered professional engineer (PE) under the employ or contract of the
village for review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of section 13-2-7 of this chapter. In the case of an appropriate use, the PE
shall state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section 13-2-7 of this chapter. (Prior ord.)
C. Dam Safety Requirements: Ensure that an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit has been issued or a letter indicating no dam safety permit is required, if the
proposed development activity includes construction of a "dam" as defined in section 13-2-2 of this chapter. Regulated dams may include weirs,
restrictive culverts or impoundment structures. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 581/618
D. Other Permit Requirements: Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
E. Plan Review And Permit Issuance: Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this
chapter and issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when the
development meets the conditions of this chapter.
F. Inspections: Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure they comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
G. Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain in the permit files an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of a residential or nonresidential building or the elevation to which a nonresidential building has been floodproofed, using a floodproofing
certificate, for all buildings subject to section 13-2-9 of this chapter for public inspection and provide copies of same.
H. Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps, copies of
federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map revision, letter of map amendment and as
built elevation and floodproofing or elevation and floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this chapter. (Prior ord.)
I. State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Illinois division of water resources for all development projects subject to
sections 13-2-7 and 13-2-8 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the village. Upon acceptance of this chapter by
IDNR/OWR and FEMA, responsibility is hereby delegated to the village as per 17 Illinois administrative code 3708 for construction in the regulatory
floodway and floodplain when floodways have not been defined in sections 13-2-7 and 13-2-8 of this chapter. However, the following review approvals
are not delegated to the village and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
1. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the Illinois Compiled Statutes; (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
2. Department of transportation projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in section 13-2-2 of this chapter and all other state, federal or
local unit of government projects, including projects of the village and county, except for those projects meeting the requirements of subsection 13-2-
7B of this chapter;
3. An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the proposed flood
profile, per subsection 13-2-7B of this chapter;
4. An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to subsection 13-2-7B of this chapter;
5. Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in subsection 13-2-7B of this chapter;
6. Permit issuance of structures within or over publicly navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
7. Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations; and
8. Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
J. Cooperation With Other Agencies:
1. Cooperation with state and federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to
improve the administration of this chapter. (Prior ord.)
2. Submit data to IDNR/OWR and the federal emergency management agency for proposed revisions of a regulatory map. Submit reports as required
for the national flood insurance program.
3. Notify the federal emergency management agency of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
K. Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to the
review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any changes. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
13-2-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
A. This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for the village. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is
not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water survey's
floodplain information repository. When a party disagrees with the best available data, he/she may finance the detailed engineering study needed to
replace existing data with better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA.
B. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of the East Branch DuPage River, Armitage Ditch, and Armitage Fork shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of the village prepared by the department of housing and urban development and
dated February 1978, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
C. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated DuPage County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of
DuPage County prepared by FEMA (or the department of housing and urban development) and dated December 16, 2004, and such amendments or
revision to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 582/618
D. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an AH zone or AO zone shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated
on the flood insurance rate map of the village.
E. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an A zone on the flood insurance rate map of the
village shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository. When no base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined from a
backwater model, such as HEC-11, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as HIP. The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a
hydrologic model, such as HEC-1, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States geological survey
for estimating peak flood discharges. Flood flows should be based on anticipated future land use conditions in the watershed as determined from
adopted local and regional land use plans. Along any watercourses draining more than one square mile, the above analyses shall be submitted to
IDNR/OWR for approval. Once approved, they must be submitted to the Illinois state water survey floodplain information repository for filing. For a
nonriverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the historic flood of record, plus three feet (3'), unless calculated by a detailed engineering study
and approved by the Illinois state water survey. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
13-2-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by proper
elevation, and compensatory storage and other provisions of this chapter are met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of
section 13-2-9 of this chapter.
A. Development Permit:
1. Permit Required: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA
without first obtaining a development permit from the village engineer.
2. Application For Permit: Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the village engineer. The application shall be
accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a
licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in MSL 1929 adjusted datum or NGVD and all changes in grade resulting
from excavation or filling; and the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans, and the development will be subject to the
requirements of section 13-2-9 of this chapter.
3. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control Plan: A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas shall be submitted. This plan shall
include a description of the sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate
their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to
ensure postconstruction maintenance.
4. Other Permits And Documents: The village engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state and federal
permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The village engineer shall not issue a permit unless all
other local, state and federal permits have been obtained.
5. Review Of Information: Upon receipt of a development permit application, the village engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation
as of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The
director of community development shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
B. Preventing Increased Damages:
1. No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and safety.
2. If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and obtain
a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
3. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken
from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the volume of storage
lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or
occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations
shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (Prior ord.)
13-2-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a regulatory floodway. The regulatory
floodway shall be as delineated on the regulatory floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR and referenced in section 13-2-2 of this chapter, definition of
"regulatory floodway". Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the
minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the requirements of section 13-2-9 of this chapter. (Prior
ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
A. Development Permit:
1. Permit Required: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a floodway
without first obtaining a development permit from the village engineer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 583/618
2. Application For Permit: Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the village engineer. The application shall include
the following information:
a. Name and address of applicant;
b. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be in
an incorporated area;
c. Name of stream or body of water affected;
d. Description of proposed activity;
e. Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
f. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
g. Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if different from the applicant;
h. Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent;
i. If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized officer shall sign the application form;
j. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the application form; and
k. If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed with
the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective interests therein;
l. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include, as a minimum:
(1) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or
numerical scale, and north arrow.
(2) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure
or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when
the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), regulatory floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and
dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical scale.
(3) Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency
flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical).
(4) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of
final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance. (Prior ord.)
(5) A copy of the regulatory floodway map, marked to reflect any proposed change in the regulatory floodway location. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011
Code)
m. Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approval letters that may be required for this type of development.
n. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of subsection B of
this section. (Prior ord.)
o. If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the application will
not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated conditional approval of the regulatory floodway map change. No structures may be built
until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
p. The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and existing ground
elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a registered
professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and
the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 13-2-9 of this chapter.
q. If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant shall submit the following information:
(1) A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
(2) A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
(3) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts the project would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water
affected;
(4) An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each feasible alternative identified in subsection B2h of this section would have on
the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and
(5) An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water
affected.
3. Other Permits And Documents: The village engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state, and federal
permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity. The village engineer shall not issue the development permit unless all required
federal and state permits have been obtained. A registered professional engineer, under the employ or contract of the village, shall review and
approve applications reviewed under this subsection. (Prior ord.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 584/618
B. Preventing Increased Damages; Appropriate Uses:
1. Appropriate Uses Allowed: The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are appropriate uses which will not cause a rise in the base
flood elevation and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity, or be a threat to public health,
safety and welfare, or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or
aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses
listed in 17 Illinois administrative code 3708 will be allowed. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill,
building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway,
fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically defined herein as an
appropriate use. The approved appropriate uses are as follows: (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
Additions to existing buildings above the BFE that do not increase the building's footprint and are valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the building.
Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and taxiways and any modification hereto.
Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable accessory structures, without toilet facilities, to existing buildings that will not block flood
flows, nor reduce floodway storage.
Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or water
quality or habitat for fish and wildlife.
Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating structures, or
construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more than
ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing structure, and which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure.
In the case of damaged or replacement buildings, reconstruction or repairs made to a building that are valued at less than fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the building before it was damaged or replaced, and which do not increase the outside dimensions of the building.
Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed 1 foot) and aircraft parking
aprons built at or below ground elevation.
Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any 1
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open air pavilions.
Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive nonerosive slope toward a watercourse.
Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls.
Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities and
improvements related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water dependent uses.
Underground and overhead utilities. (Prior ord.)
2. Engineering And Mitigation Criteria: Within the regulatory floodways as identified on the regulatory floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR, the
construction of an appropriate use will be considered permissible; provided, that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation
criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer; and provided, that any structure
meets the protection requirements of section 13-2-9 of this chapter. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
a. Preservation Of Flood Conveyance To Prevent An Increase In Flood Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert
crossings, on stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway conveyance lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up
to and including the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective regulatory floodway conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into
consideration: (Prior ord.)
(1) Regulatory floodway conveyance,
K = (1.486/n)AR
where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the cross section, and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter.
(See Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.) (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
(2) The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a
federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative
to a nonvegetative land cover.
(3) Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of effective regulatory floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that
more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
(A) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
(B) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length.
(C) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream
length shall be used.
(D) Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the regulatory
floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
(E) All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located perpendicular to flood flows. (Prior ord.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 585/618
b. Preservation Of Floodway Storage To Prevent An Increase In Downstream Flooding: Compensatory storage shall be provided for any regulatory
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least 1.5 times the volume of floodplain storage lost. Artificially created storage lost
due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced. The compensatory regulatory floodway storage shall be
placed between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost below the
existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost above the
existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely and openly to the watercourse. If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed construction, the applicant's
engineer shall demonstrate to IDNR/OWR, through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations, that the compensatory
storage is hydraulically equivalent. Finally, there shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such
modification is necessary to reduce flooding at the existing structure. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
c. Preservation Of Floodway Velocities To Prevent An Increase In Stream Erosion Or Flood Heights: For all appropriate uses, except bridges or
culverts or on stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage,
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. However, in the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for
the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of riprap or other design measures. (Prior ord.)
d. Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway Approaches:
(1) The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel
banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or
within recorded flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than 0.1 foot, the developer must
contact IDNR/OWR, dam safety section, for a dam safety permit or waiver. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
(2) The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section 13-2-5 of this chapter. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT "FHWA
Hydraulic Chart For The Selection Of Highway Culverts". Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT "Federal Highway Administration
Hydraulics Of Bridge Waterways" calculation procedures.
(3) Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection B2b of this section.
(4) Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection B2c of this section.
(5) If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for recreational or commercial navigation, a department of transportation permit
must be received. (Prior ord.)
(6) The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this subsection. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
(7) All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be designed per subsection B2h of this section.
e. Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts And Approach Roads:
(1) The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source
of flood damage.
(2) If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the
applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties. (Prior ord.)
(3) The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with the department of transportation rules 17 Illinois administrative code 3708 (floodway construction in northeastern Illinois) and
submitted to the division for review and concurrence before a permit is issued.
f. On Stream Structures Built For Purpose Of Backing Up Water: Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot, when compared to and
including the 100-year frequency event, shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or floodwalls or within recorded flood easements. A permit or letter indicating a permit
is not required must be obtained from IDNR/OWR, dam safety section, for a dam safety permit or waiver for any structure built for the purpose of
backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures as defined in section 13-2-2 of this chapter shall
meet the permitting requirements of 17 Illinois administrative code 3702 (construction and maintenance of dams). If the proposed activity involves
a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that: (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
(1) The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention;
(2) The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle,
such as for spawning;
(3) The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual
bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a presedimentation basin;
(4) A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize
the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed
control;
(5) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this section.
g. Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial Structures: If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for floodproofing activities. (Prior ord.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 586/618
h. Excavation In Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and
replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be
provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR,
through engineering calculations or model tests, that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency: (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
(1) When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
(2) When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's length; and
(3) When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream length
shall be used.
(4) Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and downstream of the transition sections.
i. Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
(1) There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body of
water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the
floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a stream side buffer strip or greenbelt. Channel modification is
acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat;
(2) Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be significantly improved by the modification, and no significant habitat area may be
destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent degree of natural resource values;
(3) The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions
of the body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria:
(A) The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match, as closely as possible, those of the existing channel in length, cross
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical;
(B) Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion;
(C) One sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible. Removal of stream side (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side
of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects of the vegetation;
(D) Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is essential for construction of the channel;
(E) Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Natural
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use
of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap is the preferred material. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or
construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives;
(F) All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the
vegetative cover;
(G) If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features shall be
provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established,
where appropriate;
(H) A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality;
(I) New or relocated channels should be built in the dry, and all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel;
(J) There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated
by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project;
(K) Unless the modification is for a public flood control project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the
floodway as a result of the modification; and
(4) The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this section.
j. Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
k. Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is potential for
erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
(1) The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time
soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days
prior to the initiation of improvements.
(2) Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may
be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days.
(3) Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement of
eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion
ditches, and sediment basins.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 587/618
(4) A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing
channels (see subsection B2p of this section). Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be
constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately.
(5) Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures And Standards For Urban
Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In Illinois" (1988), also known as the "Green Book" and "Standards And Specifications For Soil Erosion
And Sediment Control" (IEPA, 1987). (Prior ord.)
l. Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the applicant
can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in
increased flood heights outside the project right of way or easements for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
m. General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
(1) The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory floodway study referenced in section 13-2-5 of this chapter must be used for
analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval
and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
(2) If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at the site of the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to meet the requirements of this section for the 100-year
frequency flood elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions and conditions with the receiving stream at normal water elevations. (Prior ord.)
(3) If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to be
removed, reconstructed or modified or a regional flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next
five (5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this section for both the existing conditions
and the expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is built.
n. Conditional Letter Of Map Revision: If the appropriate use would result in a change in the regulatory floodway location or the 100-year frequency
flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and to FEMA all the information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a
conditional regulatory floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change before a
permit is issued. However, the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed by IDNR/OWR until as built plans or record drawings are
submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR. In the case of nongovernment projects, the village shall concur with the proposed conditional
regulatory floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval can be given. No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a
conditional approval is issued. No further development activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA and
IDNR/OWR. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
o. Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional
engineer.
p. Construction Within Twenty Five Feet Of Channel: For all activities in the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25') of the
channel, the following criteria shall be met:
(1) A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
(2) Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be established
upon completion of construction.
(3) The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided, when necessary, for
stream maintenance purposes. (Prior ord.)
3. State Review: For those projects listed below located in a regulatory floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review
and concurrence prior to the issuance of a permit:
a. IDNR/OWR will review an engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection B2d of this section.
b. IDNR/OWR will review an engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis
indicating the proposed flood profile pursuant to subsection B2e of this section.
c. The IDNR/OWR will review alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsections B2a, B2b and B2h of this
section.
d. The IDNR/OWR will review and approve, prior to the start of construction, any department projects, "dams" (as defined in section 13-2-2 of this
chapter) and all other state, federal or local units of government projects, including projects of the village or the county.
4. Other Permits: In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/4.9 et seq. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the division has delegated this responsibility to the village.
5. Dam Safety Permits: Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a "dam", as defined in section 13-2-2 of this chapter, per 17
Illinois administrative code 3702 (rules for construction of dams) shall obtain an Illinois division of water resources dam safety permit prior to the start
of construction of a dam. If the village engineer finds a dam that does not have a IDNR/OWR permit, the village engineer shall immediately notify the
dam safety section of the division of water resources. If the village engineer finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the village
engineer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, IDNR/OWR, dam safety section in Springfield and the Illinois emergency management
agency. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
6. Activities Not Requiring Registered Professional Engineer's Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional
engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
a. Underground and overhead utilities that:
(1) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations; or
(2) Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 588/618
(3) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed; and
(4) In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch debris.
b. Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
(1) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope; and
(2) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
(3) Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall location.
c. Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences), properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
d. Construction of shoreline and stream bank protection that:
(1) Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
(2) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
(3) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
(4) Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel
velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitates the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap is the preferred material.
Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
e. Temporary stream crossings in which:
(1) The approach roads will be one-half foot (1/2') or less above natural grade.
(2) The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert.
(3) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
(4) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of construction.
(5) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization. (Prior ord.)
13-2-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SFHA AREAS OR AREAS WITH NONIDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
In SFHAs or floodplains (including AO zones, AH zones or unnumbered A zones), where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA and draining more than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the
cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the
flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
A. Development Permit:
1. Permit Required: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by state law, shall commence any development in an SFHA or
floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the village engineer.
2. Application For Permit: Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the village engineer. The application shall be
accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions; existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting
from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings;
and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 13-2-9 of this chapter. The
application for a development permit shall also include the following information:
a. A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and intended use;
b. Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be
in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
c. Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
d. Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include, as a minimum:
(1) A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic or
numerical scale, and north arrow;
(2) A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the structure
or work, elevations in mean sea level (1929 adjustment) datum or NGVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control
easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body
of water), floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;
(3) Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency
flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical); and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 589/618
(4) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of
final stabilization and revegetation measures and the identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
e. Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection B of this
section.
f. Any and all other local, state and federal permits or approvals that may be required for this type of development.
3. Other Permits And Documents: The village engineer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, state, and federal
permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The village engineer shall not issue the development
permit unless all required local, state and federal permits have been obtained. (Prior ord.)
4. Review Of Information: Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois state water survey's floodplain information repository, the
village engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation information exist
for the site, the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection 13-2-5E of this chapter. Any development located on land
that can be shown to have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification is not in the SFHA
and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter. The director of community development shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate
map identification. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Preventing Increased Damages:
1. No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined, shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights
or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair
existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.
2. Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined, the following standards shall apply: (Prior ord.)
a. The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations, and data that the
project meets the engineering requirements of subsections 13-2-7B2a through B2l of this chapter for the entire floodplain as calculated under the
provisions of subsection 13-2-5E of this chapter. As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study performed to determine a
floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR for acceptance as a regulatory floodway. Upon acceptance of the floodway by the
department, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of section 13-2-7 of this chapter for the regulatory
floodway. The "regulatory floodway" shall be defined according to the definition in section 13-2-2 of this chapter.
b. A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit from IDNR/OWR or written documentation that a permit is not
required from IDNR/OWR.
c. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the division has delegated permit responsibility to the village per 17 Illinois administrative code, part
3708, for regulatory floodways, per IDNR/OWR statewide permit entitled "Construction In Floodplains With No Designated Floodways In
Northeastern Illinois".
d. Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a dam or an on stream structure to impound water, as defined in section 13-2-2 of
this chapter, shall obtain an Illinois division of water resources dam safety permit or letter indicating a permit is not required prior to the start of
construction of a dam. If the village engineer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the village engineer shall immediately notify
the dam safety section of the division of water resources. If the village engineer finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the village
shall immediately notify the owner of the dam and the Illinois emergency management agency (IEMA), and the IDNR/OWR, dam safety section in
Springfield. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
e. The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer's review or calculation of a base flood elevation and regulatory
floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of this chapter:
(1) Underground and overhead utilities that:
(A) Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations; or
(B) Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the floodway; or
(C) In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed; and
(D) In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch
debris.
(2) Storm and sanitary outfalls that:
(A) Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope; and
(B) Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
(C) Are designed so as not to cause stream bank erosion at the outfall location.
(3) Construction of shoreline and streambed protection that:
(A) Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length or two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of streambed.
(B) Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
(C) Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional area of the stream channel by more than ten percent (10%).
(D) Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel
velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitates the use of alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or riprap is the preferred
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 590/618
material. Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
(4) Temporary stream crossings in which:
(A) The approach roads will be one-half foot (1/2') or less above natural grade.
(B) The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert.
(C) The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
(D) All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
(E) The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within one year after authorization.
(5) The construction of light poles, signposts and similar structures.
(6) The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios and similar surfaces which are built at grade.
(7) The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or below
existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters.
(8) The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten feet (10') in any one dimension (e.g.,
animal shelters and toolsheds).
(9) The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not increase the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%), which are
located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which do not extend beyond the sides of the existing buildings that are
parallel to the flow of floodwaters.
(10) Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
(A) The affected length of the stream is less than one thousand feet (1,000');
(B) The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural stream channels; or
(C) The cross sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
f. The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall be maintained.
C. Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the
areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood
elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such
excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. (Prior ord.)
13-2-9: REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections 13-2-6, 13-2-7 and 13-2-8 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, regulatory floodways, and
SFHAs or floodplains where no floodways have been identified (zones A, AO, AR, AE, A99, AH, VE, V, X or D), the following requirements shall be met:
(Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
A. Public Health Standards:
1. No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE.
2. New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted, provided all
manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
B. Carrying Capacity And Notification: For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying
capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing, thirty (30) days prior to the
issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
C. Protecting Buildings:
1. All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as an SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. However, existing buildings located within a regulatory floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in
section 13-2-7 of this chapter. This building protection criteria applies to the following situations:
a. Construction or placement of a new building;
b. Nonconforming structures may remain in use, but shall not be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered. A nonconforming structure damaged by
flood, fire, wind or other manmade or natural disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market value, in which
case, it must, thereafter, conform to this chapter;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 591/618
c. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirement does not
apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and
d. Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
2. This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following methods:
a. Construction On Permanent Landfill: A residential or nonresidential building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent landfill in
accordance with the following:
(1) The lowest floor (including basement) shall be a minimum of three feet (3') above the flood protection elevation.
(2) The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1') deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation.
However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.
b. Elevation Of Buildings: A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
(1) The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space, stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters
and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The permanent openings shall be no more
than one foot (1') above grade and consist of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation.
(2) The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris. (Prior ord.)
(3) All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement)
and all electrical, heating (including ductwork), ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or
above the flood protection elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service
facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation. (Ord. 2004-49, 6-17-2004)
(4) No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for storage of items or materials.
(5) Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules
and regulations for the Illinois mobile home tie-down act1 issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code 870.
c. Dry Floodproofing Of Nonresidential Buildings: Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation); provided,
that a registered professional engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The
building design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and
impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity.
(Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.)
d. Toolsheds And Detached Garages: Toolsheds and detached garages on an existing single-family platted lot may be constructed with the lowest
floor below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:
(1) The building is not used for human habitation.
(2) All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in a
regulatory floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as not to block the flow of floodwaters and shall also meet the
appropriate use criteria of section 13-2-7 of this chapter. In addition, all other requirements of sections 13-2-6, 13-2-7 and 13-2-8 of this chapter
must be met.
(3) The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation.
(4) Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
(5) The building shall be valued at less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor size.
(6) The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses.
e. Nonconforming Structures: Nonconforming structures located in a regulatory floodway may remain in use but may not be enlarged, replaced or
structurally altered. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the
damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case, it shall conform to this chapter. (Prior ord.)
13-2-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The village board shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land management, use and
development. (Prior ord.)
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to
assure that the proposed developments are consistent with sections 13-2-6, 13-2-7, 13-2-8, and 13-2-9 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood
damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the plat act, 765 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 205/2.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 592/618
B. Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home
parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois state water survey, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection 13-2-5E of this chapter and the "regulatory floodway" per the definition in section
13-2-2 of this chapter and submitting it to the state water survey and IDNR/OWR for review and approval as best available regulatory data. (Prior ord.;
amd. 2011 Code)
C. Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Whenever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
D. The village board shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior ord.)
13-2-11: VARIANCES:
A. No variances shall be granted to any development located in a "regulatory floodway", as defined in section 13-2-2 of this chapter. However, any
ordinance requirements for floodway development which are more restrictive than minimum state requirements shall be eligible for variance
considerations. However, when a development proposal is located outside of a regulatory floodway, and whenever the standards of this chapter place
undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the village engineer for a variance. The village engineer shall review
the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the plan commission. (Prior ord.; amd. 2011 Code)
B. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted;
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety, or beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation of a
nuisance;
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations, policing, or
repairs to stream beds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public facilities;
6. The provisions of subsections 13-2-6B and 13-2-8B of this chapter shall still be met;
7. The activity is not in a regulatory floodway;
8. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a general problem; and
9. The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses.
C. The village engineer shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of section 13-2-9 of this chapter that would lessen the
degree of protection to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage;
2. Increase the risks to life and property; and
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
D. Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site or building listed on the national register of historical places or documented as worthy of
preservation by the Illinois historic preservation agency may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of subsections A and B of
this section. (Prior ord.)
13-2-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived
from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter
does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the
part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully hereunder. (Prior ord.)
13-2-13: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due
investigation, the village engineer may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist. The village engineer shall notify the
owner in writing of such violation.
B. If such owner fails, after ten (10) days' notice, to correct the violation:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 593/618
1. The village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as the court
deems necessary to secure compliance herewith.
2. Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
4. The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the property.
C. The village engineer shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
D. Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Prior ord.)
13-2-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This chapter is
intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program regulations, but is not intended to
repeal the resolution which the village passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Prior ord.)
Title 14
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS AND WIRELESS SERVICES
Chapter 1
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES AND FACILITIES
ARTICLE A. GENERAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVISIONS
14-1A-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
A. Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and services.
B. Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications
providers and services.
C. Promote competition in telecommunications.
D. Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers and services.
E. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and
residents of the village.
F. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the village for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis.
G. Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in public trust by the village.
H. Assure that the village's current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the persons
seeking such access and causing such costs.
I. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the village and the residents of the village for permitting private use of the public ways.
J. Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or services within the village comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the
village.
K. Assure that the village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 594/618
L. Enable the village to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and
technological development. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless
the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate otherwise:
AFFILIATE: A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.
ANNUAL GROSS REVENUE: Reserved.
CABLE ACT: The cable communications policy act of 1984, 47 USC 532 et seq., as now and hereafter amended.
CABLE FRANCHISE: A cable operator who holds a franchise authorizing the construction or operation of a cable system as that term is defined in the
cable act.
CABLE OPERATOR: A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to provide cable service within the village as that term is defined in the cable act.
CABLE SERVICE: Shall have the same meaning provided by the cable act.
CABLE SYSTEM: Shall have the same meaning provided by the cable act.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees of the village.
EXCESS CAPACITY: The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public way that is
or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.
FRANCHISEE: Any person or group of persons holding a telecommunications franchise issued by the village.
ICC OR ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION: The state administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers in the state of Illinois.
OTHER WAYS: The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights of way within the village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the village.
OVERHEAD FACILITIES: Utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the
underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
PERSON: Means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies and individuals, and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
PUBLIC STREET: Any highway, street, alley or other public right of way for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the village which has
been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as those terms are defined in this section, now or hereafter owned by the
village, but only to the extent of the village's right, title, interest or authority to grant a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements
for telecommunications facilities.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
SURPLUS SPACE: That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders
and regulations of the Illinois commerce commission, to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER: Means and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages the plant,
equipment or property within the village, used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Means and includes every person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities
without any ownership or management control of the facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice,
data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: See definition of Telecommunications Facilities.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES: Utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or
supports for overhead facilities.
USABLE SPACE: The total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical
clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois commerce commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 595/618
UTILITY EASEMENT: Any easement owned by the village and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with
telecommunications facilities.
UTILITY FACILITIES: The plant, equipment and property including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and
equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public ways of the village and used or to be used for the purpose of providing
utility or telecommunications services.
VILLAGE: The village of Glendale Heights, Illinois.
VILLAGE PROPERTY: Means and includes all real property owned by the village, other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are
defined in this section, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the village, which are not subject to right of way licensing and franchising as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1A-3: REGISTRATION, LICENSE AND FRANCHISES REQUIRED:
A. Registration: Except as otherwise provided herein, all telecommunications carriers and providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications originating or terminating in the village shall register with the village pursuant to article B of this chapter.
B. License: Except as otherwise provided therein, any telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate
telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the village for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications service to
persons and areas outside the village shall first obtain a license granting the use of such public ways from the village pursuant to article C of this
chapter.
C. Franchises:
1. Telecommunications Franchise: Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate,
maintain or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way of the village, and to also provide
telecommunications service to persons or areas in the village, shall first obtain a franchise granting the use of such public ways from the village
pursuant to article D of this chapter.
2. Cable Television Franchise: Except as otherwise provided herein, any telecommunications carrier who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain
or locate telecommunications facilities in any public way of the village for the purpose of providing cable service to persons in the village shall first
obtain a cable franchise from the village as provided in article E of this chapter. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1A-4: APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISES:
This chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or franchise agreement until:
A. The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement;
B. An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not
later than the present expiration date. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1A-5: AMENDMENTS:
The village reserves the right to amend this chapter or any franchise agreement granted pursuant hereto. Any license or franchise granted under this
chapter is hereby made subject to any revisions of this chapter and the general ordinances of the village; provided, that such revisions do not materially
alter or impair the obligations of a grantee set forth in any license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1A-6: PENALTIES:
A. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be
deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1A-7: WAIVERS AND EXEMPTIONS:
The village reserves the right to waive provisions of this chapter or exempt a grantee from meeting provisions of this chapter if the village determines such
waiver or exemption is in the public interest. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
ARTICLE B. REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS
14-1B-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 596/618
All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within the village
or outside the corporate limits, from telecommunications facilities within the village, shall register with the village pursuant to this article on forms to be
provided by the village clerk, which shall include the following:
A. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
C. A description of registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the village.
D. A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms,
businesses or institutions within the village.
E. Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public way licensing or franchising under this chapter. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
F. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be provided by the
registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any municipal telecommunications tax or other occupation tax imposed by the village. (Ord.
96-91, 10-17-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
G. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois commerce
commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the village.
H. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required
by the federal communications commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the village.
I. Such other information as the village clerk may reasonably require. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1B-2: REGISTRATION FEE:
Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 96-91, 10-
17-1996)
14-1B-3: PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION:
The purpose of registration under this article is to:
A. Provide the village with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the village, or that own or operate telecommunications facilities within the village.
B. Assist the village in enforcement of this chapter.
C. Assist the village in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the village.
D. Assist the village in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal laws. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
ARTICLE C. LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
14-1C-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; PURPOSE:
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of the village for the sole
purpose of providing telecommunications services to persons or areas outside the village. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1C-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this article shall file an application with the village which shall include the following
information:
A. The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 597/618
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans and specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities.
2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, drainage and other facilities in the public way
along the proposed route.
3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or
relocate.
E. If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing
utility poles along the proposed route.
F. If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
I. A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the Illinois department of transportation "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
J. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct,
operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities
and services described in the application.
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer
or provide the telecommunications services.
M. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to article F of this chapter.
N. Such other and further information as may be required by the village administrator. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1C-3: GRANT OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
A. Within ninety (90) days after receiving a complete application under section 14-1C-2 of this article, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial. In reviewing the license application, the village shall give consideration to the following:
1. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
2. The legal status of the applicant.
3. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
4. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
5. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
6. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.
7. The service that the applicant will provide to the community and region.
8. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license is granted.
9. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 598/618
10. Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
11. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest.
B. The corporate authorities reserve the right to extend the time period in which they shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application,
in whole or in part, an additional ninety (90) days. Written notice containing the reasons for the extension shall be provided to the applicant. The
decision to extend the time period is at the sole discretion of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1C-4: AGREEMENT:
No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the applicant and the village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and
provisions under which the license to occupy and use public ways of the village will be granted. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1C-5: NONEXCLUSIVE LICENSE:
No license granted under this article shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the village for
delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1C-6: RIGHTS GRANTED:
No license granted under this article shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the
public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1C-7: TERM OF LICENSE:
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a telecommunications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five (5) years. (Ord. 96-
91, 10-17-1996)
14-1C-8: LICENSE ROUTE:
A telecommunications license granted under this article shall be limited to a grant of specific public ways and defined portions thereof. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-
1996)
14-1C-9: AMENDMENT OF LICENSE:
A. A new license application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities
in public ways of the village which are not included in a license previously granted under this article.
B. If ordered by the village to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted license, the village shall
grant a license amendment without further application. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1C-10: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
A. Application For Renewal: A grantee that desires to renew its license under this article shall, not more than one hundred eighty (180) days nor less than
ninety (90) days before expiration of the current license, file an application with the village for renewal of its license which shall include the following
information:
1. The information required pursuant to section 14-1C-2 of this article.
2. Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between the village and the grantee.
B. Grant Or Denial Of Renewal: Within sixty (60) days after receiving a complete application under subsection A of this section, the corporate authorities
shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application, in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal
application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal. In reviewing the renewal application, the village shall give
consideration to the following:
1. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
2. The legal ability of the applicant.
3. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities.
4. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the license agreement.
5. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
6. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 599/618
C. Condition Of Renewal: No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the licensee's performance of the license agreement, or of
the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the village.
(Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1C-11: SERVICE TO VILLAGE USERS:
A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications services to persons or areas within the village upon submitting an application for
approval pursuant to article D of this chapter. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
ARTICLE D. TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE
14-1D-1: FRANCHISE REQUIRED; PURPOSE:
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public ways of the village and to provide
telecommunications services to any person or area in the village. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1D-2: APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE:
Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this article shall file an application with the village which shall include the following
information:
A. The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.
C. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
D. Preliminary engineering plans and specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the village, all in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities.
2. The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, drainage and other facilities in the public way
along the proposed route.
3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
4. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or
relocate.
E. If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing
utility poles along the proposed route.
F. If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to identify:
1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
G. If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
H. A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
I. A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the Illinois department of transportation "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
J. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct,
operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
K. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities
and services described in the application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 600/618
L. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer
or provide the telecommunications services.
M. Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial tone service or other video programming service, and sufficient information to
determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
N. An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the village that the applicant intends to use or lease.
O. A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the village and other public, educational and governmental
institutions.
P. A description of the applicant's access and line extension policies.
Q. The area or areas of the village the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.
R. All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to article F of this chapter.
S. Such other and further information as may be requested by the village administrator. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1D-3: GRANT OR DENIAL OF FRANCHISE:
A. Within ninety (90) days after receiving a complete application under section 14-1D-2 of this article, the corporate authorities shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written
determination shall include the reasons for denial. In reviewing the franchise application, the village shall give consideration to the following:
1. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
2. The legal status of the applicant.
3. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
4. The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
5. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
6. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public ways.
7. The service that the applicant will provide to the community and region.
8. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise requested is granted.
9. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
10. Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
11. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest.
B. The corporate authorities reserve the right to extend the time period in which they shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application,
in whole or in part, an additional ninety (90) days. Written notice containing the reasons for the extension shall be provided to the applicant. The
decision to extend the time period is at the sole discretion of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1D-4: AGREEMENT:
No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the applicant and the village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and
provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use public ways of the village will be granted. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1D-5: NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE:
No franchise granted under this article shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public ways of the village for
delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1D-6: TERM OF FRANCHISE:
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of ten (10) years. (Ord.
96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1D-7: RIGHTS GRANTED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 601/618
No franchise granted under this article shall convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and occupy
the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in the grant. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-
1996)
14-1D-8: FRANCHISE TERRITORY:
A telecommunications franchise granted under this article shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the village to be served by the franchise
grantee, and the specific public ways necessary to serve such area. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1D-9: AMENDMENT OF FRANCHISE:
A. A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to locate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the village which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.
B. If ordered by the village to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously granted franchise, the village
shall grant a franchise amendment without further application. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1D-10: RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE:
A. Application For Renewal: A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this article shall, not more than two hundred forty (240) days nor less than
one hundred fifty (150) days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the village for renewal of its franchise which shall include
the following information:
1. The information required pursuant to section 14-1D-2 of this article.
2. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the village and the grantee.
B. Grant Or Denial Of Renewal: Within sixty (60) days after receiving a complete application under section 14-1D-2 of this article, the corporate authorities
shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal
application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal. In reviewing the renewal application, the village shall give
consideration to the following:
1. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
2. The legal ability of the applicant.
3. The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities.
4. The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement.
5. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.
6. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest.
C. Condition Of Renewal: No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee's performance of the franchise agreement,
or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the
village. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1D-11: SERVICES:
A. Nondiscrimination: A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such
service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall
prohibit a franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers.
B. Rates: A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to the village at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users, unless
otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
ARTICLE E. CABLE FRANCHISE
14-1E-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. In addition to the provisions outlined in article D of this chapter regarding franchise application, grant and authority, cable franchisees are subject to the
provisions and requirements outlined in this article.
B. Cable franchisees are subject to this chapter in its entirety, Illinois statutes relating to the provisions of cable services and the cable act.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 602/618
C. If a conflict arises between the language in this article and the rest of this chapter, this article shall prevail. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1E-2: DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM:
The minimum capacity for a cable system shall be four hundred fifty (450) MHz with at least fifty (50) downstream channels. The franchisee shall, as part
of the acceptance of a franchise, provide the village with a written description of the cable system within the village, including technical characteristics,
channel capacity, channel carriage, and a strand map. The franchisee shall provide the village with an updated description upon request or whenever
substantial changes in the system are made. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1E-3: CHANNEL ALLOCATION:
The franchisee shall, to the maximum extent possible, assign, as dial locations for local broadcast stations carried on the system, numbers available by
either a cable ready television or a converter which correspond to their respective FCC assigned TV station call numbers unless the station has negotiated
a more favorable position in the channel lineup. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1E-4: ACCESS CHANNELS:
A. The franchisee shall provide access channels on the subscriber network for the exclusive use of institutions designated by the village.
B. The number and use of said channels will be prescribed in the franchise agreements.
C. The village shall determine the channel allocations for such designated institutions.
D. Such channels shall be available on the lowest tier of basic service.
E. The franchisee shall make every reasonable effort to assign PEG (public, educational, government) channels to the same channels assigned by other
providers within each municipality, and in contiguous municipalities.
F. The franchisee shall list the specific assigned user on each channel in every channel lineup. A new channel chart shall be issued to subscribers by the
bill stuffer in the billing to be received prior to any changes.
G. PEG channels may not be reassigned without forty five (45) days' notice to the village. The franchisee shall notify subscribers of any PEG channel
reassignments by bill messages or the bill stuffer in the billing to be received prior to the change. PEG channels may not be reassigned more than once
in any twelve (12) month period.
H. The franchisee shall be responsible for any established costs incurred by the village due to a change in channel assignment for any PEG channel which
was not requested by the user. These costs may include stationery, business cards and public notices. The franchisee will incur these costs for no
more than a one month period. The franchisee shall discuss reimbursement of special promotional items, such as T-shirts or other special items, with
the affected user on a case by case basis. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1E-5: EXTENSION OF SERVICE:
Following the initial construction of the franchisee's telecommunications system, the franchisee shall extend its system and make service available as
follows:
A. Unless otherwise specified in a license or franchise agreement, within forty five (45) days after notification by the village of an annexation having a
minimum density of twenty five (25) units per street mile, construction may begin on the telecommunications system within such annexed area to
provide service to each person requesting such service. Construction and activation to the annexed area shall be completed within forty five (45) days
unless extended by the village due to delays attributable to causes beyond the control of the franchisee.
B. The village shall notify the franchisee of the construction of any new development within the village by delivering to the franchisee a final plat of survey
to include final design for all utilities for that development. For developments having a minimum density of twenty five (25) units per street mile, the
franchisee shall deliver to the village its construction design plan and shall have applied for all necessary permits and licenses within thirty (30) days of
said notification. Construction shall begin within thirty (30) days after the receipt of all necessary permits and licenses and shall be completed, including
restoration, within forty five (45) days unless extended by the village due to delays attributable to causes beyond the control of the franchisee.
C. Within thirty (30) days after signing a contract and approved design with any multiple dwelling unit for the provision of service, the franchisee shall begin
construction and installation of its system in such multiple dwelling unit. Construction and installation shall be completed within thirty (30) days.
D. The franchisee shall provide service to areas not meeting the minimum density of twenty five (25) units per street mile within six (6) months after
notification by the village. If the franchisee determines that a line extension is not economically feasible, it may request relief from this provision.
Approval of such request shall not be unreasonably withheld.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 603/618
E. The franchisee further agrees that any litigation instituted by a third party shall not suspend the franchisee's obligation to construct and install the cable
communications system in accordance with the construction time schedule unless otherwise ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 96-91,
10-17-1996)
14-1E-6: TECHNICAL STANDARDS:
A. The distribution of all signals throughout the system, including the combined degradation effects of both upstream and downstream carriage, no matter
where the signals originate or are terminated, shall meet the applicable industry standards set for the delivery method being used.
B. All applicable regulatory standards shall be observed as if each and every one were stated herein. In the event that enforcement of said regulatory
standards is discontinued or the regulatory agency charged with enforcement is dissolved, the standards shall remain in full force and effect until the
village exercises its right hereunder to amend this agreement to require such standards as it shall deem necessary.
C. In the areas where standards have not been developed, the system shall operate at the equipment manufacturer's specifications until measurable
standards have been developed. The franchisee shall be obligated to ensure that the signal quality is of the highest practicable level achievable for the
components in question. For the first year that newer equipment for which no standards have been developed is in use, the franchisee will report
monthly on the reliability and performance of said equipment. Thereafter, if the equipment is functioning within the levels anticipated, the franchisee
may test and report on the same schedule as the rest of the communications system. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1E-7: TESTING:
A. The franchisee shall conduct appropriate monitoring and measurements utilizing appropriate measuring devices, including devices capable of
measuring signal leakage in microvolts/meter, to ensure that the system is performing within the applicable standards. When such monitoring or
measurements indicate that performance has fallen below these standards, corrective action shall be taken to restore proper performance. All channels
on the system shall be monitored daily by a visual inspection of the picture and listening to the audio for general performance and audio level balance.
B. At a minimum, measurements shall be made monthly at the headend and quarterly at two (2) randomly selected, longest cascades in each community
to ensure that all channels on the system are operating properly. Measurement of all operational parameters shall be made semiannually at the
headend and four (4) geographically divided locations at the ends of the longest cascades in each community on all channels.
C. If the village suspects an area is not performing in accordance with the applicable standards, it may order the franchisee to test in that location within
forty eight (48) hours of notice from the village.
D. Newly constructed sections shall be tested within one week of activation and results reported to the village.
E. The franchisee shall submit copies of its federally required proof of performance testing within thirty (30) days of its completion. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-
1996)
14-1E-8: RELIABILITY:
A. The franchisee shall employ a professional engineer or equivalent and a service and repair force of competent technicians capable of maintaining the
system in accordance with the technical performance and service requirements in this agreement.
B. The franchisee shall install and maintain a standby power system that provides a minimum of three (3) hours' duration throughout the distribution
networks.
C. System headends and distribution system as well as standby power will have remote status monitoring. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1E-9: MAINTENANCE:
The franchisee shall perform routine maintenance within the following parameters:
A. The franchisee shall interrupt system service after seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and before one o'clock (1:00) A.M. only with good cause and for the
shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after cablecasting notice of service interruptions at least twenty four (24) hours in
advance.
B. Service may be interrupted between one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. for routine testing, maintenance and repair, with notification
to the village, on any day except Saturday, Sunday, or legal holidays.
C. Routine maintenance may be performed during the daylight hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on any day except Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holidays, up to twice a year upon notification to the village. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1E-10: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 604/618
A. General Standards:
1. The franchisee shall initiate prompt corrective action to satisfy unresolved complaints. If a customer is not satisfied with the resolution of a complaint,
that customer shall be automatically referred to a management person. Local management will work with the person to resolve the problem within
forty eight (48) hours. In the event that local management does not satisfy the customer complaint, the complaint shall be referred to the district
manager.
2. Customer service representatives and service technicians, including contracted help, shall identify themselves by name. When performing work in
the field, a company identification badge shall be displayed on the outer clothing of the technician or contractor.
3. Any vehicle used for the installation, construction, maintenance or repair of the telecommunications system shall bear the identification of the
contractor or the franchisee in a conspicuous place and manner.
4. Customers shall receive a copy of the service report and a phone number to call to resolve any additional problems, at the time service is completed.
5. The franchisee shall make available to every subscriber the equipment or devices necessary for the receipt of all services for which they wish to
subscribe. The lowest tier of basic service which includes all off air and PEG channels shall be available without a converter.
6. Upon request from the subscriber, the franchisee shall provide a "parental control" mechanism or device that permits the subscriber to "lock out"
audible and visual reception of certain programming. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
7. All installations shall comply with chapter 8 of the national electrical code, 2008 edition, or its successor. When an installation is proposed in any
structure, other than a single-family dwelling, notification shall be made to the village. The village reserves the right to inspect the property to ensure
that the installation will not compromise fire safety measures required in the life safety code, the building code, or the fire code. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-
1996; amd. 2011 Code)
B. Telephone Response:
1. The franchisee shall maintain a local, toll free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers twenty four (24) hours per
day, seven (7) days per week. Trained representatives of the franchisee will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries twenty four (24)
hours per day, seven (7) days per week.
2. Calls must be answered within four (4) rings by a representative or mechanical device. Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive
a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
3. Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made.
If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds.
4. The abandonment rate for calls shall be no more than ten percent (10%) of the calls reported incoming during any monthly reporting period.
5. The above standards shall be met ninety five percent (95%) of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a monthly basis. The village
shall consider unique or onetime occurrences in the evaluation of the average standards in any one monthly reporting period. The franchisee shall
submit a monthly report accurately showing the telephone response performance covering all areas listed in this subsection.
C. Outage Response:
1. The franchisee shall submit a monthly report accurately showing the time, the duration, probable cause, number of homes affected, and action taken
on all failures or outages on the main distribution system.
2. An outage affecting three (3) customers in the same geographic area, off the same line or feeder, shall be corrected within twenty four (24) hours.
3. In the event of extensive system failure of any trunk or feeder cable causing a service outage to ten (10) or more customers in any geographic area,
or the failure of modulator equipment, satellite reception equipment, or other system functions that result in the interruption of service throughout the
franchise area, corrective action shall be taken immediately.
4. Total outages, with the exception of those caused by the cutting of properly buried and marked cables or the accidental downing of an aerial cable,
throughout the village shall not exceed ten (10) hours in any one month.
5. The franchisee shall notify the village of all major outages, locations of the outage, and the homes affected at the time of occurrence to aid the
village in handling phone calls regarding the problem.
D. Service Call Response:
1. All requests for installation, change of service or disconnection shall be completed within seven (7) days.
2. All customer service calls regarding repairs and/or service problems which are not outage related shall be completed within twenty four (24) hours
unless the franchisee can sufficiently document why said repairs will take longer as in the case of equipment or cable replacement. At no time should
repairs take longer than one week to complete.
3. The appointment window alternatives for any call requiring the subscriber to be at the premises shall be either a specific time or, at a maximum, a
four (4) hour block within extended business hours, including weekends.
4. The franchisee will not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment.
5. If the franchisee's representative is running late for an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the
subscriber will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer.
E. Charges And Billing:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 605/618
1. All charges to subscribers and users shall be consistent throughout the franchise area with a written schedule of fees for all services offered
available upon request. The franchisee shall apprise each new subscriber of all applicable fees and charges for providing any cable communications
services, in writing.
2. The franchisee shall not, in regard to fees, discriminate or grant any preference or advantage to any person; provided, however, that the franchisee
may establish different rates for different classes of subscribers or users; provided, that the franchisee shall not discriminate between any
subscribers or users of the same class.
3. Except as may be otherwise provided in this agreement, the franchisee may offer service which requires advance payment of periodic service
charges for no more than one year in advance subject to the conditions contained in this subsection.
4. Subscribers shall receive a monthly statement with a payment due date to arrive not less than ten (10) days prior to the due date.
5. Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized and clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including dates of
service being billed, optional charges, rebates, and credits.
6. All statements shall clearly denote a postmark or initiated date of bill.
7. A phone number for bill adjustment shall be printed on the statement, along with instructions to call for any billing problems. Adjustments will be
made for any verifiable loss of service. Adjustments shall appear on the next available subscriber statement. Any adjustments requested by the
subscriber which are not automatic under the terms of this agreement must be requested within thirty (30) days.
8. No bill, or portion thereof, may be considered delinquent or be the basis for termination if said amount is in dispute resolution.
9. Customer requested disconnections shall be made as soon as practicable, and in no case shall billing continue longer than five (5) days following
the request. The franchisee shall not enter into any agreement with a subscriber which imposes any charge other than past due balances and
unreturned equipment charges following disconnection of service, except for the reconnection, applicable deposits, and subsequent monthly or
periodic charges, and those charges shall be no greater than charges for new subscribers. This subsection shall not prevent the franchisee from
refusing service to any person because the franchisee's prior accounts with that person remain due and owing.
10. The subscriber shall have the right, at any time, to have his service, or any portion thereof, disconnected with a refund for unused service charges.
11. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either the customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty (30) days,
whichever is earlier, or the return of the equipment supplied by the franchisee.
12. The franchisee may hold promotions or otherwise accept payments for up to one year in advance; provided, however, that the service for which
payment has been accepted is not subject to an increase in cost until such payment has been expended.
F. Village Regulation Of Rates: The village reserves the right to regulate rates as permitted by state and federal law.
G. Notices: The franchisee shall, at the time service is initiated, either for the first time or by reconnection, and at least annually thereafter, provide the
customer with written information covering the following:
1. Instructions for using all equipment, including instructions for use in conjunction with customer owned equipment.
2. The fact that A/B switches are available.
3. The procedures and charges to change service(s).
4. What to do in case of a problem, troubleshooting, and where to call for service.
5. A channel chart and price list.
6. Billing policy.
7. The fact that customer service representatives and service technicians are to identify themselves by name.
8. The fact that customers have the right to speak to a supervisor.
9. The appropriate regulatory authority with whom to register a complaint and a listed phone number. Members of the cable council shall have the cable
council listed as their representative.
10. A customer may request a copy of the above listed information at any time for no charge.
H. Agreements/Promotions: The village shall be placed on the mailing list for all local, national and co-op promotions. All promotions must clearly state the
cost of service to the subscriber, restrictions of the promotion, and the date the promotion expires.
I. Compliance Reports: The franchisee shall provide a monthly report outlining specific performance in the following areas:
1. Telephone response performance in all areas listed in subsection B of this section.
2. An outage report shall include the number of outages and their location, duration, number of homes affected, and cause.
3. A service call report listing the number of service calls for the village and by category.
4. A construction report listing the progress made over the last month, and the status of pending projects.
5. Franchise fee report which shall include a statement of revenues by category including infomercial revenues, leased access, advertising and
production.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 606/618
6. The franchisee shall notify the village of the resolution of all complaints received by the village within ten (10) days of receipt of such complaint. This
provision does not nullify other deadlines within this agreement. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1E-11: PERFORMANCE EVALUATION:
A. The village and the franchisee shall hold performance evaluation meetings in the month of February of each calendar year to discuss the performance
of the franchisee during the previous year.
B. The village may periodically do a more extensive evaluation of the franchisee's performance which may include a financial or technical audit. The
franchisee shall fully cooperate with the village during all reviews and evaluations.
C. If at any time the village determines that reasonable evidence exists of inadequate performance, it may require the franchisee to perform tests directed
toward the suspected inadequacies. The franchisee shall prepare results and a report within thirty (30) days after notice.
D. Within thirty (30) to thirty six (36) months prior to the expiration of the franchise agreement, the village shall begin an evaluation of the franchisee's
performance over the life of the franchise. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
E. All evaluation meetings shall be open to the public and announced by the village in a newspaper of general circulation within the village ten (10) days
prior to such meeting. The franchisee shall place an announcement of the highest use origination channel on the system no less than three (3) times
during the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. for five (5) consecutive days preceding the meetings. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-
1996; amd. 2011 Code)
14-1E-12: RENEWAL OF FRANCHISE:
To the extent applicable, renewal shall be governed by the cable act. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1E-13: SERVICE TO VILLAGE:
Applications for franchises shall include proposals for the provision of public, educational and governmental access to the telecommunications system.
(Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1E-14: EMERGENCY OVERRIDE:
The franchisee shall provide the equipment required to automatically interrupt programming on all channels of the subscriber network by means of an
audio message to present emergency information by public and law enforcement officials of the village. Such equipment shall be accessible through any
municipal facility at no charge for the equipment, installation or maintenance. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1E-15: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
A. The franchisee shall maintain books and records of its operation within the village to show total revenues by service category in sufficient detail,
consistent with generally accepted accounting principles.
B. The franchisee shall maintain all books and records required for regulation of rates by the appropriate governmental authority.
C. The franchisee shall maintain such books and records for the village separate from any other operation; provided, however, that any expenses,
expenditures or revenues which apply to both the system in the village and any other operation shall be reasonably allocated between all such
operations.
D. The franchisee shall keep appropriate records of all requests for installation of service, service calls, and outages, showing the date completed and any
corrective action taken. A summary of the above listed information shall be submitted to the village prior to the annual performance evaluation meeting.
E. The required books and records shall be made available in the franchisee's local office during normal business hours, for inspection and audit by the
village within thirty (30) days after such request has been made. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1E-16: DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION:
A. The franchisee shall submit to the village copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by any federal, state and local courts, regulatory agencies
and other governmental bodies relating to its telecommunications operations within the village.
B. Copies of the franchisee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms, subscriber user services, policies regarding the processing of subscriber
complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the franchisee's policy in
connection with subscriber or user services shall be filed with the village and updated as necessary, and shall be made available for public inspection in
the franchisee's local office.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 607/618
C. Copies of all correspondence, petitions, reports, applications and other documents filed by the franchisee with federal or state agencies having
jurisdiction over telecommunications, or the same received from said agencies, shall be furnished simultaneously to the village by the franchisee.
D. Within ten (10) days of a written request from the village, each franchisee shall furnish the village with information sufficient to demonstrate:
1. That the franchisee has complied with all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
2. That all municipal sales and/or telecommunications taxes or applicable franchise fees due the village in connection with the telecommunications
services and facilities provided by the franchisee have been properly collected and paid by the franchisee. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996; amd. 2011
Code)
3. In addition to the annual filing required in this chapter, all books, records, maps and other documents maintained by the franchisee with respect to its
facilities within the public ways shall be made available for inspection by the village at reasonable times and intervals. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
ARTICLE F. FEES AND COMPENSATION
14-1F-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this article to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the village related to the
enforcement and administration of this chapter. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1F-2: APPLICATION AND REVIEW FEE:
A. Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to article C or D of this chapter shall pay a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or one percent (1%) of
the estimated cost of applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities, as certified by the applicant's professional engineer, whichever is greater.
B. The application and review fee shall be deposited with the village as part of the application filed pursuant to article C or D of this chapter. (Ord. 96-91,
10-17-1996)
C. An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within sixty (60) days of its application and review,
file a written request and be refunded the balance of its deposit under this section, less: (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
1. One hundred dollars ($100.00); and
2. All ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the village in connection with the application. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1F-3: OTHER VILLAGE COSTS:
All license or franchise grantees shall, within thirty (30) days after written demand therefor, reimburse the village for all direct and indirect costs and
expenses incurred by the village in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any license or franchise
agreement. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1F-4: COMPENSATION FOR USE OF PUBLIC WAYS AND VILLAGE PROPERTY:
A. Public Ways: The village reserves its right to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a
telecommunications license or franchise grantee. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the village and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be
paid for the granted property rights.
B. Village Property: If the right is granted, by lease, license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy village property for the installation of
telecommunications facilities, the compensation to be paid shall be fixed by the village. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1F-5: CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall pay a permit fee equal to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or one percent (1%) of the estimated
cost of constructing the telecommunication facilities, as certified by the applicant's engineer and approved by the village engineer, whichever is greater.
(Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1F-6: ANNUAL FEES:
Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant agreement, each license or franchise grantee shall pay an annual license fee to the village equal to
five hundred dollars ($500.00) as reimbursement for the village's costs in connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy of
the public ways in behalf of the public and existing or future users. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1F-7: CABLE FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 608/618
Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise fees, payments and costs provided in article E of this chapter. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1F-8: FEES AND COMPENSATION ARE ADDITIONAL:
The regulatory fees and costs provided in this article, and any compensation charged and paid for the public ways provided in subsection 14-1F-4A of this
article, are separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state, local and village taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications
carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications services. (Ord. 96-91, 10-
17-1996)
14-1F-9: FAILURE TO MAKE PAYMENTS:
In the event that any fee or payment of compensation is not made on or before the dates specified herein, the grantee shall pay an additional
compensation:
A. An interest charge, computed from such due date, of eighteen percent (18%) per annum during the period for which payment was overdue, and in
addition.
B. If the payment is late by forty five (45) days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent (5%) of the amount due in order to defray those additional
expenses and costs incurred by the village by reasons of delinquent payment. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
ARTICLE G. CONDITIONS OF GRANT
14-1G-1: CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a license or
franchise agreement:
A. A grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
B. A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and
then only if surplus space is available.
C. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of the village, a
grantee with permission to occupy the same public way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
D. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way
of the village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which
shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the village engineer, such
relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public ways.
E. Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access
to future carriers. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-2: COMPLIANCE WITH JULIE:
All license or franchise grantees shall, before commencing any construction in the public ways, comply with all regulations of JULIE. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-
1996)
14-1G-3: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
All license or franchise grantees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in article H of this chapter.
However, nothing in this article shall prohibit the village and a grantee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a
license or franchise agreement, provided such alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices.
(Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-4: INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC WAYS; DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
A. Interference Prohibited: No license or franchise grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the
use of the public ways by the village, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways. All such
facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the village engineer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 609/618
B. Damage To Property Prohibited: No license or franchise grantee nor any person acting on a grantee's behalf shall take any action or permit any action
to be done which may impair or damage any village property, public ways of the village, other ways or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto.
(Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-5: NOTICE OF WORK:
A. Nonemergency Work: Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no license or franchise grantee, nor any person acting on the
grantee's behalf, shall commence any nonemergency work in or about the public ways of the village or other ways without ten (10) working days'
advance notice to the village.
B. Repair And Emergency Work: In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a grantee may commence such repair and emergency response work
as required under the circumstances, provided the grantee shall notify the village as promptly as possible before such repair or emergency work or as
soon thereafter as possible if advance notice is not practicable. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-6: MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
Each license or franchise grantee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and
local requirements. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-7: RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES:
A. Village Use Of Public Ways: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, a license or franchise grantee shall, at its own expense,
temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public ways whenever the
corporate authorities shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
1. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any village or other public improvement in or upon the public ways.
2. The operations of the village or other governmental entity in or upon the public ways.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the village, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other
person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the public ways or
property of the village shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public ways or property of the village and restore
such ways or property to as good a condition as existed before the facility was installed, unless otherwise directed by the village. A telecommunications
system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the grantee's telecommunications license or franchise.
2. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the village.
3. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a telecommunications license or franchise.
4. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit.
5. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee's telecommunications license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located
within the public ways of the village as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-8: NONLIABILITY OF VILLAGE FOR DAMAGE TO FACILITIES:
Unless directly and proximately caused by the wilful, intentional or malicious acts by the village, the village shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of
any telecommunications facility within the public ways of the village as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements,
construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the village. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-9: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS, OTHER WAYS AND VILLAGE PROPERTY:
A. When a license or franchise grantee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public ways, other ways or village property, it
shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to as good a condition as existed before the
work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the village.
B. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section, the grantee shall temporarily restore the affected ways or
property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the licensee's sole expense, and the licensee shall promptly undertake and complete the required
permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration.
C. A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of
all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such ways
or property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 610/618
D. In the event of a failure by a license or franchise grantee to complete any restoration work required by this chapter or by a license or franchise
agreement or any other work required by any agreement, law or ordinance, within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice, and to the satisfaction
of the village, the village may cause such work to be done, and the grantee shall reimburse the village for the cost thereof within thirty (30) days after
receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or the village may recover such costs through the security fund or bonds provided by the grantee. The village
shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-10: FACILITIES MAPS:
Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the village with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within
the public ways. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-11: DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION:
Within ten (10) days of a written request from the village administrator, each license or franchise grantee shall furnish the village with information sufficient
to demonstrate:
A. That the grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
B. That all municipal sales and/or telecommunications taxes due the village in connection with the telecommunications services and facilities provided by
the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the grantee. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996; amd. 2011 Code)
C. All books, records, maps and other documents maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be made available for
inspection by the village at reasonable times and intervals. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-12: LEASED CAPACITY:
A license or franchise grantee shall have the right, without prior village approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers, provided:
A. Grantee shall furnish the village with a copy of any such lease or agreement.
B. The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-13: INDEMNIFICATION:
A. General Indemnification: Each license or franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, the grantee's express undertaking to defend,
indemnify and hold the village and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and
expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the
negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering
telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
grant agreement made or entered into pursuant to this chapter.
B. Liability:
1. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following
liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the village and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as
coinsureds:
a. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:
(1) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
(2) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
(3) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability.
b. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a limit of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each person and three million
dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each accident.
c. Workers' compensation within statutory limits and employer liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
d. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not
less than three million dollars ($3,000,000.00).
2. The liability insurance policies required by this subsection shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications license
or franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise or license hereunder, or is engaged in the
removal of its telecommunications facilities. The liability insurance policies required by this subsection shall be primary as respects the village, and its
elected and appointed officials, agents and employees. Any insurance or self-insurance arrangement maintained by the village shall be excess
insurance and shall not contribute to grantee's insurance. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 611/618
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be cancelled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
3. Within sixty (60) days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event later than thirty (30) days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall
obtain and furnish to the village replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this subsection.
4. The grantee shall furnish to the village, prior to the earlier of commencement of construction or operations within the village, certificates of insurance
and, if requested by the village, certified copies of the insurance coverages required by this subsection including any endorsement affecting
coverage. The certificates shall be on forms approved by the village.
C. Performance And Construction Surety: Before a license or franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the
grantee shall provide and deposit such monies, bonds, letters of credit or other instruments in form and substance acceptable to the village as may be
required by this chapter or by an applicable license or franchise agreement.
D. Security Fund:
1. Each grantee shall establish a permanent security fund with the village by depositing the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) with the
village in cash, an unconditional letter of credit, or other instrument acceptable to the village, which fund shall be maintained at the sole expense of
the grantee so long as any of the grantee's telecommunications facilities are located within the public ways of the village.
2. The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete performance of this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the village
pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the village.
3. Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the village shall give written notice to the grantee:
a. Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the damages, costs or expenses which the village has incurred by reason of the grantee's
act or default.
b. Providing a reasonable opportunity for the grantee to first remedy the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable.
c. Providing a reasonable opportunity for the grantee to pay any monies due the village before the village withdraws the amount thereof from the
security fund, if applicable.
d. That the grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act, default or failure described in the notice with the village administrator or his
designee.
4. Grantees shall replenish the security fund within fourteen (14) days after written notice from the village that there is a deficiency in the amount of the
fund.
E. Construction And Completion Bond:
1. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the village equal to
at least one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of constructing the grantee's telecommunications facilities within the public ways of the
village shall be deposited before construction is commenced.
2. The construction bond shall remain in force until sixty (60) days after substantial completion of the work, as determined by the village engineer,
including restoration of public ways and other property affected by the construction.
3. The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the village:
a. Timely completion of construction.
b. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards.
c. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the village.
d. Restoration of the public ways and other property affected by the construction.
e. The submission of as built drawings after completion of the work as required by this chapter.
f. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. (Ord. 96-91,
10-17-1996)
14-1G-14: COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES:
A. All grantees are required to cooperate with the village and with each other.
B. By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the village with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may affect the
public ways.
C. Each grantee shall meet with the village, other grantees and users of the public ways annually or as determined by the village to schedule and
coordinate construction in the public ways.
D. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the village engineer, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption
or damages. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 612/618
14-1G-15: TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT OF GRANT:
A. Except in the event of the merger, consolidation or reorganization of a licensee or franchisee, the licensee or franchisee shall not have the right to
assign its rights and privileges under this chapter or to otherwise transfer them in any manner whatsoever, without the prior written approval of the
village, pursuant to an ordinance enacted by the corporate authorities.
B. In the event of a transfer or assignment of the rights and privileges of the licensee or franchisee under this chapter, all provisions of this chapter which
are obligatory upon or which inure to the benefit of a licensee or franchisee shall also be obligatory upon and shall inure to the benefit of any and all
successors and assigns of the licensee or franchisee. In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without the successor in interest
becoming a signatory for the license or franchise agreement. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-16: TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING CONTROL OF GRANT:
Any transactions which singularly or collectively result in a change of ten percent (10%) or more of the ownership or working control of the grantee, of the
ownership or working control of a telecommunications license or franchise, or the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or
working control of the grantee or of a telecommunications system, or of control of the capacity or bandwidth of the grantee's telecommunication system,
facilities or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an assignment or transfer requiring village approval pursuant to section 14-1G-15 of this article.
Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from village approval. The grantee shall promptly notify, in writing, the village of any proposed
change in or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of control of the grantee. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-17: REVOCATION OF GRANT:
A. Grounds: A license or franchise granted by the village to use or occupy public ways of the village may be revoked for the following reasons:
1. Construction or operation in the village or in the public ways of the village without a license or franchise grant of authorization.
2. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
3. Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.
4. Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.
5. Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's franchise or license assets, or a substantial interest therein.
6. Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the village.
7. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
8. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this chapter.
9. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the village.
10. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
11. Violation of material provisions of this chapter.
12. Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement.
13. Failure to provide or maintain in full force and effect the required liability and indemnification coverages or the security fund or bonds.
14. The cessation of service within the village for a period exceeding thirty (30) days for any reason within the control of the grantee or abandonment of
the management and/or operation of the system within the village.
B. Notice Of Revocation: In the event that the village administrator believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, he shall give the
grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the
violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, to furnish evidence:
1. That corrective action has been or is being actively and expeditiously pursued to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
2. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
3. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation.
C. Hearing: In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the village administrator as provided in subsection B of this
section, he shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall provide the grantee with
notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.
D. Standards For Revocation Or Lesser Sanctions: If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this title, or of
a franchise or license agreement, the corporate authorities shall determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish some lesser
sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:
1. Whether the misconduct was egregious.
2. Whether substantial harm resulted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 613/618
3. Whether the violation was intentional.
4. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.
5. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
6. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-18: NONDISCRIMINATION:
A. The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, PEG access channel users, or general citizens on the
basis of income, race, color, religion, national origin, age, gender, marital status or physical or mental disability of an individual or group in an area. The
grantee shall comply at all times with the cable act and all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and all executive and
administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.
B. Grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local laws and regulations in effect on the date of
the franchise grant, and as amended from time to time.
C. The entire operations of the grantee shall be operated in a manner consistent with the principle of fairness and equal accessibility of its facilities,
equipment, channels, studios and other services to all citizens, businesses, public agencies and other entities having a legitimate use for the system,
and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1G-19: PERSONAL INFORMATION:
The grantee's policy with regard to personally identifiable information shall be consistent with federal law. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
ARTICLE H. CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
14-1H-1: COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE AND CODES:
A. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, all telecommunications carriers are subject to the requirements of this article.
B. No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within the village except as
provided in this article.
C. Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes,
rules and regulations including the national electrical safety code. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1H-2: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required; Conditions: No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within the village without first obtaining a construction
permit therefor; provided, however:
1. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within the village unless the telecommunications carrier
has filed a registration statement with the village pursuant to article B of this chapter.
2. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities in the public ways unless the telecommunications carrier
has applied for and received a license or franchise pursuant to article C, D or E of this chapter.
3. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities without payment of the construction permit fee
established in section 14-1F-5 of this chapter.
B. Application For Permit:
1. Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the village and shall be
accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:
a. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.
b. The location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing utility poles.
c. The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points
along the route which are within the public ways.
d. The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public ways along the
underground route proposed by the applicant.
e. The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the village, but not within the public ways.
f. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public ways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 614/618
g. The location, dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent to the public ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together with a
landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction.
2. All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications
submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations.
3. All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or along any public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating
the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with Illinois department of transportation "Uniform Manual Of Traffic Control
Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
C. Performance Bond: Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall provide a performance bond, as provided in subsection 14-1G-13E of
this chapter.
D. Issuance Of Permit: Within forty five (45) days after submission of all plans and documents required of the applicant and payment of the permit fees
required by this chapter, the village engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans and documents comply with all requirements of this chapter, shall
issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and
manner of performing the work as he may deem necessary or appropriate.
E. Display Of Permit: The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed
and made available for inspection by the village engineer or his representatives at all times when construction work is occurring. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-
1996)
14-1H-3: CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE:
The permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the village engineer ten (10) working days before commencing any work in or about the
public ways. The permittee shall further notify the village engineer not less than two (2) working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public
ways. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1H-4: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT, PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
A. All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The village
engineer and his representatives shall be provided access to the work and such further information as he or she may require to ensure compliance with
such requirements.
B. Upon order of the village engineer, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the
requirements of this title shall be removed. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1H-5: SURVEY OF UNDERGROUND FACILITIES:
If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by depth, line, grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the permittee shall cause the
location of such facilities to be verified by a registered Illinois land surveyor. The permittee shall relocate any facilities which are not located in compliance
with permit requirements. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1H-6: COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION:
The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the village ways and other public and private property. All
construction work authorized by a permit within village ways, including restoration, must be completed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date of
issuance. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1H-7: AS BUILT DRAWINGS:
Within sixty (60) days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the village with two (2) complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and
certified to the village, as accurately depicting the location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
14-1H-8: RESTORATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Improvements: Upon completion of any construction work, the permittee shall promptly repair any and all public and private property improvements,
fixtures, structures and facilities in the public ways or otherwise damaged during the course of construction, restoring the same as nearly as practicable
to its condition before the start of construction.
B. Landscape:
1. All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation maintenance, repair or replacement of
telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a franchise, license, or permit, shall be replaced or restored, as nearly as may
be practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 615/618
2. All restoration work within the public ways shall be done in accordance with landscape plans approved by the village engineer. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-
1996)
14-1H-9: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PERFORMANCE AND COMPLIANCE:
The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the license or franchise grantee are responsible for performance of and compliance with all
provisions of this article. (Ord. 96-91, 10-17-1996)
Chapter 2
CABLE OR VIDEO CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION
14-2-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering
services within the village boundaries. (Ord. 2007-104, 11-1-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
14-2-2: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection law that becomes effective after the effective date hereof shall be incorporated into this
chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the village boundaries. However, any amendment that
makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without formal action by the corporate
authorities of the village. (Ord. 2007-104, 11-1-2007)
14-2-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby, pursuant to law, declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the village. (Ord. 2007-104, 11-1-2007)
14-2-4: PENALTIES:
A. The village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the
cable and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or
video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law. (Ord. 2007-104, 11-1-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
B. The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty (30)
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
C. A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the
cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2007-104, 11-1-2007)
14-2-5: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided in the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/22-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the
violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits, and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 2007-104,
11-1-2007; amd. 2011 Code)
Chapter 3
CABLE OR VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEES
14-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 616/618
A. Gross revenues shall include the following:
1. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
2. Event based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
3. Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment.
4. Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair charges.
5. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
6. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
7. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or
exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the village.
The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
8. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with
respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's
network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this definition.
9. In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
10. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
B. Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
1. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
2. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued authorization
to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service.
3. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received
from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunications services,
information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic
publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
4. The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
5. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
6. Security deposits collected from subscribers.
7. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of
the cable service or video service.
C. Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the
affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the
service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to the village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and
which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered
over the public internet. (Ord. 2007-103, 11-1-2007)
14-3-2: CABLE OR VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 617/618
A. Fee Imposed; Amount: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village. The amount of the fee imposed
hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
B. Notice To Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video
service in the village.
C. Liability For Fee: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the
first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of a copy of the ordinance codified herein by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
D. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the
fee.
E. Exemptions: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with
the village in which a fee is paid.
F. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-301(c), with credit for any prepaid franchise fee under that agreement, may deduct the amount of such credit from the fee that the operator owes
under subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2007-103, 11-1-2007)
14-3-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE:
A. Fee Imposed; Amount: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to section 14-3-2 of this chapter. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of
the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG
access support in the village.
B. Liability For Fee: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection 14-3-2C of this chapter.
C. Payment Date: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.
D. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-
301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to this subsection may
be credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection A of this section. (Ord. 2007-103, 11-1-2007)
14-3-4: PAYMENT OF FEES; LATE PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by the village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 2007-103, 11-1-2007)
14-3-5: ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 2007-103, 11-1-2007)
14-3-6: OTHER TAXES APPLY:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that is
or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect any
requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village
911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2007-103, 11-1-2007)
14-3-7: AUDIT OF CABLE OR VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
A. Audit Required: The village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of
its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its
jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the village. If all
local franchises between the village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village pursuant to the local
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=688 618/618
government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an
accord that the amounts are correct.
B. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice for the
sum. (Ord. 2007-103, 11-1-2007)