MUNICIPAL CODE VILLAGE OF GLENVIEW, ILLINOIS 
____________ 
Published 2004 by Order of the President and Board of Trustees 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
VILLAGE OF 
GLENVIEW, ILLINOIS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Lawrence R. Carlson 
President 
____________ 
Kerry D. Cummings 
Mary Beth Denefe 
Michael J. Guinane 
Jeffrey M. Lerner 
James R. Patterson, Jr. 
Kimball C. Woodrow 
Board of Trustees 
____________ 
L. Todd Hileman 
Village Manager/Village Clerk 
____________ 
Jeffrey M. Randall 
Village Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Village of Glenview, Illinois. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1959 Code, and ordinances adopted by the president and board of trustees. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1959 Code, and any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many State and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of James S. Vaught, Supervising Editor, and Leesa Hampton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Mary Bak, Director of Development/Special Counsel, Ms. Joanne Hirtzig, Administrative Secretary, Jeffrey M. Randall, Village Attorney, and Eric Patt, Robbins, Salomon & Patt, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Municipal Code which will make the active law of the Village readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Village's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Glenview, Illinois. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Glenview, Illinois. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Village of Glenview, Illinois. 2004. 
ORDINANCE NO. 4736 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE VILLAGE OF GLENVIEW, ILLINOIS THAT PROVIDES FOR (A) THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, (B) A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF, (C) THE MANNER OF AMENDING THE NEW CODE, AND (D) THE DATE AND TIME THE NEW CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE WILL BECOME EFFECTIVE 
WHEREAS, the Village of Glenview (the "Village") is a home rule municipality in accordance with the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970; and 
WHEREAS, the Village has the authority to adopt ordinances and to promulgate rules and regulations that pertain to its government and affairs that protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens; and 
WHEREAS, the corporate authorities have determined that it is in the best interests of the Village to adopt and enact a new Code for the Village (the "New Code") that provides for (a) the repeal of certain ordinances not included in the New Code, (b) a penalty for the violation of the New Code, (c) the manner of amending the New Code, and (d) the date and time the New Code and this Ordinance will become effective. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF GLENVIEW, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. The facts and statements contained in the preamble to this Ordinance are found to be true and correct and are hereby adopted as part of this Ordinance. 
Section 2. The New Code entitled "Municipal Code, Village of Glenview, Illinois" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 98, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 3. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 21, 2004, and not included in the New Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 4. The repeal provided for in Section 3 above shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this Ordinance. 
Section 5. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, whenever in the New Code adopted by this Ordinance or in any ordinance of the Village any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in the New Code adopted by this Ordinance or in any ordinance of the Village the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of the New Code adopted by this Ordinance or any ordinance of the Village shall be a petty offense, and shall be punished by a monetary fine not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00. Each day any violation of any provision of the New Code adopted by this Ordinance or any ordinance of the Village shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to a monetary fine, a penalty imposed for violation of an ordinance may include, or consist of, a requirement that the defendant perform some reasonable public service work, such as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in public parks or along public highways or the maintenance of public facilities. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Village may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 6. Additions or amendments to the New Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the President and Board of Trustees to make the same a part of the New Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the New Code, so that reference to the New Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 7. Ordinances adopted after September 21, 2004, which amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the New Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the New Code. 
Section 8. Each provision of this Ordinance is severable. If any provision of this Ordinance or the application of any provision of this Ordinance to any person or circumstance is held invalid, then the remainder of this Ordinance and the application of the provisions of this Ordinance to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby and shall remain valid, enforceable and otherwise in full force and effect. 
Section 9. This Ordinance and the New Code referenced herein shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of its passage and approval according to law. 
PASSED this 4 th day of January, 2005. 
AYES: Lerner, Denefe, Cummings, Patterson, Guinane, Woodrow 
NAYS: None 
ABSENT: None 
APPROVED by me this 4 th day of January, 2005. 
	      Lawrence R. Carlson, President 
      Village of Glenview, Cook County, Illinois 
 	 
ATTEST: 
      Todd Hileman, Village Clerk 
      Village of Glenview, Cook County, Illinois 	
 	 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Municipal Code, Village of Glenview, Illinois," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1959, § 1.1)  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the interpretation and construction of this Code, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the president and board of trustees or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Board and Village Board. The terms "board" and "Village Board" shall mean the corporate authorities of the Village of Glenview, Illinois. 
Code and this Code. The terms "Code" and "this Code" shall mean the Municipal Code, Village of Glenview, Illinois. 
Computation of time. The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day is a Saturday or Sunday, or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or hereafter in force in the State, and then it shall also be excluded. If the day succeeding such Saturday, Sunday or holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or Sunday then such succeeding day shall also be excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 5 ILCS 70/1.11. 
County. The term "County" or "the County" shall mean Cook County in the State of Illinois. 
Court. The term "court" shall include all courts of record. 
Gender. A term importing the masculine gender may be applied to the female gender. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 5 ILCS 70/1.04. 
ILCS. The abbreviation "ILCS" shall mean the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as now or hereafter amended. 
In the Village or within the Village. The term "in the Village" or "within the Village" shall mean and include all territory over which the Village has or shall acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
Joint authority. Terms purporting to give a joint authority to three or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or persons. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 5 ILCS 70/1.09. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Terms importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things, and words importing the plural number may include the singular. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 5 ILCS 70/1.03. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be deemed to include an affirmation, and the term "sworn" shall be construed to include the term "affirmed." 
Occupant and tenant. The terms "occupant" and "tenant," when applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of, or actually occupied the whole or part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Officers, departments, boards, commissions, committees and employees. The officers, departments, boards, commissions, committees and employees referred to in this Code shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions, committees and employees of the Village, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, either body politic or corporate, firm, joint venture or joint stock association or other legal entity, or a shareholder, officer, director, controlling person, contractor or person having control over the work of such individual, partnership, corporation, firm, joint venture or joint stock association or other legal entity, or any city or state, or any subdivision thereof, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof. This term shall apply to all applicants for a business license, including, but not limited to, all record titleholders, holders of trust beneficial interests, contract purchasers, contractors, subcontractors or any other party in interest. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as defined by this section. 
Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. Real property shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments and shall embrace all chattels real. 
Shall and may. The term "shall" is mandatory; and the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State. The term "State" or "the State" shall mean the State of Illinois. 
Street. The term "street" shall mean the entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
Tense. Terms in the present tense include the future. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 5 ILCS 70/1.02. 
Village. The term "Village" or "the Village" shall mean the Village of Glenview in Cook County, State of Illinois, except as otherwise provided. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" may include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by his proper mark. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise expressed. 
(Code 1959, § 1.2, ch. 10, art. XIII)  
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
The catchlines of the several sections and subsections, and the headings of chapters, articles, divisions and subdivisions are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, subsection, chapter, article, division or subdivision, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, subsections, chapters, articles, divisions or subdivisions, nor as any part of the section, subsection, chapter, article, division or subdivision, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, subsections, chapters, articles, divisions or subdivisions, including the catchlines or other headings, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1959, § 1.3)  
Sec. 1-4. - History notes and references. 
Cross references, state law references, editor's notes and history notes are by way of explanation only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section, except as may otherwise be provided in this Code.  
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions construed as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, as far as they are substantially the same as those of the ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code or of the 1939 Code, shall be construed as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1959, § 1.4)  
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision, or any chapter, article or section of this Code shall itself be repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision or any chapter, article or section of this Code, unless it shall be therein so expressly provided. 
(Code 1959, § 1.12)  
Sec. 1-7. - Village seal. 
The seal of the Village shall contain the following words: "Village of Glenview, Corporate Seal, Cook County, Illinois," in the following form:  
The above is declared to be the corporate seal of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 1.6)  
Sec. 1-8. - Official time. 
The official time for the Village shall correspond to the official time prevailing in the City of Chicago, Illinois. 
(Code 1959, § 1.7)  
Sec. 1-9. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the Village shall commence on January 1 of each year and close on December 31 of such year. 
(Code 1959, § 1.8)  
Sec. 1-10. - Geographical base line datum. 
The horizontal and vertical datums for the Village have been established and are defined in the Village of Glenview Geodetic Control Markers, Vertical and Horizontal booklet, available in the development department. 
(Code 1959, § 1.9)  
Sec. 1-11. - Vertical and horizontal benchmarks. 
Vertical and horizontal control markers (i.e., benchmarks) have been set and established throughout the Village. Each of such vertical and horizontal control markers are defined vertically in feet by a United States Geological Survey (USGS) elevation, and horizontally in feet by Illinois State Plane Coordinates which consist of two components, a northing coordinate and an easting coordinate. Each control marker's vertical elevation and horizontal coordinates, and a description and sketch of each control marker's location is included in the Village of Glenview Geodetic Control Marker, Vertical and Horizontal pamphlet, available in the development department. 
(Code 1959, § 1.10)  
Sec. 1-12. - Disposition of Village Code. 
All the printed books containing the Village Code shall be deposited with the Village clerk. He shall deliver one copy thereof to each officer of the Village, and to such other persons as the president and board of trustees may direct, free of charge, and new copies to replace old copies as needed. Copies of the Village Code shall be available from the Village clerk. 
(Code 1959, § 1.11)  
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word in this Code be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the president and board of trustees without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1959, § 1.5)  
Sec. 1-14. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections or subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed or as omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of the adoption of such subsequent ordinances, or of repeal of ordinances, until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a part of this Code by the Village Board. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of the Municipal Code, Village of Glenview, Illinois, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Municipal Code, Village of Glenview, Illinois, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:…." The provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(d)  There shall be one official copy of this Code. The official copy shall be maintained by the Village clerk so that all amendments thereto and all general ordinances thereafter passed may be posted and inserted in their proper places within the Code.  
Sec. 1-15. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or administrative direction, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive parts of general ordinances passed by the Village Board during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be numbered so that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may, without Village Board authorization, make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance," or words of the same meaning, to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections or the alphabetical arrangement of new chapters inserted into the Code. In no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-16. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the Village any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be considered a petty offense subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 and not exceeding $1000.00. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any fine, judgment, penalty, or cost that remains unpaid after 60 days from the day upon which it is assessed shall operate as a lien upon the underlying parcel that is superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens. 
(c)  The Village clerk is authorized to collect or receive any and all fines assessed or imposed by any hearing officer or court of competent jurisdiction by virtue of a violation of any provision of this Code or any other ordinance violation of the Village, except as maybe otherwise provided by law. 
(Code 1959, § 1.13; Ord. No. 4801, §§ 2, 3, 10-6-2005; Ord. No. 5411, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 5524, § 22, 11-15-2011) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide that ordinance violations constitute misdemeanors and to provide for penalties, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/1-2-1.1.  
Sec. 1-17. - Ordinances, rights, etc., saved from repeal upon adoption of Code. 
The repeal provided for in the ordinance adopting this Code shall not affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment is mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the Village, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the Village or any evidence of the Village's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the Village. 
(3)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance of the Village. 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, accepting the dedication of, naming, establishing, locating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street, alley, public way or public park in the Village. 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(6)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes or special assessments, or authorizing tax fund transfers not inconsistent with this Code. 
(7)  An ordinance rezoning specific property or any amendment thereto. 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the Village. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the Village, or providing regulations for the subdivision of land. 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing the boundaries, or extending or contracting the boundaries of the Village. 
(12)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any Village officer or employee, not inconsistent with this Code. 
(13)  Any ordinance declaring certain property to be a public nuisance and authorizing procedures for the demolition thereof. 
(14)  Any ordinances or State statutes adopted by reference by any provision of this Code or any amendments to such ordinances or State statutes. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing fire lanes on private property. 
(16)  Any ordinance establishing traffic or parking regulations for a street, or portion thereof, or any other location in the Village, not inconsistent with this Code. 
(17)  Any temporary or special ordinance. 
(18)  Any ordinance respecting conveyance or acceptance of real property or easements in real property. 
(19)  Chapter 98, zoning, or any amendment thereto. 
(20)  The administrative ordinances and regulations not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code.  
Sec. 1-18. - Processing charge for payments refused or denied. 
(a)  If the Village receives any payment that is returned and/or refused for any reason, including, but not limited to, nonsufficient funds, accounts closed, or refusal of credit card or debit card companies to honor payments to the Village, the payor and/or recipient of the service for which such payment was made shall be obligated to pay to the Village a fee as set forth in chapter 30, plus reimburse the Village for any charges and/or penalties imposed by the entity refusing or denying payment. 
(b)  If payment is refused or denied for a service provided by the Village, the Village shall have the right, in its sole discretion, upon ten days' prior written notice to the person or entity to whom the service is being provided, to refuse to provide such service. 
(c)  All fees and charges assessed by the Village must be paid in full prior to reinstating or providing services. 
(d)  Should a payor be subject to two or more processing charges for refused or denied payments in a 12-month period, the Village may require payment by cash, cashier's check or certified check. 
(Ord. No. 4617, § 2, 2-3-2004)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration and enforcement of plumbing code, § 18-31 et seq.; administration and enforcement of electricity, § 18-251 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 26; fees and charges, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 42; planning, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 82; administration of zoning regulations, § 98-41 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Code of ethics—Declaration of policy and purpose. 
(a)  The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsive to the people they serve; government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; public office not be used for personal gain or to advance the interests of family or relatives; and the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of such goals, there is established a code of ethics for all Village public officials, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid, and for Village employees. The purposes of sections 2-1 through 2-25 are to establish ethical standards of conduct for all such public officials and employees by setting forth the acts or actions which are inconsistent with the best interests of the Village and its inhabitants and by requiring 1) a duty of confidentiality to the extent permitted and required by law and 2) the disclosure by public officials and employees of private financial or other pecuniary personal interests in matters which may affect the Village. 
(b)  Sections 2-1 through 2-25 are founded upon the principle that no individual shall receive any impermissible financial or other gain by reason of their serving as a public official or employee of the Village, and that no private person or taxpayer, including public officials or employees, or their family members, should receive any benefits from Village action beyond that which is available to any other private person or taxpayer due to their relation to or as a result of privileged information or support provided by any public official or employee. 
(Code 1959, § 2.82; Ord. No. 5636, § 6, 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-2. - Same—Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in sections 2-1 through 2-25, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business entity means any business, proprietorship, firm, partnership, person in a representative or fiduciary capacity, association, venture, trust or corporation. 
Campaign for elective office means any activity in furtherance of an effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include activities: 
(1)  Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, 
(2)  Relating to collective bargaining, or 
(3)  That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
Candidate means a person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in 10 ILCS 5/1-3. 
Collective bargaining has the same meaning as that term is defined in the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act, 5 ILCS 315/3. 
Compensated time means, with respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location. 
Compensatory time off means authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment. 
Contribution has the same meaning as that term is defined in 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4. 
Doing business means engaging in an activity for profit or gain, or that requires a license or permit by an agency. 
Employer means the Village of Glenview. 
Family member means a spouse, children and grandchildren, and their spouses, parents and the parents of a spouse, and brothers and sisters and their spouses. 
Gift means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an officer or employee given without consideration or expectation of return. 
Interest means any material direct or indirect benefit accruing to a public official or employee, or their family members, whether in the public official's or employee's own name, or the name of any person, from which the official or employee is entitled to receive any financial benefit as a result of a contract or transaction which is or which is known will become the subject of an official act or action by or with the Village, except for such contracts or transactions which, by their terms and the substance of their provisions, confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of similar benefits to all other citizens of the Village. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, any interest permitted or prohibited under 65 ILCS 5/3.1-55-10 shall be permitted or prohibited under the same circumstances and conditions as therein set forth. 
Interest in real property includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Legal or equitable title; 
(2)  A beneficial interest in any trust, including a land trust; 
(3)  Any assignment of any interest from a beneficiary or any other party of an interest; 
(4)  A power to direct conveyance; 
(5)  A right to receive rents or proceeds from property; 
(6)  The obligation to pay rent; 
(7)  A lien; 
(8)  A tax sale certificate; 
(9)  An option; or 
(10)  Any other financial interest, real or personal, direct or indirect, in such property, including status as a nominee or undisclosed principal. 
Intergovernmental gift means any gift given to a public official or public employee by a public official or public employee of another governmental entity. 
Intragovernmental gift means any gift give to a public official or public employee from another public official or public employee. 
Leave of absence means any period during which an employee does not receive: 
(1)  Compensation for employment, 
(2)  Service credit towards pension benefits, and 
(3)  Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer. 
Lobbyist means any person: 
(1)  Who, for compensation or on behalf of any person other than himself, undertakes to influence any legislative or administrative action; or 
(2)  Any part of whose duties as an employee of another includes undertaking to influence any legislative or administrative action. 
Official act or action means any legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of any public official or employee of the Village, or any agency, board, committee or commission thereof. 
Official Village business means attendance at ribbon cutting ceremonies, business receptions, business and restaurant openings, community events, fund raising events, other public events and/or appearances or ceremonies and the like. 
Person means any individual, entity, corporation, proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, firm, association, trade union, syndicate, committee, trust, estate or group, as well as any parent or subsidiary of any of such entities, whether or not operated for profit. 
Political activity means any activity in support of or in connection with any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not include activities: 
(1)  Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, 
(2)  Relating to collective bargaining, or 
(3)  That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties. 
Political organization means a party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk under Section 9-3 of the Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/9-3, but only with regard to those activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk. 
Prohibited political activity means: 
(1)  Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event; 
(2)  Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event; 
(3)  Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution; 
(4)  Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question; 
(5)  Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question; 
(6)  Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question; 
(7)  Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls; 
(8)  Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question; 
(9)  Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office; 
(10)  Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires; 
(11)  Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question; 
(12)  Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum question; 
(13)  Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against any referendum question; 
(14)  Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party convention; or 
(15)  Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any election. 
Public employee means any person who is employed by the Village, whether on a full or part-time basis or pursuant to contract, who is compensated for services as an employee and not as an independent contractor and who: 
(1)  Is, or functions as, the head of a department, division, bureau, authority or other administrative unit within the Village or exercises similar authority within the Village; 
(2)  Has direct supervisory authority over or direct responsibility for the formulation, negotiation, issuance or execution of contracts entered into by the Village; 
(3)  Has authority to approve licenses and permits to be issued by the Village, not including inspectors and plan reviewers; 
(4)  Adjudicates, arbitrates or decides any judicial or administrative proceeding, or reviews the adjudication, arbitration or decision of any judicial or administrative proceeding within the authority of the Village; 
(5)  Has authority to issue or promulgate rules and regulations within areas under the authority of the Village. 
Acts of any family member of a public official or employee, when done with the knowledge and express, implied or tacit consent of the public official or employee, shall be deemed to be acts of such official or employee for purposes of applying the prohibitions and restrictions of sections 2-1 through 2-25. 
Public official means any person elected or appointed to the Village Board or persons appointed to any other Village board, including, but not limited to, the zoning board of appeals, plan commission or appearance commission, whether paid or unpaid. 
Transaction means any matter, including, but not limited to, contracts, work or business with the Village, the sale or purchase of real estate by the Village and any requests for zoning amendments, variations, planned development approval or special permits pending before the Village, upon which a public official or employee performs an official act or action. 
(Code 1959, § 2.83; Ord. No. 4648, § 2, 5-18-2004; Ord. No. 4791, § 2, 9-6-2005) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-3. - Same—Fiduciary duty. 
Public officials and employees, at all times in the performance of their public duties, owe a fiduciary duty to the Village and the citizens thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 2.84)  
Sec. 2-4. - Conflict of interest; disclosure of interest. 
(a)  Any public official or employee who has, or whose family members have, or knows he will acquire an interest in a transaction which is the subject of an official act or action shall not perform or participate in an official act or action with regard to said transaction. Such interest shall be also be disclosed on the record of the board or commission which performs such official act or to the Village manager, in the case of employees. 
(b)  Whenever the performance of an official act or action of a public official or employee shall include deliberation, voting or the rendering of a decision on his part on any matter in which he has or knows he may acquire an interest, he shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of such interest and disqualify himself from participating in the deliberation and the decision-making process, as well as in the voting. In order to avoid the appearance of impropriety, the public official or employee who has disqualified himself from participation under this subsection shall not be present in the same room during which the decision-making process, the deliberations or voting on the issue may occur. 
(c)  No public official or employee, or family member of a public official or employee, or paid consultant of the Village shall represent any person in any action or proceeding against the interests of the Village in any litigation in which the Village is a party. 
(d)  Any, permit, contract, application, ruling, determination or other official action of the Village Board, a Village Committee, or Board or Commission of the Village thereof, or of any Village department or employee, applied for or in any other manner sought, obtained or undertaken by said public official or employee in violation of any of the provisions of sections 2-1 through 2-25 shall be reviewed by the Ethics Committee and a recommendation shall be made to the Village Board regarding the consequences of said violation. 
(e)  When zoning requests, permits or the expenditure of Village funds are the subject of a proceeding before the Board of Trustees or any Board or Commission of the Village, no public official, employee or paid consultant of the Village or immediate family member of a public official, employee, or paid consultant of the Village shall appear on behalf of or represent any person or organization at such proceeding except on behalf of himself/herself or a member of his/her household, or on behalf of an eleemosynary organization. 
(f)  No professional association, organization or company of which the public official or employee is a partner or an employee shall appear on behalf of or represent any person or organization at any proceeding before any board, committee or commission of the Village on more than three separate matters in any one calendar year. When a professional association, organization or company appears before any board or commission on which the public official is a partner or an employee of such professional association, organization or company, the public official shall recuse himself from taking part in any matter presented by such professional association, organization or company, or from reviewing, rendering a decision or in any other way providing advice or assistance to the professional association, organization or company, if he is an employee of that professional association, organization or company. 
(Code 1959, § 2.85; Ord. No. 4363, § 2, 1-15-2002; Ord. No. 5636, § 7, 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-5. - Same—Gift ban. 
(a)  Except as permitted in subsection (b), no public official or public employee, as the case may be, and no family member, shall solicit or accept any gift from any person. 
(b)  Subsection (a) is not applicable to the following exceptions which are mutually exclusive and independent of every other exception: 
(1)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
(2)  Commercially reasonable loans made in the ordinary course of the lender's business; 
(3)  Complimentary copies of trade publications; 
(4)  Holiday greeting cards; 
(5)  Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same conditions as for the general public; 
(6)  Anything for which the public official or public employee or family member pays the fair market value; 
(7)  Any (i) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code or (ii) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate; 
(8)  Educational materials; 
(9)  A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, half brother, half sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee; 
(10)  Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 
a.  The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 
b.  Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and 
c.  Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other public officials or public employees or family members; 
(11)  Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of a public official or public employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of the public official or public employee, and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances; 
(12)  Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts; 
(13)  Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death; or 
(14)  Reasonable hosting, and food or refreshments not exceeding $75.00 per person in value on a single calendar day, furnished to the public official or public employee in connection with official Village business, if furnished by the sponsor of the event relating to the official Village business and the hosting, and food or refreshments are consumed on the premises from which they were purchased, prepared, or catered. Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this subsection, no public employee shall attend any event referred to herein unless and until the Village manager determines that no permit or substantial issue regarding Village regulations is outstanding and/or undetermined with respect to the host and/or sponsor of such event, and the Village manager authorizes the public employee's attendance at the event. The burden is on the public employee to request authorization from the Village manager to attend any event referred to herein. 
(Code 1959, § 2.86; Ord. No. 4648, § 2, 5-18-2004; Ord. No. 4791, § 3, 9-6-2005)  
Sec. 2-6. - Same—Solicitation or receipt of money for advice or assistance. 
No public official or employee, or any of their family members, shall solicit or accept any money or other thing of value, including, but not limited to, gifts, favors, services or promises of future employment, in return for advice or assistance on matters concerning the operation or business of the Village; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prevent a public official or employee, or the spouse of a public official or employee from accepting compensation for services wholly unrelated to the public official's or employee's Village duties and responsibilities and rendered as part of his non-Village employment, occupation or profession. 
(Code 1959, § 2.87)  
Sec. 2-7. - Same—Disclosure of information. 
No public official or employee, with respect to any transaction which is or which is reasonably expected to become the subject of an official act or action, shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the Village or use such information to advance the interest of such public official or employee, or his family members. 
(Code 1959, § 2.88)  
Sec. 2-8. - Same—Private use of public property. 
No public official or employee shall request or permit the use of Village-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal use, convenience or profit, except as allowed by administrative order of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 2.89)  
Sec. 2-9. - Same—Special consideration, treatment or advantage of others. 
No public official or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any person or business entity beyond that which is available to every other citizen. 
(Code 1959, § 2.90)  
Sec. 2-10. - Same—Prohibited political activities. 
(a)  No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited political activity during any compensated time. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the Village in connection with any prohibited political activity. 
(b)  At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity 
(1)  as part of that officer or employee's duties, 
(2)  as a condition of employment, or 
(3)  during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off). 
(c)  No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited political activity. 
(d)  Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this section. 
(e)  No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party, or of a political organization or club. 
(Code 1959, § 2.91; Ord. No. 4648, § 2, 5-18-2004)  
Sec. 2-11. - Same—Whistleblower protection. 
(a)  No public official, employee or agency shall discharge, threaten or otherwise discriminate against a complainant, or public official or employee acting on behalf of a complainant, regarding compensation, terms, conditions, location or privileges of employment because: 
(1)  The complainant, or public official or employee acting on behalf of the complainant, reports or is about to report, verbally or in writing, a violation or a suspected violation of sections 2-1 through 2-25; or 
(2)  A complainant, or public official or employee acting on behalf of the complainant, is requested to participate in an investigation, hearing or inquiry, or any related court action. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a complainant, or public official or employee acting on behalf of a complainant, who knowingly makes a false report. 
(c)  A court, in rendering judgment in an action brought pursuant to this section, shall order, as the court considers appropriate, reinstatement of the complainant, public official or employee acting on behalf of the complainant, the payment of back wages, full reinstatement of fringe benefits and seniority rights, actual damages or any combination of such remedies. A court may also award the complainant all or a portion of the costs of litigation, including reasonable attorney's fees and witness fees, if the court determines that the award is appropriate. 
(Code 1959, § 2.92)  
Sec. 2-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5636, § 8, adopted Feb. 19, 2013, repealed § 2-12, which pertained to disclosure of interest and was derived from Code 1959, § 2.93.  
Sec. 2-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5459, § 3, adopted June 7, 2011, repealed § 2-13 which pertained to Code of Ethics annual disclosure statements and was derived from Code 1959, § 2.94.  
Sec. 2-14. - Same—Incompatible employment. 
No public official or employee, or family member of such public official or employee, shall engage in private employment with, or render services for, any private person who has business transactions with the Village unless such public official shall first make full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such employment or services. 
(Code 1959, § 2.95)  
Sec. 2-15. - Same—Confidential information. 
No public official or employee shall, without prior formal authorization of the public body having jurisdiction, disclose any confidential information concerning any other public official or employee, or any other person, or any property or governmental affairs of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 2.96)  
Sec. 2-16. - Same—Post-employment restrictions. 
(a)  No former public official or employee shall assist or represent any person other than himself or any family member in any judicial or administrative proceeding against the interests of the Village or any of its agencies for a period of one year after the termination of the public official's or employee's term of office or employment, if the public official or employee was counsel of record or participated personally in the said proceeding during his term of office or employment. 
(b)  No former public official or employee, or paid consultant of the Village shall, for a period of one year after the termination of the public official's term of office, or of the employee's employment, or of the consultant's services, appear before any board or commission of the Village, or do business with the Village or any of its departments, or assist or represent any person, other than himself or any family member on any transaction, if the official, employee or consultant participated personally in the subject matter of the transaction during his term of office or employment. Such public official, employee or consultant may be released from the terms of this subsection after review of the relevant facts of his case by the Village manager on the application of such former public official, former employee or consultant. The Village manager shall make a recommendation to the Village Board as to whether or not the former public official, former employee or consultant shall be released from the terms of this subsection, and thereafter, the Village Board shall render its decision, taking into consideration the recommendation of the Village manager. The decision of the Village Board shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 2.97; Ord. No. 5636, § 9, 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5636, § 10, adopted Feb. 19, 2013, repealed § 2-17, which pertained to accounting for benefits obtained in violation of article and was derived from Ord. No. 1959, § 2.98. Information formerly found in this section can now be found in § 2-25 of this Code.  
Sec. 2-18. - Same—Adoption of State Gift Ban Act. 
(a)  The solicitation or the acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the Act is prohibited by any elected or appointed official or any employee of the Village and continues to be prohibited as provided in sections 2-1 through 2-25. 
(b)  If the State supreme court declares the Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et seq.) unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the Village if the act is found unconstitutional by the State supreme court. 
(c)  If the State supreme court declares part of the Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et seq.) unconstitutional, but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, the part of this section relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the Village. 
(Code 1959, §§ 2.102, 2.107; Ord. No. 5636, § 11, 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-19. - Same—Ethics advisor. 
(a)  There is hereby created an Ethics Committee for the Village. The Ethics Committee shall consist of the Village Manager, the Village Attorney, and a third person appointed by the Village Manager. 
(b)  The Ethics Committee shall provide guidance to the elected and appointed officials and employees of the Village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of this section and State ethics laws. The Ethics Committee shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the Village Board. The Ethics Committee shall provide guidance to the elected and appointed officials and employees of the Village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of this section and State ethics laws, and shall report its actions to the Village Board. 
(Code 1959, § 2.103; Ord. No. 4648, § 2, 5-18-2004; Ord. No. 5636, § 12, 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-20. - Same—Complaints. 
All complaints for violations of the State Gift Ban Act shall be filed with the State legislative ethics commission (created by 5 ILCS 425/45(a)(6)). All complaints for violations of the code of ethics shall be heard and processed as otherwise provided under this Code, as may be applicable. 
(Code 1959, § 2.104)  
Sec. 2-21. - Same—Existing code of ethics or gift ban ordinance. 
Sections 2-1 through 2-25 do not repeal or otherwise amend or modify the code which regulates the conduct of Village officials and employees. To the extent that section 2-5 is less restrictive than the State gift ban act and sections 2-1 through 2-25, then the provisions of the act and sections 2-1 through 2-25 shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 425/95. 
(Code 1959, § 2.105)  
Sec. 2-22. - Same—Future amendments to State Gift Ban Act. 
Any amendment to the State Gift Ban Act (5 ILCS 425/1 et seq.) that becomes effective after the passage of the ordinance from which sections 2-1 through 2-25 are derived shall be incorporated into sections 2-1 through 2-25 by reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation and acceptance of gifts. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall be incorporated into sections 2-1 through 2-25 by reference, without formal action by the corporate authorities of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 2.106)  
Sec. 2-23. - Same—Acquisition of property within a tax increment financing district. 
(a)  The provisions of this section hereby specifically supersede the provisions of 65 ILCS 110/65 and 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4(n). 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no public official, employee or family member of a public official or employee shall acquire any direct or indirect interest in any real property, whether by deed conveyance, other form of ownership or control or lease of more than ten consecutive years in any tax increment financing project area established within the municipal boundaries of the Village (referred to in this section as the "TIF project area"), other than a residential dwelling unit to be used solely and exclusively as the public official's, employee's or family member's primary place of residence. 
(c)  Any public official, employee or family member who has or acquires any interest in any real property within a TIF project area or knows that he will acquire an interest in any real property within a TIF project area is hereby required to disclose such possible acquisition or actual acquisition of such interest to the Village clerk under the provisions of this section. 
(d)  If a public official, employee or family member either knows he will acquire such an interest, or has or acquires an interest in any real property within a TIF project area, the public official or employee shall recuse himself from performing or participating in an official act or action or in deliberation, voting or the rendering of a decision on his part on any matter which impacts the subdivision in which the real property is located. 
(e)  If the public official, employee or family member fails or refuses to disclose his interest in any real property within a TIF project area or otherwise violates any of the provisions of this section, the public official or employee shall be subject to penalties and sanctions as otherwise provided under the code of ethics or this Code, as may be applicable. In addition, any public official or employee who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be obligated to disavow and relinquish any real property interest acquired in a TIF project area and disgorge himself of or from any profit earned as a result of acquiring any interest in any real property within a TIF project area, in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(f)  The prohibitions set forth in this section shall be null and void, and of no further force or effect upon termination of tax increment financing for the project area in question. 
(Code 1959, § 2.108)  
Sec. 2-24. - Same—Severability. 
If any provision of sections 2-1 through 2-25 or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of sections 2-1 through 2-25 which can be given effect without the invalid application or provisions, and, to this end, each such invalid provision or invalid application of sections 2-1 through 2-25 is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Code. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the Village that sections 2-1 through 2-25 would have been adopted had any such unconstitutional or otherwise invalid provision or application not been included. 
(Code 1959, § 2.101)  
Sec. 2-25. - Same—Violations; penalties. 
(a)  A person who is found guilty of intentionally violating any provision of section 2-10 of this chapter may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.00. 
(b)  A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 2-5 may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.00. 
(c)  Any person who is found guilty of intentionally making a false report alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the State's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.00. 
(d)  A violation of section 2-10 shall be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by the Village attorney. 
(e)  A violation of section 2-5 may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by the Village attorney. 
(f)  A violation of subsection (c) may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by the Village attorney. 
(g)  In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable hereunder, a public official who is found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of section 2-5, section 2-10, or subsection (c), after a due process hearing before the Village Board, may be subject to discipline, or removal from office as otherwise may be authorized by law. 
(h)  In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable hereunder, a public employee who is found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of section 2-5, section 2-10, or subsection (c) may be subject to discipline and/or dismissal as may otherwise be determined by the Village manager. 
(i)  Any current or former public official or employee shall, upon demand of the Village manager, account for all benefits accruing to such public official or employee as a result of any violation of the provisions of sections 2-1 through 2-25. Any current or former public official or employee receiving any such benefits in violation of any of the provisions of sections 2-1 through 2-25 shall return such benefits and, in addition to any other penalty provided in sections 2-1 through 2-25, shall be subject to a penalty equal to two times the amount of such benefits. If any such public official or employee refuses to account for benefits received in violation of any of the provisions of sections 2-1 through 2-25, the Village attorney may seek an accounting in a court of equity. 
(j)  Any public official or employee, or family member of such public official or employee, who shall engage in private employment with, or render services for, any private person who has business transactions with the Village which is incompatible with his or her official position or employment with the Village shall be required to resign from one of the positions that are incompatible. 
(k)  The penalties provided in subsections (a) through (j) are not exclusive and are in addition to any other regulations relating to public official or public employee sanctions or disciplinary procedures as may otherwise be authorized in the Village Municipal Code for violation of the Code of Ethics. 
(Code 1959, § 2.99; Ord. No. 4648, § 2, 5-18-2004; Ord. No. 4791, § 4, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 5636, § 13, 2-19-2013)  
Secs. 2-26—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - VILLAGE BOARD  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Compensation. 
Each trustee of the Village Board shall, during his term of office, receive as compensation for his services thereon such sum as the president and board of trustees shall provide from time to time, by ordinance or resolution. In the event a trustee is employed by a company that has an express written policy prohibiting employees from accepting outside compensation, then such trustee shall be entitled to refuse compensation under this section. In such an event, the trustee electing to refuse compensation shall notify the Village manager, in writing, of such refusal, and shall provide a copy of the policy of that trustee's employer concerning the prohibition on such compensation. 
(Code 1959, § 2.10; Ord. No. 5435, § 2, 3-15-2011)  
Sec. 2-32. - Regular meetings. 
(a)  At the beginning of each calendar year, the Village Manager shall prepare a schedule of the regular meetings for the year, listing the dates, times and places of such meetings. Such schedules shall be posted in prominent locations at the Village Hall and made available to all persons requesting such schedule. 
(b)  If a change is made in the regular meeting dates, at least ten days' notice of such change shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. Notice of such change shall also be posted in prominent locations at the Village Hall. Notice of such change shall also be supplied to the news media which have filed an annual request for notice as provided by statute. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 5 ILCS 120/2. 
(c)  The Village manager shall, at the beginning of each calendar year, prepare a schedule of the regular meetings for the year, listing the dates, times and places of such meetings. Such schedules shall be posted on the bulletin board and made available to all persons requesting such schedule. 
(Code 1959, § 2.11; Ord. No. 5075, § 1, 1-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-33. - Special meetings. 
(a)  The president, or any three of the trustees, may call special meetings of the Village Board. The persons authorized to call the special meeting may fix the day and hour of such special meeting. Notice of any special meeting shall be given at least five days previously thereto by written notice delivered personally or mailed to the president and each trustee at their residence. If the written notice cannot be personally served, then a copy of the notice shall be considered to be personally delivered if it is left at the residence of the official with a member of his family over the age of ten years. If mailed, such notice shall be deemed to be delivered when deposited in the United States mail so addressed, with postage thereon prepaid. Any member of the Village Board may waive notice of any meeting. The attendance of any member of the Village Board at any meeting shall constitute a waiver of notice of such meeting, except where a trustee attends a meeting for the express purpose of objecting to the transaction of any business because the meeting is not lawfully called or convened. Neither the business to be transacted at, nor the purpose of any regular or special meeting of the board of trustees need be specified in the notice or waiver of notice of such meeting. 
(b)  Public notice of any special, rescheduled or reconvened meeting shall be given by posting a copy of the notice on the bulletin board on the first floor of the Village hall. Copies of such public notice shall also be supplied to any local newspaper of general circulation or any local radio or television station that has filed an annual request for such notice. 
(Code 1959, § 2.12)  
Secs. 2-34—2-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRESIDENT 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Powers and duties. 
The president shall: 
(1)  Be the chief elected officer of the Village; 
(2)  Preside at all meetings of the president and board of trustees and shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution or motion, except where the vote of the trustees has resulted in a tie; where one-half of the trustees elected have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is no tie vote; or where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is required by this Code to adopt an ordinance, resolution or motion; 
(3)  Supervise the conduct of the officers of the Village, except the trustees; 
(4)  Examine and investigate all complaints made against any Village officer and cause all violations of duties or other neglects to be promptly punished or reported to the proper tribunal for correction; 
(5)  Sign all commissions, permits, licenses and warrants on the treasurer granted or ordered by the president and board of trustees; 
(6)  Do all such other acts as shall be required of him by law or ordinance; 
(7)  Report to the board, at each regular meeting thereof, any and all acts that he may have authorized or committed in connection with authority conferred on him by this Code, or by any ordinance or resolution passed by the board; and 
(8)  Appoint an acting Village president if a temporary absence prevents him from performing his duties. 
(Code 1959, § 2.15)  
Sec. 2-52. - Compensation. 
The president shall receive such compensation for his services as the president and board of trustees shall by provide ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 2.16)  
Sec. 2-53. - Temporary incapacity of Village president. 
If the Village president is temporarily absent due to an incapacity to perform official duties, the corporate authorities shall elect one of their members to act as president pro tem in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35.  
Secs. 2-54—2-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RULES OF ORDER 
 
Sec. 2-71. - Established. 
(a)  Rule 1, order of business. The president shall take the chair at the hour at which the meeting shall have been called, and call the members to order. If a quorum is present, he shall cause the minutes of the last meeting to be approved, and the board of trustees shall take up business in the following order: 
(1)  A consideration of the minutes of the last meeting, any amendment or amendments thereto and the approval of such minutes. 
(2)  Report of the Village president. 
(3)  Report of the Village manager. 
(4)  Report of the Village attorney. 
(5)  Reports of special committees. 
(6)  Public hearings. 
(7)  Consent agenda and approval of bills. 
(8)  Old business. 
(9)  New business. 
(10)  Matters to be presented by the public. 
(11)  Adjourn. 
(12)  Other business, to be listed as a line entry on the agenda for all business under subsections (a)(2), (a)(7) and (a)(8). 
(b)  Rule 2, order and decorum. The president shall preserve order and decorum; may speak to points of order in preference to any other member; and shall decide questions of order, subject to an appeal to the trustees by any two members, on which appeal no member shall speak more than twice, unless by leave of the board of trustees. 
(c)  Rule 3, questions and motions; chairman pro tem. Every question or motion, when seconded, shall be stated by the president before it is open for debate. When a question is put, if the president is in doubt or a division is called for by any member, the trustees shall decide. The president may call any member to perform the duties of the chair, but such substitution shall not extend beyond an adjournment, and any trustee acting as chairman pro tem shall still be entitled to vote as a trustee. 
(d)  Rule 4, appointment of committees. The president shall appoint all special committees, unless otherwise specifically directed by the board of trustees, in which case they shall be appointed by vote of the board of trustees. 
(e)  Rule 5, right to speak. Every member, previous to speaking, shall address the presiding officer as "Mr./Madam President," but shall not proceed with his remarks until named and recognized by the chair. 
(f)  Rule 6, transgression of rules. If any member transgresses the rules of the board of trustees, the president or any member may call him to order, and, when called to order, the member shall take his seat, unless permitted to explain. 
(g)  Rule 7, speaking more than twice on the same subject. No member shall speak more than twice on the same subject, unless by consent of a majority of the trustees present. 
(h)  Rule 8, duty to vote; motions in writing. Every member, when a question is taken, shall vote, unless excused by the board of trustees, unless he shall be directly interested in the question, in which case, no such member shall vote. All motions shall be in writing if the president, clerk or any member so demands. 
(i)  Rule 9, disposition of reports or motions. After a report is made or a motion stated by the president, it shall be in possession of the board of trustees, but it may be amended or laid on the table, or withdrawn at any time before the question is put. 
(j)  Rule 10, order of motions, etc. When a question is under consideration, no motion shall be received, but to adjourn; lay on the table; the previous question; postpone to a certain day; to commit; to amend; to substitute, or postpone indefinitely, which several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they are arranged in this rule. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and be decided without debate. 
(k)  Rule 11, preclusion of amendments, etc. A motion for the previous question, to lay on the table or to commit until it is decided shall preclude all amendments or substitutes and debate of the main question; and a motion to postpone a question indefinitely, or to adjourn it to a certain day, until it is decided, shall preclude all amendments and substitutes to the main question. 
(l)  Rule 12, previous question. The previous question shall be as follows: "Shall the main question now be put?" 
(m)  Rule 13, blanks to be filled, etc. When a blank is to be filled, and different sums or times proposed, the question shall first be put upon the largest sum or the longest time. 
(n)  Rule 14, vote necessary for passage of ordinance. Unless otherwise required by statute of the State, the concurrence of a majority of all the members elected to the board of trustees, including the president, shall be necessary for the passage of any ordinance. This means at least four trustees must concur on the proposition, or three trustees and the president. When a vote greater than the majority of the corporate trustees elected is required by the statutes to adopt an ordinance, the president may vote. Any trustee present and not voting when a vote is being taken shall be recorded in the negative, unless excused under rule 8 as set forth in subsection (h) of this section. 
(o)  Rule 15, introduction and adoption of ordinances. Except when this rule may be suspended, the board of trustees shall consider and act upon all ordinances in the following manner: an ordinance shall be listed on the meeting agenda when first introduced and it shall be announced that copies thereof are available for public distribution. The board may consider and discuss the ordinance at such first meeting, but no ordinance shall be passed at such meeting when it is so introduced. The ordinance shall be considered again at the next regular meeting of the board, at which time it shall also be listed on the meeting agenda. At the next regular meeting of the board, the ordinance shall either be passed, passed as amended, continued to a subsequent meeting, rejected or otherwise acted upon. All ordinances shall be numbered consecutively by the clerk after passage. 
(p)  Rule 16, report of committees. All special committees to whom any matter may be referred shall report thereon, in writing, at the next regular meeting, giving the recommendation of the majority of the committee. Those not in favor may present a minority report. Every committee, in reporting upon the subject referred to it, shall attach to its report all resolutions, petitions, remonstrances and other papers in its possession relating to the subject matter referred to, and any such report, after being read, shall be referred for final action to the next regular meeting of the board of trustees upon the request of any two trustees present. 
(q)  Rule 17, questions containing several propositions. When a question before the board of trustees contains several distinct propositions, any member may call for a division of the question so as to take a vote on each proposition separately. 
(r)  Rule 18, petitions. All petitions addressed to the board of trustees shall be in writing and filed by the clerk, unless withdrawn by leave of the board of trustees, except as otherwise provided by statute. 
(s)  Rule 19, filing and preservation of records, etc. All reports made by committees, and all resolutions and ordinances adopted by the board of trustees shall be filed and preserved by the clerk. The Village manager shall publish all ordinances, maps and other documents and instruments required by law to be published either in a newspaper, or by printing in book or pamphlet form, in the manner provided by law. Where publication is by printing in book or pamphlet form, the printing shall contain the legend "Published by Authority of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Glenview, Illinois," and the date of publication. 
(t)  Rule 20, resolutions and motions entered in minutes. In all cases when a resolution or motion shall be entered in the minutes of the board of trustees, the name of the member moving the resolution or motion shall also be entered in the minutes. 
(u)  Rule 21, reconsiderations. A member who votes with the prevailing side or any trustee who was absent at the time the vote was taken may move a reconsideration, but no such motion shall be in order after the expiration of the next meeting of the board of trustees. 
(v)  Rule 22, contracts. No contract in writing, to which the Village is a part, shall be considered as entered into until it has first been read in an open meeting of the board of trustees, and where a bond is required, the amount of the bond for the faithful performance thereof shall be fixed by the board of trustees, the sureties approved and the president and clerk directed to execute such contract by a vote of a majority of the members elected to the board of trustees. 
(w)  Rule 23, payment of bills. All bills, before being paid, shall be certified to by the Village employee having knowledge that the material or services charged for has been properly and fully supplied, furnished or rendered and that the charge is a just and proper one for the quantities or services stated and shall be further approved by the Village manager. Upon the submission of an itemized list of bills so certified and approved, the board of trustees may authorize and direct the Village treasurer to pay the bills. 
(x)  Rule 24, nonmembers addressing board. It shall not be allowable for any person not a member of the board of trustees, except the Village officers, to address such board without the unanimous consent of the members present, and then only once on the same subject, without further consent. 
(y)  Rule 25, censorship or expulsion of members. Any member acting or appearing in a disgraceful manner, or using violent and insulting language to or about any member of the board of trustees, or who does not obey the orders of the chair, shall, on motion, be censured by a majority vote of the members present, or expelled by a two-thirds vote of all members elected. 
(z)  Rule 26, ayes and nays. The individual ayes and nays shall always be taken on the voting upon all ordinances, resolutions and motions and entered on the journal, and the roll shall be called in rotating order. 
(aa)  Rule 27, adherence to rules. The rules or procedures set forth in subsections (a)—(z) of this section and order of business shall be adhered to invariably by the board of trustees, unless suspended as provided in subsection (dd) of this section. 
(bb)  Rule 28, new business. All new business introduced at any meeting shall be referred to the appropriate committee, lie over until the next meeting or be acted upon at once. 
(cc)  Rule 29, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. Whenever a question of parliamentary law, not fully covered by the rules set forth in subsections (a)—(bb) of this section, shall arise, such question shall be decided in accordance with the rules of parliamentary law as laid down in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(dd)  Rule 30, suspension, etc., of rules. Any or all of the rules set forth in subsections (a)—(cc) of this section may be suspended or amended, or additional rules adopted by the affirmative vote of four trustees. 
(ee)  Rule 31, attendance by members of boards and commissions at open meetings other than by physical presence. 
(1)  If a quorum of the members of a public body is physically present as required by Section 2.01 of the Act, a majority of the public body may allow a member of that body to attend the meeting by other means if the member is prevented from physically attending because of: (i) personal illness or disability, (ii) employment purposes or the business of the public body, or (iii) a family or other emergency. "Other means" is by video or audio conference. 
(2)  If a member wishes to attend a meeting by other means, the member must notify the recording secretary or clerk of the public body before the meeting unless advance notice is impractical. 
(3)  A majority of the public body may allow a member to attend a meeting by other means only in accordance with and to the extent allowed by Public Act 094-1058 adopted by the corporate authorities. The rules must conform to the requirements and restrictions of this section, may further limit the extent to which attendance by other means is allowed, and may provide for the giving of additional notice to the public or further facilitate public access to meetings. 
(Code 1959, § 2.14; Ord. No. 4926, § 2, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 5830, § 2, 8-5-2014)  
Secs. 2-72—2-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Appointive officers. 
Unless otherwise provided, all appointive officers of the Village shall be appointed by the president, by and with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, at the first regular meeting of the board held after the regular election of members of the board of trustees, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, and shall hold their office for such time as the board, by ordinance or resolution, provides. Any officers so appointed may be suspended or removed from office at any time by a majority vote of the entire board at any regular meeting or at any special meeting called in accordance with law. All such vacancies may be filled in the manner provided in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 2.1)  
Sec. 2-82. - Oath of office. 
All elected or appointed officers of the Village shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the ordinances of the Village of Glenview, and that I will faithfully discharge all the duties of ___________, according to the best of my ability," which oath or affirmation so subscribed shall be filed in the office of the Village clerk. 
(Code 1959, § 2.2)  
Sec. 2-83. - Bond—Required. 
All officers of the Village shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, give such bond may, by ordinance or resolution, be provided, or as may be required by the statutes of the State in such case made and provided. If any such officer shall not take the oath or affirmation as required, and present such bond to the Village clerk within ten days after notification by the Village clerk of his election or appointment, his office shall be declared vacant. Such bond, however, if not already approved as to form and sureties by the president and board of trustees, shall be received by the clerk, subject to the approval of the president and board of trustees, and if the president and board of trustees shall, at the next regular meeting, require a different form of bond or other sureties, the Village clerk shall immediately notify the officer filing such bond of the required changes, and in case a new bond is not filed complying with such requirements within ten days after such notification, the office of the principal in the bond shall be declared vacant. 
(Code 1959, § 2.4)  
Sec. 2-84. - Same—Amount; payment of premiums. 
All officers and employees shall post a bond in such amount and with such sureties as the board of trustees shall, by resolution, require. The premiums of all such bonds shall be paid from the Village treasury. 
(Code 1959, § 2.5)  
Sec. 2-85. - Same—Execution, sureties and approval. 
The bond of each officer or employee of the Village, as required, shall be executed in favor of the Village and shall be secured by any surety company licensed to do business in the State and shall be approved by the president and board of trustees. 
(Code 1959, § 2.6)  
Sec. 2-86. - Delivery of books and other property to successor. 
Any person whose term of office shall have expired as an officer of the Village shall, within five days after notification and request by the Village president, deliver to his successor in office all books, property and effects of every description that may be in his possession, and belonging to the Village, or pertaining to his office. 
(Code 1959, § 2.7)  
Sec. 2-87. - Additional duties, etc. 
Each officer shall perform such other and further duties, besides the specific ones called for in this Code, and be subject to such other lawful rules and regulations as the board of trustees may require from time to time, or by other ordinances establish, including regulations established by the Village manager. 
(Code 1959, § 2.8)  
Sec. 2-88. - Access to books, etc. 
The president or any member of the board of trustees and the Village manager shall, at any time they so desire, have free access to the examination of all books, papers, vouchers, warrants, entries of accounts of each and every such office, and upon a resolution adopted by the board of trustees, or an order promulgated by the Village manager, demand a written report on any matter which may be designated in such resolution or such order of the Village manager, and within the time so set forth. 
(Code 1959, § 2.9)  
Sec. 2-89. - Eligibility for office of president or trustee. 
No person shall be eligible for the office of Village president or Village trustee unless he is a qualified elector of the Village and has resided therein for at least one year preceding his election or appointment. 
(Code 1959, § 2.80)  
Sec. 2-90. - Eligibility for Village office, board or commission. 
No person shall be eligible for any other Village office, board or commission unless he has resided in the Village for 30 days next preceding his election or appointment. Such requirement shall not apply to the Village engineer, Village finance director, Village treasurer created under section 2-251, director of development or other officers who require technical training or knowledge, nor to the environmental review commission, Village attorney, Village firefighters or police officers, or appearance commission members who meet the requirements of being an owner or officer of a corporation owning business, commercial or industrial property in the Village as noted in chapter 54, article III. 
(Code 1959, § 2.81)  
Secs. 2-91—2-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MANAGER 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Creation of office. 
The office of Village manager is hereby created. 
(Code 1959, § 2.17)  
Sec. 2-132. - Appointment and removal; qualifications; vacancy. 
(a)  The Village Manager shall be appointed by the president and board of trustees for an indefinite term. He shall be chosen on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office as set forth in this division. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the Village or the State, but, during his tenure of office, he shall reside within the Village. Neither the Village president, nor any of the Village trustees shall receive such appointment during the term for which he shall have been elected or within one year after the expiration of his term. 
(b)  The Village manager may be removed by the Village Board by a majority vote of the entire board at any time. The manager may demand written charges or a written statement of the reasons for removal, which the Village Board shall furnish to the manager within 20 days after the filing of such request. During such 20-day period, the manager may be suspended from office with or without pay. The action of the Village Board in removing the manager from office shall be final. 
(c)  Any vacancy in the office of Village manager shall be filled within 60 days after the effective date of such vacancy. 
(Code 1959, § 2.18)  
Sec. 2-133. - Powers and duties. 
Purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget in accordance with the procurement policy and procedures ("procurement policy") which may be amended from time to time. Amendments to the procurement policy shall be approved by the Village Board; however, the Village Manager retains the authority to approve procedural changes. He/she may not purchase any items or approve any change order which exceeds any budget appropriation until the Village Board has increased the appropriation, provided that, for competitively bid purchases of more than $25,000.00, he/she shall be required to receive sealed bids and shall present such bids to the Village Board for approval or rejection and the Village Board shall determine the responsibility of bidders. He shall be responsible to the Village Board for the proper administration of all affairs of the Village. He shall have the power, and be required, to: 
(1)  Appoint and remove officers. Appoint or remove all non-elective officers and employees of the Village, except the Village prosecutor, Village collector, Village treasurer, members of boards and commissions or ad hoc committees as defined herein, and the Village attorney. Such appointments or removals shall be based upon merit and the qualifications of such officers or employees, without regard to any political belief or affiliation. Any removal of an officer by the Village Manager shall be reported to the Village Board at or prior to the next regular meeting of the Village Board. 
(2)  Appoint and remove employees. Employ and discharge all employees, other than those referred to in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)  Annual report on finances and administrative activities. Prepare and submit to the Village Board, at the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the Village for the preceding year. 
(4)  Advise and make recommendations to Village Board on financial conditions and future needs. Keep the Village Board advised of the financial condition and future needs of the Village and make such recommendations as he may deem desirable. 
(5)  Recommend salaries and employee compensation packages Recommend to the president and board of trustees the salaries and compensation packages to be paid and provided to each appointive officer and subordinate employee of the Village and otherwise provide for full and meaningful disclosure of employee compensation in the yearly budget for review and approval by the corporate authorities as a part of the yearly budget process. 
(6)  Make general recommendations. Recommend to the president and board of trustees, in writing, from time to time, for adoption, such measures as the Village manager may deem necessary and expedient. 
(7)  Consolidate offices, positions, departments and units; department head. Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his jurisdiction, with the approval of the president and Village Board. The Village manager may be the head of one or more departments. 
(8)  Attend Village Board meetings. Attend all meetings of the Village Board, unless excused therefrom by the board, except when his removal is under consideration. The Village manager shall have the privilege of taking part in the discussion of all matters coming before the board. He shall be entitled to notice of all meetings, regular and special, of the board. 
(9)  Purchase materials, supplies and equipment. Purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget, but he/she may not purchase any items or approve any change order which exceeds any budget appropriation until the Village Board has increased the appropriation, provided that, for competitively bid purchases that will exceed $25,000.00, he/she shall be required to receive sealed bids and determine the responsibility of bidders. Such procurement is not, however, undertaken pursuant to section 8-9-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-9-2, and the Village Board expressly reserves the right to make any award which, in its sole discretion, best serves the public interest. The Village manager shall advise the Village Board as to whether or not any contract offered is desirable, or which of several contracts offered is most desirable for the Village. He may issue such rules and regulations governing requisitions and the transactions of the business of purchasing between himself as purchasing agent and the heads of the departments, officers and employees of the Village as the Village Board may approve. In case of accidents or other circumstances creating an emergency, the Village manager may award contracts and make purchases for the purposes of repairing damages caused by such accident or meeting such public emergency, but he shall promptly file with the Village Board a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity of such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(10)  Enforce ordinances. Ensure that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced. 
(11)  Authorize to investigate Village affairs or departments and divisions. Make investigations into the affairs of the Village or any department or division thereof, and investigate all complaints in relation to all matters concerning the administration of the government of the Village and in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the Village, and ensure that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the Village are faithfully observed. 
(12)  Ex officio Village collector and Village treasurer. The Village manager shall act as ex officio as both Village collector and Village treasurer, and exercise and perform all duties and be subject to all the requirements and obligations appertaining to such officers. 
(13)  Devote to duty. Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties. 
(14)  Coordinator of the emergency management agency. The Village manager or his nominee shall act as the coordinator of the emergency management agency to carry out the directives of the Village president during any period in which an emergency has been declared pursuant to the applicable provisions of chapter 26, article II of the Code. 
(15)  [ Decision-making. ] Make decisions where currently required to be made by department director(s) or department heads, in lieu of said department director(s) or department head, unless otherwise explicitly prohibited in the village municipal code or state statute. In the event a vacancy exists, and where the Code provides for any position with decision-making authority consistent with the job description of said vacant position, the Village manager may assume the decision-making authority of the vacant position or delegate such authority to his or her designee. Unless otherwise provided in the municipal code or state statute, the decision of the Village manager shall be final. 
(16)  Perform additional duties. Perform such other duties as may be required of him by the Village Board or president, not inconsistent with the Village ordinances or the law. 
(Code 1959, § 2.19; Ord. No. 4455, § 2, 11-19-2002; Ord. No. 4882, § 2, 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5032, §§ 2—4, 10-2-2007; Ord. No. 5568, § 2, 6-19-2012; Ord. No. 5636, § 5, 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5674, §§ 2, 3, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 6188, §§ 2, 3, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 2-134. - Interference of Village Board with administrative service. 
Individual members of the Village Board shall deal with the administrative service solely through the Village manager and no board member shall give orders to any subordinates of the Village manager, either publicly or privately, or direct their appointment or removal. 
(Code 1959, § 2.20)  
Sec. 2-135. - Bond and compensation. 
(a)  The Village manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the Village Board, and such bond is to be conditioned for the performance of his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the Village. The bond shall name the Village manager as principal in his capacity as Village manager and also in his capacity as ex officio treasurer and collector of the Village. 
(b)  The Village manager shall receive such compensation as the Village Board shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 2.21)  
Secs. 2-136—2-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ATTORNEY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Appointment, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5(a)(5). 
 
Sec. 2-161. - Creation of office; term. 
There is hereby created the office of Village attorney. The term of such office shall be for and during the fiscal year in which the Village attorney is appointed, and until his successor has been appointed and has qualified by taking the oath of office. 
(Code 1959, § 2.51)  
Sec. 2-162. - Appointment; qualifications. 
The office of Village attorney shall be filled by appointment by the president and board of trustees, and shall be made immediately after the biennial installation of the trustees, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, and annually thereafter. The Village attorney shall be a regularly licensed and practicing member of the bar of the State. It shall not be a condition of his employment that he reside within the corporate limits of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 2.52)  
Sec. 2-163. - Duties. 
The duties of the Village attorney shall be to advise the president and board of trustees, the committees thereof, and the officers of the Village on legal questions; attend the regular meeting of the board, when required; render a legal opinion on questions submitted to him; draft ordinances and legal documents on behalf of the Village; appear for and represent the Village in all legal proceedings to which it may be a party, and perform such other duties in behalf of the Village as pertain to the position of Village attorney; and, at the request of the president and board of trustees, make and file with the Village clerk a written report showing the business transacted, the services rendered by him, the status of pending litigation and unfinished business, and all other material facts of public interest pertaining to the legal business of the Village for the preceding fiscal year. It shall further be the duty of the Village attorney to spend one-half day each week within the Village for the purpose of consulting with municipal officers of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 2.53)  
Sec. 2-164. - Compensation. 
(a)  The compensation of the Village attorney shall be such sum as shall be established from time to time by ordinance or resolution adopted by the president and board of trustees. In special assessment projects, he shall be paid such amount as may be allowed by State statute. 
(b)  The Village attorney shall also be paid out of the Village treasury such expenses as may be necessary in the performance of his duties as Village attorney, provided that such expenses have been previously authorized to be incurred by the president and board of trustees or subsequently approved by them. 
(c)  The Village attorney shall be paid for services in other proceedings before courts and commissions, and any other litigated or contested matters on behalf of the Village that may be required of him, and such reasonable fees as may be fixed by the board of trustees. 
(Code 1959, § 2.54)  
Secs. 2-165—2-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CLERK 
 
Sec. 2-191. - Duties in general. 
The Village clerk shall keep the corporate seal, to be provided under the direction of the president and board of trustees, and all papers belonging to the Village. He shall attend all meetings of the president and board of trustees, and keep a record of its proceedings; and copies of all papers duly filed in his office and other records and files of his office, certified by him under the corporate seal, shall be evidenced in all courts in like manner as if the originals were produced. 
(Code 1959, § 2.22)  
Sec. 2-192. - Issuance of notices to the board of trustees, etc. 
The Village clerk shall, in addition to the duties imposed upon him by section 2-191, issue notices to the members and all officers of the board of trustees and other persons, when directed to do so by the board or the chairman of any committee of such board and when required by law. 
(Code 1959, § 2.23)  
Sec. 2-193. - Attesting licenses and other documents. 
The Village clerk shall attest all the licenses granted by the president and board of trustees under the ordinances of the Village, and all other documents required to be signed by the president. 
(Code 1959, § 2.24)  
Sec. 2-194. - Delivery of communications, resolutions and ordinances. 
(a)  The Village clerk shall, without delay, deliver to the officers of the Village and all committees of the board, all resolutions and communications referred to such officers or committees by that body. 
(b)  The Village clerk shall, without delay, deliver to the president of the Village, all ordinances or resolutions under his charge, which may be required to be approved or otherwise acted upon by the president, with all papers on which such ordinances or resolutions were founded. 
(Code 1959, § 2.25)  
Sec. 2-195. - Notification of successful candidates or appointments. 
(a)  The Village clerk shall, within five days after the result of any election shall be declared, or appointment made, notify such person so elected or appointed to any Village office of his election or appointment, and, unless such person shall qualify within ten days after such notice, the office shall become vacant. 
(b)  In any election for Village office, not more than three of the judges in any one precinct shall be supporters of any one organization listing candidates on a certificate of nomination filed with the Village clerk for such election. 
(Code 1959, § 2.26)  
Sec. 2-196. - Appointment of deputy. 
The Village clerk may appoint a deputy, by and with the consent of the president and board of trustees, who, in the temporary absence of the Village clerk, in case of sickness or otherwise, shall be empowered to perform all the duties of the Village clerk. 
(Code 1959, § 2.27)  
Sec. 2-197. - Filing and preserving official bond, oath of office, etc. 
The Village clerk shall file and preserve, in a convenient form for reference and use, according to the date of filing and subject matters, all official bonds, oaths of office, written reports of officers and committees, vouchers and all papers and documents filed with him or deposited in his care, and promptly turn over such materials to his successor in office, taking a receipt therefor. 
(Code 1959, § 2.28)  
Sec. 2-198. - Salary. 
The salary of the Village clerk shall be in such amount as shall be fixed by the president and the board of trustees from time to time by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1959, § 2.29)  
Sec. 2-199. - Additional duties and functions. 
In addition to the duties specified in this division, the Village clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by the ordinances of the Village and the statutes of the State. 
(Code 1959, § 2.30)  
Secs. 2-200—2-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - COLLECTOR 
 
Sec. 2-221. - Creation of office. 
There is hereby created the office of Village collector. The Village manager shall act ex officio as Village collector and shall exercise and perform all duties and be subject to all requirements and obligations pertaining to such office. 
(Code 1959, § 2.39)  
Sec. 2-222. - Bond. 
The Village collector shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, execute to the Village a bond in such sum as may be required by the board of trustees and the statutes of the State, with sureties to be approved by the board of trustees, conditioned for the faithful discharge of the duties of his office, and the bond shall be filed in the office of the Village clerk within ten days after the approval and confirmation by the board of trustees of his appointment. The bond of the Village manager, in his ex officio capacity as treasurer and collector, shall satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 2.40)  
Sec. 2-223. - New bond or additional sureties. 
The board of trustees shall have the right to demand a new bond or further and additional sureties from time to time as, in its opinion, may be necessary for the protection of the Village, and if the original bond filed by such collector shall not be approved, or having been approved by the board of trustees, further or additional sureties shall thereafter be required, notice of such action by the board of trustees shall be delivered to the collector, whereupon, within ten days after the receipt of such notice, he shall file a new bond or furnish additional sureties, as the case may be. Failure to file such new bond or furnish such additional sureties as required by the board of trustees, within ten days after receipt of notice as set forth in this section, shall create a vacancy in such office. 
(Code 1959, § 2.41)  
Sec. 2-224. - Books of account. 
The Village collector shall keep books of account, which shall show all moneys received by him and all other matters pertaining to his office. Such books shall be kept in a clear and methodical manner and shall be open at all times to the inspection of the president, any member of the board of trustees and any person or other officer of the Village authorized by law to inspect such books, and he shall keep such books as the president and board of trustees shall direct from time to time. 
(Code 1959, § 2.44)  
Sec. 2-225. - Annual reports. 
The Village collector shall annually, between April 1 through April 10, file with the Village clerk and the Village treasurer a complete list of all assessments returned as delinquent by him to the county collector, stating the amount returned on each assessment, and he shall make an annual report of the business of his office on April 30 of each year. 
(Code 1959, § 2.46)  
Sec. 2-226. - Serving, posting and publishing notices of special assessments, special taxes and other warrants and matters for collection; annual returns to County officials of unpaid collections. 
(a)  The Village collector shall serve, post and publish, or cause to be served, posted and published, all notices required by law or ordinances of the Village to be served, posted or published in connection with the collection of various special assessments, special taxes and other warrants and matters in his hands for collection. 
(b)  The Village collector shall annually make returns to the county treasurer and ex officio county collector of all delinquent special assessments and special taxes, and any and all other taxes in his hand for collection which he has been unable to collect at the time and in the manner required by law and which, by law, this Code or other ordinances of the Village, he is required to return to such county collector. 
(Code 1959, § 2.47)  
Sec. 2-227. - Duties upon expiration of term of office. 
At the expiration of his term of office, the Village collector shall deliver to his successor in office all warrants, books, files, stationery and other property in his possession relating to the conduct of such office, taking a complete detailed itemized receipt therefor, in duplicate, and he shall deliver to the Village treasurer a complete detailed and accurate statement of all moneys collected by him subsequent to the date of his last report and pay such amounts over to the treasurer, taking his receipt therefor, in duplicate, and shall submit to the president and board of trustees a report of all moneys collected by him subsequent to the date of his last report from any and every source whatsoever and shall file with such report a receipt from his successor in office for the warrants, books, files, stationery and other property turned over to him, and a receipt from the Village treasurer for the moneys collected by him as set forth in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 2.48)  
Secs. 2-228—2-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - TREASURER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Duties, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40. 
 
Sec. 2-251. - Office created; duties in general; bond. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of the treasurer of the Village. The Village manager shall act ex officio as the Village treasurer and shall exercise and perform all duties and be subject to all the requirements and obligations pertaining to such office. 
(b)  The treasurer of the Village shall furnish a surety bond from an approved surety company in such sum as may be required by the board of trustees and the statutes of the State in such case made and provided. 
(Code 1959, § 2.31)  
Sec. 2-252. - Receipt and payment of moneys. 
(a)  The Village treasurer shall keep a true and accurate account of all moneys paid into the treasury, from whom and from what account received, and pay out all such sums of money on warrants signed only by the president and attested by the Village clerk, as may be ordered by the president and board of trustees. Such warrants, in all cases, must state upon what particular fund they are drawn, but all bonds and interest coupons issued by the Village, which may be due and payable, shall be considered as warrants, and shall be duly paid by the Village treasurer. 
(b)  No money shall be paid by the Village treasurer upon any warrant, bond or coupon, except from moneys in the particular fund or appropriation designated in such warrant, bond or coupon, or upon which they have been drawn, nor shall any amount be transferred by the Village treasurer from one fund to another, after being received and credited by him, nor appropriated to any other purpose than the one for which it has been paid, without the necessary proceedings to such ends. 
(Code 1959, § 2.32)  
Sec. 2-253. - Method of keeping books generally. 
The Village treasurer's books must at all times show the exact condition of the funds under his control, of each account and appropriation, and all receipts and disbursements, and such books, together with all orders, blanks and other papers, belonging to the Village, and in his custody, shall be handed over by him to his successor. He shall, upon all receipts of money, enter and place such receipts under the proper appropriation, to the credit of the several accounts upon which such moneys were paid, and state from whom they were received. He shall keep a separate account with each fund or appropriation, stating the amount of such appropriation and the several debits and credits belonging thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 2.33)  
Sec. 2-254. - Special assessments. 
The Village treasurer shall keep an account with each special assessment, under its general description and number, and show the amount assessed for public and special benefits, and all moneys received on any special assessment shall be held by the Village treasurer for that fund, only to be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the assessment was made, and such money shall not be used for any other purpose whatsoever, except as may have been provided in the ordinance for the improvement, or as may be otherwise permitted by statute or order of court. 
(Code 1959, § 2.34)  
Sec. 2-255. - Monthly report of finance committee. 
The Village treasurer shall, at the first meeting of each month, render a report in writing, under oath, to the committee on finance, showing, in detail, the receipts and disbursements during the second month previous, and the state and condition of every account not closed on his books, thereby showing a balance sheet of the financial sheet of the financial affairs of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 2.35)  
Sec. 2-256. - Cancellation of paid warrants. 
The Village treasurer shall cancel all warrants paid or redeemed by him, and shall attach the warrants as paid, each month, to his monthly report, as well as duplicate receipts for moneys received, and such other vouchers as may cover, in detail, all his transactions for the month, as shown in such report. Upon examination and approval by the committee on finance and the president and board of trustees, the Village clerk shall take charge of the report, warrants and vouchers and place them on file in his office. He shall keep an accurate list of all warrants canceled by him. 
(Code 1959, § 2.36)  
Sec. 2-257. - Annual report. 
The Village treasurer shall annually, within 30 days after the close of the fiscal year, make out and file with the Village clerk a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures, and all his transactions as Village treasurer during the preceding fiscal year, and shall show in such account the state of the treasury at the close of the fiscal year, which account the Village clerk shall immediately publish in accordance with law. 
(Code 1959, § 2.37)  
Sec. 2-258. - Personal use of Village funds. 
The Village treasurer shall keep all moneys belonging to the Village that may be in his possession separate and distinct from his own moneys, and is prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the Village money or warrants in his custody or keeping for his own benefit or the benefit of any other person whatsoever. 
(Code 1959, § 2.38)  
Secs. 2-259—2-280. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - BUDGET OFFICER 
 
Sec. 2-281. - Creation of office; appointment. 
The office of budget officer is hereby created. The Village manager or his designee shall serve as the budget officer. 
(Code 1959, § 2.74)  
Sec. 2-282. - Duties. 
The budget officer shall exercise the statutory powers and duties of his office as provided and set forth in 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1, and pursuant to these duties, he shall: 
(1)  Permit, encourage and establish the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management procedures. 
(2)  Compile an annual budget in accordance with section 2-283. 
(3)  Examine all books and records of the Village which relate to moneys received and paid out by the Village, as well as debts and accounts receivable, and amounts owed by or to the Village. 
(4)  Obtain such additional information from the Village departments as may be useful to the budget officer for compiling an annual budget, and such information is to be furnished in the form required by the budget officer. 
(5)  Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are made by the Village, except as authorized by the budget. 
(Code 1959, § 2.75) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.2.  
Sec. 2-283. - Annual budget contents. 
(a)  The budget officer shall compile a budget, which shall contain estimates of revenues available to the Village for the fiscal year for which the budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the Village. 
(b)  Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal management practices. Substantial conformity to a chart of accounts recommended by the National Committee on Governmental Accounting, the comptroller of the State or the department of local government affairs of the State or successor agencies shall be deemed proof of such conformity. 
(c)  The budget shall contain actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for the two years immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. As far as possible, the fiscal data for such two preceding fiscal years shall be itemized in a manner which is in conformity with the chart of accounts approved as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Each budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made. 
(Code 1959, § 2.76)  
Sec. 2-284. - Capital equipment purchase, repair or replacement fund. 
(a)  In the preparation by the budget officer of the annual budget, no more than three percent of equalized assessed value of property subject to taxation by the Village may be accumulated in the capital equipment purchase, repair or replacement fund. 
(b)  Expenditures from the capital equipment purchase, repair or replacement fund shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which the purchase, repair or replacement of capital equipment will occur. 
(Code 1959, § 2.77)  
Sec. 2-285. - Public inspection, notice and hearing on annual budget. 
(a)  The president and board of trustees shall make the tentative annual budget conveniently available to public inspection for at least ten days prior to the passage of the annual budget. 
(b)  Not less than one week after the tentative annual budget is made available for public inspection, and prior to final action on the budget, the president and board of trustees shall hold a public hearing on the tentative annual budget, after which hearing, the tentative budget, without any further inspection, notice or hearing, may be further revised and adopted by vote of the president and board of trustees. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by publication of a legal notice in a newspaper having a general circulation in the Village at least one week prior to the time of the hearing. 
(Code 1959, § 2.78)  
Sec. 2-286. - Adoption of annual budget. 
Adoption of the annual budget by the president and board of trustees shall be in lieu of adoption of the appropriation ordinance as required by statute. The annual budget need not be published, except in a manner provided for in section 2-285. The annual budget shall be adopted by the president and board of trustees before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies. 
(Code 1959, § 2.79)  
Secs. 2-287—2-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - PROSECUTOR 
 
Sec. 2-311. - Creation of office; term. 
There is hereby created the office of Village prosecutor. The term of office shall be for and during the fiscal year in which the Village prosecutor is appointed and until a successor has been appointed and is qualified by taking the oath of office. 
(Code 1959, § 2.59)  
Sec. 2-312. - Appointment; qualifications. 
The office of Village prosecutor shall be filled by appointment by the president and board of trustees. The Village prosecutor shall be a regularly licensed and practicing member of the bar of the State. It shall not be a condition of his employment that he reside within the corporate limits of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 2.60)  
Sec. 2-313. - Duties. 
The duties of the Village prosecutor shall be to represent the Village in proceedings before the police magistrate of the Village, or elsewhere as cases may be properly transferred, insofar as matters arising as the result of violations of traffic ordinances of the Village or upon appeal thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 2.61)  
Sec. 2-314. - Compensation. 
The compensation of the Village prosecutor shall be such sum as shall be established from time to time by ordinance or resolution adopted by the president and board of trustees. The Village prosecutor shall also be paid out of the Village treasury such expenses as may be necessary in the performance of his duties as Village prosecutor, provided such expenses have been previously authorized to be incurred by the president and board of trustees or subsequently approved by them. 
(Code 1959, § 2.62)  
Secs. 2-315—2-390. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Building department, § 18-81 et seq.; plumbing inspection department established, § 18-352; fire department, § 34-31 et seq.; public health department, § 38-51 et seq.; police department, § 42-31 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-391—2-410. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT HEADS 
 
Sec. 2-411. - Director of public works. 
The office of the director of public works is hereby created. The director of public works shall serve as the head of the department of public works and shall be appointed by the Village manager for an indefinite term, and be subject to the supervision, direction and control of the Village manager. The director of public works shall be charged with the planning, budgeting, management, direction and control of the maintenance and operation of the utilities and capital plant of the Village, and other duties as set forth in this Code or delegated by the Village manager. 
(Code 1959, § 2.56) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82.  
Sec. 2-412. - Director of community development. 
The office of director of community development is hereby created. The director of community development shall serve as the head of the department of community development and shall be appointed by the Village manager for an indefinite term, and be subject to the supervision, direction and control of the Village manager. The director of community development shall be charged with the planning, budgeting, management, direction and control of the construction-related regulatory activities of the Village, including planning, building and zoning, health and sanitation and engineering, and other duties as set forth in this Code or delegated by the Village manager. 
(Code 1959, §§ 5.2.2, 5.2.4; Ord. No. 5879, § 2, 12-9-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 2, adopted December 9, 2014, amended § 2-412 to read as set out herein. Previously § 2-412 was titled director of development. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 38.  
Secs. 2-413—2-440. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5636, §§ 2a, 3, adopted Feb. 19, 2013, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 2-441—2-520, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete derivation of former Art. V, see the Code Comparative Table. Ord. No. 5636 supplied provisions to be added as §§ 2-441—2-573. In order to maintain the established numbering style of this Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as §§ 2-441—2-520 to read as set out. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-441. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to compile into one location the ordinances establishing and regulating Village boards, commissions, and committees. In some cases, however, it has been deemed advantageous to maintain these regulations with the ordinance related to the subject matter to the board, commission, or committee. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3, 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-442. - Applicability. 
Except as set forth elsewhere in these ordinances, in state law, or in the document establishing a given board, commission, or committee, this section shall apply to all such bodies, regardless of how established or whether termed a board, commission, committee, work group, task force, or similar name or whether standing or ad hoc. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3, 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-443. - Definitions. 
As used in this section: 
Authority or district means an entity that is a separate political body from the Village of Glenview. 
Board or commission means a commission of the Village, that is established by State statute, local ordinance, or resolution and that is given some independent power to make determinations on behalf of the Village or recommendations to the Village President or Board of Trustees. The Zoning Board of Appeals, Plan Commission, Appearance Commission and Board of Fire and Police Commissioners are examples of boards or commissions. Members of Boards or Commissions shall be considered "Public Officials" as that term is defined and used in chapter 2, article I. 
Ad hoc committee means any group other than a standing board or commission, and generally is limited to making recommendations or reports to the Village President or Board of Trustees or some other body, unless explicitly empowered otherwise. An ad hoc committee is generally created to meet a specific purpose or project. Any group called a task force, work group or similar name is an ad hoc committee. 
Administrative committee means any group of individuals appointed by the Village Manager. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3, 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-444. - Creation and dissolution. 
Unless otherwise provided by State statute, commissions and ad hoc committees may be created and dissolved by ordinance or resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3, 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-445. - Appointments. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or state statute, all appointments shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Appointments to commissions, ad hoc committees and non-Village committees shall be made by the Village President with the approval of the Board of Trustees. 
(2)  Appointments to ad-hoc commissions shall be subject to the rules set forth in the resolution or order establishing the commission. If not otherwise provided, appointments shall be made by the Village President with the approval of the Board of Trustees. 
(3)  Commission members must be residents of the Village unless otherwise provided herein. 
(4)  Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as other appointments. 
(5)  Alternates. If the commission is authorized to have alternate members, the alternates shall be given numerical appointments (first alternate, second alternate etc.). When a member or members of the commission are absent, the alternates shall act as full members of the commission in their numerical order, that is, the first alternate shall first act as a full member; the second alternate shall be then next to so act, etc. 
(6)  Compensation. All members are to serve without compensation except as otherwise provided by local ordinance or state statute; authorized expenses may be reimbursed in accordance with applicable Village regulations. 
(7)  Removal of members. Any member of any commission may be removed from office by a majority vote of the Board of Trustees at any regular or special meeting, provided however that a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may only be removed for cause by the Board of Trustees after first conducting a public hearing in accordance with chapter 98, subsection 98-43(b)(1). 
(8)  Members of commissions or ad hoc commissions shall be subject to the Village Ethics Code (chapter 2, article I, section 2-1). 
(9)  Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all commission members shall take and subscribe the oath or affirmation required by the Illinois Constitution, and set forth in section 2-82 of the Municipal Code. The oath of office may be administered by the Village President or Commission Chairman. The subscribed oath or affirmation shall be filed in the office of the municipal clerk. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3, 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-446. - Terms of appointment. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or state statute: 
(1)  All commission members shall be for a term of four years or until a successor is appointed. 
(2)  The initial term of any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall be until the end of the term for which the vacancy was filled. 
(3)  Any ordinance amendment or resolution affecting the terms of or the qualifications of members of boards, commissions, or committees shall, unless otherwise explicitly provided therein, have prospective application only, and shall not have any effect upon the remainder of any terms of office nor upon the appointment of any member of a commission in existence on the date said ordinance amendment or resolution becomes effective. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any fixed term of office, the terms of board, commission, and committee members shall run until their successors are appointed and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3, 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5657, § 5, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-447. - Officers; chairperson. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or state statute: 
(1)  The Village President shall appoint one of the members of the commission to serve as a chairman. The chairman shall have the power to administer oaths. 
(2)  The Chairman of a commission shall serve until a successor is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3, 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5657, § 5, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-448. - Attendance, quorum, and voting. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or state statute: 
(1)  If at any board, commission, or committee meeting, a quorum is not secured within 15 minutes of the officially scheduled meeting time, the commission shall adjourn without taking any action, except that it may set a date and time for its next meeting. 
(2)  The Chair of each board, commission, or committee (or staff if delegated by the Chair) shall report to the Village Manager and President and Board of Trustees each instance in which a member is absent from three consecutive meetings or more than 50 percent of the regularly scheduled meetings in a calendar year. For purposes of reporting this only, a regular meeting that is not held due to lack of a quorum shall count towards a missed meeting by any member not present. The Village President shall take appropriate action to secure the attendance of such members including, in the Village President's discretion, requesting their resignation. In the absence of any statute or ordinance that establishes the quorum for any board, commission, or committee, the quorum of any such body is the number that constitutes a majority of the authorized voting membership. Vacant positions shall be counted in determining the quorum of such a body. 
(3)  Except as provided in section 98-47 of the Code which provides that the concurring vote of four members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to grant a variation, in the absence of any other statute or ordinance to the contrary, motions before the board, commission, or committee shall be passed by an affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the quorum of the board, commission, or committee. The chair of a commission shall not vote unless the chair's vote would affect the outcome of the matter before the board, commission, or committee. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3, 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5657, § 5, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-449. - Minutes, rules of procedure, hearings, public comment. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or state statute: 
(1)  The Village Manager shall designate a secretary for each commission. The secretary shall: 
a.  Take minutes of each commission meeting, originals of which shall be kept by the secretary. 
b.  Provide administrative and technical assistance to the commission to assist in making the decisions and findings as provided hereunder, and 
c.  Publish and distribute to the commissioners copies of the minutes, reports, and decisions of the commission. 
d.  The secretary shall have no vote. 
(2)  Boards, commissions, and ad hoc committees shall utilize the rules of the Board of Trustees, chapter 2, article II, division 3, section 2-71 of the Municipal Code. 
(3)  Hearings and public notice. 
a.  All hearings required by this Code to be conducted by the board and/or the commission shall be open to the public. Any person may appear and testify at a hearing either in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney. All testimony shall be given under oath. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, shall administer oaths and may compel the attendance of witnesses. 
b.  Unless otherwise provided in the Code, notice of a public hearing shall be published not more than 30 days, nor less than 15 days before the hearing, in one or more of the newspapers in general circulation within the Village. The published notice may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as the board may provide. The Village Manager or his designee shall also cause one or more signs to be posted on the subject property, not more than 30 days, nor less than 15 days prior to the hearing. The number and location of signs shall be determined by the Village Manager or his designee. Each sign must be a minimum of 24 inches by 24 inches in size, have letters with a minimum of three-eighths-inch wide stroke by 2½ inches high, and contain the following information: 
1.  The fact that a public hearing will be held regarding the subject property; 
2.  Direction to interested members of the general public to call the appropriate Village office for further information concerning the date, time, place and subject matter of the public hearing; and 
3.  The telephone number of the Village office. 
4.  The absence of a posted sign shall not deprive the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of the authority to conduct a public hearing provided all other notice requirements are met. 
c.  Where the Village Manager or designee has administrative discretion, a notice of administrative relief shall be sent to all adjacent property owners on a one plus one basis, allowing 15 days for response. If there is no response, the Village Manager or designee may grant administrative relief, where applicable. If an adjacent property owner responds with a concern regarding such administrative relief, the Village Manager or designee shall forward the case to the Zoning Board of Appeals in the form of a variance request for disposition. 
(4)  Public comment. Every board, commission, or committee, shall establish a period for public comment at or near the beginning of each meeting. The public comment section of the meeting allows comments on any matter on the agenda, provided, however, that the board, commission, or ad hoc committee shall not take action on a matter raised in the public comment portion of the meeting unless that matter is otherwise on the agenda. The board, commission, or committee may allow public comment on any agenda item at the time that item is taken up. Members of the public who comply with applicable rules, including registering to speak prior to the board, commission, or committee beginning discussion on any agenda item, on registration forms established by the Village, shall be permitted at least three minutes to speak. If the speaker requires an interpreter, either because of his/her limited English proficiency or because of a disability, he/she shall be allowed no less than six minutes. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3, 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5657, § 5, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-450. - Meetings. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance or state statute: 
(1)  All meetings of all commissions shall be held in compliance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 65 ILCS 120/1 et seq. as amended from time to time. 
(2)  Each commission shall, at the beginning of each calendar or fiscal year, submit to the Village Manager for publication, a written schedule of the date, time, and location of its regular meetings for the following calendar year in accordance with state statute. Each commission shall meet at least four times per year unless otherwise provided herein. 
(3)  No meetings election day. No board, commission, or committee shall meet on any general election day for local, state or national offices, or referenda unless otherwise provided for above. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3, 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5657, § 5, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-451. - Reports. 
(a)  Every board, commission, or committee, whether created by ordinance, resolution, or order shall act on items the Village Board refers to it, where the votes are contested, by roll call vote. Its report to the Village Board shall include a list of members who voted and the vote of each. 
(b)  Annual report: On or before January 31 of each year, each board, commission or committee shall file a report with the Village President and Board of Trustees that summarizes the actions of the previous year and identifies the goals and objectives of the board or commission for the coming year. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3, 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-452. - Mandatory training session. 
All members of boards or commissions must complete any training mandated by state or local ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3, 2-19-2013)  
Secs. 2-453—2-455. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - APPEARANCE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-456. - Established. 
There is hereby established an Appearance Commission which shall be comprised of seven members. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-461), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-457. - Composition. 
Members of the Appearance Commission shall possess the following qualifications: 
(1)  Two members shall have one or both of the following qualifications: 
a.  Be a registered architect; or 
b.  Be a professional who possesses a design background in at least one of the following: architecture, landscape architecture or design, graphic arts, graphic design and/or advertising. 
(2)  The remaining five members of the Commission shall preferably have at least one of the following qualifications, listed in order of preference: 
a.  Be a landscape architect or landscape designer. 
b.  Be an architect. 
c.  Have a design background including graphic arts, graphic design or advertising. 
d.  Be the owner or officer of a corporation owning a business, commercial or industrial property in the Village, and is preferred to be a member of the Chamber of Commerce. Such member is preferred, but not required, to be a resident of the Village. 
e.  Be an at-large Glenview citizen with relevant skills, including government, business, law, real estate development, or management. 
(3)  All members of the appearance commission, except the business member referenced in subsection (2)(d), shall be residents of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-462), 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5919, § 2, 7-7-2015)  
Sec. 2-458. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
The Appearance Commission is hereby vested with the jurisdiction and authority to: 
(1)  Consult and cooperate with the Plan Commission, other Village departments and any other municipal or governmental bodies on matters affecting the appearance of the Village. 
(2)  Study exterior design drawings, landscape and site plans, and materials for any proposed public works or public improvements and make recommendations to the Board of Trustees or Village Manager as to the architectural or aesthetic aspects thereof. 
(3)  Hold hearings, when required, on the issuance of certificates of appropriateness as provided in section 54-65 in connection with questions pertaining to applications for building permits and issue or deny such certificates pursuant to the provisions of section 54-65. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-463), 2-19-2013)  
Secs. 2-459, 2-460. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
Sec. 2-461. - Established. 
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals "Zoning Board" which shall be comprised of seven members. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-471), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-462. - Composition. 
Members of the Zoning Board shall be residents of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-472), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-463. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
The Zoning Board is hereby vested with the jurisdiction and authority to: 
(1)  Hear and pass upon appeals in which it is alleged that there is an error in any interpretation, requirement, decision, or determination (referred to collectively in this section as "interpretation") made by the Village Manager or his designee under this chapter, in the manner and subject to the standards set forth in section 98-48. 
(2)  Hear and pass upon applications for variations from the regulations and restrictions imposed by this chapter, in the manner and subject to the standards set forth in section 98-47. 
(3)  Hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under chapter 98. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-473), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-464. - Finality of decisions of the Zoning Board. 
(a)  Interpretations. Decisions of the Zoning Board on an appeal from the decision of the Village Manager or his/her designee may be taken to the Board of Trustees in the manner provided in section 98-48. 
(b)  Multi-family residential, commercial and industrial variations. Decisions of the Zoning Board, upon application for a variation after a hearing, with regard to lots located within the RT-8, R-18, PD, B-1, B-2, B-3, D-D, H-1, MURC, SLE, I-1, or I-2 zoning districts, or lots located in the R-1, R-1.3, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 R-6, R-E or P-1 districts and are utilized for multi-family, commercial or industrial uses shall be subject to the procedures contained within subsection 98-50(b) which shall apply to applications for variations to commercial and industrial lots or parcels. 
(c)  Residential variations. Decisions of the Zoning Board upon application for a variation after a hearing, for lots located in the, R-1, R-1.3, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 R-6, R-E or P-1 shall be final administrative determinations and shall be subject to review by a court in the manner provided by applicable State statutes. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-474), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-465. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-466. - Established. 
There is hereby established a Building Commission which shall be comprised of five members. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-481), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-467. - Composition. 
Members of the Building Commission shall be individuals who are qualified by experience and training to consider matters pertaining to building construction, including but not limited to persons engaged in building construction, general contracting, architecture, heating and air conditioning, plumbing, and mechanical engineering. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-482), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-468. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
The Building Commission is hereby vested with the jurisdiction and authority: 
(1)  To hear and pass upon appeals in which it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by the village staff. 
(2)  To make recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees regarding the adoption of building codes and related rules and regulations necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents and businesses of the Village of Glenview. 
(3)  To hear and decide all matters referred to it by the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-483), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-469. - Meetings. 
The Building Commission shall meet only on such occasion as a pending matter is referred to them. 
(Ord. No. 5657, § 7, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-470. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
[6]
Footnotes: 
 
Sec. 2-471. - Established. 
There is hereby established a Historic Preservation Commission, which shall be comprised of seven members. 
(Ord. No. 5762, § 4, 2-4-2014; Ord. No. 6152, § 2, 3-6-2018)  
Sec. 2-472. - Composition. 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall be comprised of the following: 
(1)  The seven members of the Appearance Commission. Such members shall serve terms consistent with their membership on the Appearance Commission. 
(2)  The chairman of the Appearance Commission shall serve as chairman of the Historic Preservation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 5762, § 4, 2-4-2014; Ord. No. 6152, § 3, 3-6-2018)  
Sec. 2-473. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
The Historic Preservation Commission is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority: 
(1)  To conduct an ongoing survey of the Village using the criteria identified in section 98-536 to identify buildings, structures, and property by address or location that are of historic, cultural or architectural significance, and potential landmarks. 
(2)  To investigate, hold public hearings and recommend to the Village Board of Trustees the consideration of ordinances designating as landmarks certain Village properties or structures having special historic, community, or architectural value. 
(3)  To compile information concerning designated landmarks. 
(4)  To prepare, keep current, and publish maps and/or registers of designated landmarks. 
(5)  To develop and maintain technical information pertaining to the physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse, and on procedures for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places and to make such information available to the owners of potential and designated landmarks. 
(6)  To inform and educate the residents of the Village concerning the historic and architectural heritage of the Village by publishing appropriate maps, newsletters, brochures and pamphlets, by other appropriate means and by holding programs and seminars. 
(7)  To investigate, hold public hearings and recommend to the Village Board of Trustees to consider certain Village areas as having special historic, community or architectural value as historic districts. 
(8)  To keep a register of all property and structures which have been designated under this article, including all information required for each designation. 
(9)  To seek grants and donations to achieve the purposes of this article and, upon authorization by the Village Board of Trustees, to seek the certifications or approvals necessary to qualify the Village, the Commission or the owners of designated landmarks, for financial or other assistance. 
(10)  To determine an appropriate system of markers and make recommendations for the design and implementation of specific markings of the street and route leading from one landmark historic district to another. 
(11)  To advise and assist interested owners of landmarks and property or structures within the historic districts on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse and on procedures for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places. 
(12)  To nominate landmarks and historic districts to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(13)  To hold hearings and to review public building permit applications for construction, alterations, removal or demolition of designated landmarks or structures within historic districts, and to recommend to the Village Board of Trustees issuance or denial of certificates of appropriateness, for which applicants may be required to submit plans, drawings, elevations, specification and other information as may be necessary to make decisions. 
(14)  To consider and make recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees on applications for economic hardship that would allow the performance of work on any structure for which an application for certificate of appropriateness has been denied. 
(15)  To develop specific criteria for the alteration, construction, or removal of landmarks or property or structures within the historic district. 
(16)  To review applications for proposed subdivision or site plan review, zoning amendments applications for conditional uses or application for zoning variances that affect historic districts. The Secretary shall send copies of applications to the members of the Historic Preservation Commission prior to the date of the hearing by the Commission, Plan Commission, or Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(17)  To make recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees about possible amendments to this chapter, but not limited to, this article, that relate to the protection and continued use of designated landmarks or property and structures within historic districts. 
(18)  To testify before all Village boards and commissions on any matter affecting historically and architecturally significant property and landmarks. 
(Ord. No. 5762, § 4, 2-4-2014)  
Sec. 2-474. - Meetings. 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall meet a minimum of four times per year unless otherwise necessary to hold hearings related to the designation of a landmark or historic district, confirmation of eligibility, certificate of appropriateness, or certificate of economic hardship. 
(Ord. No. 5762, § 4, 2-4-2014)  
Sec. 2-475. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PLAN COMMISSION. 
 
Sec. 2-476. - Established. 
There is hereby established a Plan Commission under the authority of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-12.4 et seq., which shall be comprised of seven members. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-501), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-477. - Composition. 
Members of the Plan Commission shall be residents of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-502), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-478. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
The Plan Commission is hereby vested with the jurisdiction and authority pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-12.4 et seq., with respect to land within the corporate limits and to contiguous territory not more than 1½ miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality, to: 
(1)  Hear and report to the Board of Trustees applications for planned developments and amendments, subject to the standards set forth in the Village's Zoning Code. 
(2)  Hear and report to the Board of Trustees applications for conditional uses, subject to the standards set forth in the Village's Zoning code. 
(3)  Hear and report to the Board of Trustees applications for site plan review and amendments subject to the standards set forth in the site plan review ordinance herein. 
(4)  Hear and report to the Board of Trustees applications for amendments to the regulations imposed or the districts created in the Zoning Code of the Village. 
(5)  Prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities a comprehensive plan for the present and future development or redevelopment of the Village. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted by the Board of Trustees, shall be the official comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the Village. Such plan may include, but need not be limited to, provisions for the: 
a.  Establishment of reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and re subdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public improvements; 
b.  Establishment of reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course and surfacing of public streets, highways, alleys and ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds and other public grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers and sewerage collection and treatment; and 
c.  Designation of land suitable for annexation to the Village, and the recommended zoning classification for such land, upon annexation. 
(6)  Recommend changes, from time to time, in the official comprehensive plan, or part thereof. 
(7)  Prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities, from time to time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of such official plan. 
(8)  Draft and recommend ordinances directed toward the implementation of the official comprehensive plan, or specific improvements included therein. Such ordinances may pertain to any aspect of the official comprehensive plan and may provide for the full exercise of the constitutional and statutory powers of the Village. 
(9)  Assist officials of the Village charged with carrying out the official comprehensive plan or specific improvements included therein, and, generally, promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan. 
(10)  Propose and draft an official map of the area which may be included as a part of the official comprehensive plan. 
(11)  Upon request of the Board of Trustees, hold any public hearing which may be required by law as a prerequisite to adoption of an official comprehensive plan or official map, or any amendment thereof or for any other matter under the authority granted under 65 ILCS 5/11-13-22 et seq. 
(12)  Exercise all powers incidental to the powers set forth in this section and such other powers germane to the powers granted by this article as may be conferred by the Board of Trustees of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-503), 2-19-2013)  
Secs. 2-479, 2-480. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - NATURAL RESOURCES COMMISSION. 
 
Sec. 2-481. - Established. 
There is hereby established a Natural Resources Commission comprised of five members. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-511), 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5882, § 2, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 2-482. - Composition. 
(a)  The Natural Resources Commission shall be comprised of individuals who possess training, interest or experience in such areas as ecology, biology, environmental law, education, pollution control, engineering, science and public health. 
(b)  The Natural Resource Commission shall also include one ex-officio non-voting member who shall be a high school student, or a college student resident having an interest in the natural resources commission. Student members shall serve a maximum term of two years. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-512), 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5882, § 2, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 2-483. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
The Natural Resources Commission is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority to: 
(1)  Make such investigations and such recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees as it may deem appropriate to carry out the following functions: 
a.  Preserve, conserve, enhance, and protect the environment, natural resources, and environmental values of the Village including the quality of land, air, and water and the interrelationships that exist among and between them and all living things within the limits of the Village. To further these goals, the following list identifies activities which might be undertaken by the natural resources commission: 
b.  Conduct and maintain an inventory of the natural resources of the Village. 
c.  Develop and recommend a plan for protection and restoration of the natural resources of the Village. 
d.  Review and comment on management plans as such plans are developed by Village staff with respect to areas of specific interest, including but not limited to the: 
1.  West Fork of the Chicago River; 
2.  Techny Basin; 
3.  Natural Areas of Gallery Park, including Lake Glenview and wetlands surrounding the lake. 
(2)  Strive to create an interest and awareness of the problems of land, water and air pollution and of the need to preserve, conserve, protect, and enhance the environment, natural resources, and environmental values of the Village among the citizens of and visitors to the Village. 
(3)  Hear appeals from any decision of the Director of Public Works (1) issuing or revoking a tree permit, (2) denying a tree permit application, or (3) granting or denying an exemption pursuant to subsection 20-11(f) of Ordinance Number 4235 Regarding Tree Protection and Preservation. With respect to this subsection (3), the decision of the natural resources commission shall be final. 
(4)  Act as a liaison between the Village and other governmental, public and private agencies such as the Glenview Park District, area schools, Friends of the Chicago River, Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning, Chicago Wilderness, and others to encourage development of programs and management of land that supports recognition and conservation of native species and natural ecological communities, and the improvement and enhancement of the environment. 
(5)  May propose an annual budget to the Village Board of Trustees for the purpose of furthering the goals and objectives of the Natural Resources Commission. Such budget, if approved, shall be administered by the Village Manager. 
(6)  All recommendations of the Natural Resources Commission shall be forwarded to the Village Manager for final action. Appeals to the Village Manager's decision shall be heard by the Village Board of Trustees. 
(7)  Advise the Village Board of Trustees on such matters as may be requested. 
(8)  The Natural Resources Commission shall have no authority to act in any way which is contrary to or inconsistent with respect to the powers, duties and jurisdiction of the Environmental Review Committee as set forth in this Code. 
(9)  Nothing in this section shall operate or be construed to authorize the regulation, direction or management of Glenview Park District natural resources assets. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-513), 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5882, § 2, 1-6-2015)  
Secs. 2-484, 2-485. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-486. - Established. 
There is hereby established an Environmental Review Committee comprised of five members, who are appointed by the Village manager. One member shall be appointed chairman by the Village manager. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-520), 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5657, § 3, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-487. - Composition. 
Members of the Environmental Review Committee shall be comprised of individuals collectively knowledgeable in planning, biology, hydrology, water quality, soil science, engineering, economics and the applicable agency permit criteria. Environmental Review Committee members need not be residents of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-521), 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5657, § 3, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-488. - Compensation. 
Environmental Review Committee members may receive compensation for their services as approved by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-522), 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5657, § 3, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-489. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
The Environmental Review Committee is hereby vested with the jurisdiction and authority to: 
(1)  Hear and recommend to the Plan Commission requests to designate areas within the Village as ESAs. 
(2)  Hear and recommend to the Plan Commission regarding all activities concerning areas within such ESAs. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-523), 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5657, § 3, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-490. - Meetings. 
The Environmental Review Committee shall meet only on such occasion as a pending matter is referred to them. 
Members of the Environmental Review Committee shall be appointed for terms consistent with section 2-475. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-524), 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5657, § 3, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-491. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - ELECTRICAL COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-492. - Established. 
There is hereby established an Electrical Commission which shall be comprised of five members. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-531), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-493. - Composition. 
Members of the Electrical Commission shall possess qualifications in accordance with the statutory qualifications provided in the State Municipal Code, as amended from time to time, which are presently as follows: 
(1)  One shall be a registered professional engineer. 
(2)  One an electrical contractor. 
(3)  One a journeyman electrician. 
(4)  One a representative of an electricity supply company. 
(5)  One a representative of an inspection bureau maintained by the fire underwriters, if one resides in the Village, however, if no such representative resides in the municipality, then the chief of the fire department. 
(6)  If there is no person residing in the municipality who is qualified under any one of these descriptions, president may appoint some other person to fill that position. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-532), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-494. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
The Electrical Commission is hereby vested with the jurisdiction and authority to: 
(1)  To hear and pass upon appeals in which it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination made by the Village staff. 
(2)  To make recommendations to the Board of Trustees regarding the adoption of electrical Codes and related rules and regulations necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents and businesses of the Village of Glenview. 
(3)  To hear and decide all matters referred to it by the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-533), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-495. - Meetings. 
The Electrical Commission shall meet only on such occasion as a pending matter is referred to them. 
(Ord. No. 5657, § 6, 4-2-2013)  
DIVISION 10. - BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS 
 
Sec. 2-496. - Generally. 
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, except as otherwise provided in this section, shall operate under the provisions of an act to provide for the appointment of a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1-10-2.1-30. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-541), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-497. - Authority to suspend pending disciplinary hearing. 
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have the authority to suspend any officer or sworn member of the fire or police department without pay, not to exceed 180 calendar days, pending the outcome of a disciplinary hearing. If, after a hearing, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners determines that an officer or sworn member of the fire or police department is guilty of the charges which were the subject of the hearing, the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may, but shall not be obligated to, add an additional period of suspension of up to 180 days, without pay, as provided under [section 2-498]. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-542), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-498. - Authority to suspend in excess of thirty days. 
The provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-17, which limit suspensions of officers and sworn members of the fire and police departments to no more than 30 days, is hereby amended and deemed superseded by this subsection, which hereby grants to the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners the authority to suspend an officer or sworn member of the fire or police department for a period not to exceed 180 calendar days, without pay. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-543), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-499. - Additional disciplinary sanctions. 
In addition to the suspension provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-17 as modified in [section 2-497], the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall, as part of a disciplinary sanction after a due process hearing, have the authority to: 
(1)  Demote any officer or sworn member of the fire or police department one grade or rank; 
(2)  Remove the name of any officer or sworn member of the fire or police department from the current promotional eligibility list; 
(3)  Cause a forfeiture of longevity pay and/or holiday pay for any officer or sworn member of the fire or police department during the term of the suspension; 
(4)  Remit to the Village payment for health insurance during the term of the suspension; and 
(5)  Order performance of random drug testing of any officer or sworn member of the fire or police department for any offense relating to the use of narcotics or who may be found to be otherwise in violation of the Village's drug and alcohol policy. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-544), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-500. - Application of sanctions. 
All of the sanctions set forth in [sections 2-497—2-499] may be individually or cumulatively applied. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-545), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-501. - Application of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-17. 
In all other respects not inconsistent with the expansion of disciplinary authority of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners set forth in this section, including the continued right to discharge any officer or sworn member of the fire or police department pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-17, the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-17 shall continue to apply to all officers and sworn members of the fire and police department of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-546), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-502. - Authority to supersede 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-17. 
The ordinance from which this section is derived is adopted pursuant to Article VII, Section 6 of the State constitution and shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and approval by the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-547), 2-19-2013)  
Secs. 2-503—2-505. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-506. - Established. 
There is hereby established the Glenview Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Board ("Foreign Fire Tax Board"). The Foreign Fire Tax Board shall exercise the powers as designated herein consistent with 65 ILCS 5/11-10-2. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-551), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-507. - Membership, officers, term of office, vacancies. 
(a)  The Foreign Fire Tax Board shall consist of seven trustees; the fire chief, who shall hold office by virtue of rank, and six members who shall be elected at large by the sworn members of the Glenview Fire Department ("Department"). If there is an insufficient number of candidates to fill all these positions, the number of board members may be reduced, but not to fewer than three trustees. All members of the department shall be eligible to be elected as trustees of the Foreign Fire Tax Board. 
(b)  The trustees shall annually elect officers from among the trustees, consisting of a chairman and a treasurer. The trustees may also elect a vice chair and secretary. 
(c)  Each trustee, with the exception of the fire chief, shall serve a three-year term. In the event no successor trustee assumes office prior to the expiration of the three-year term, then the trustee shall serve until a successor trustee assumes office. The initial terms of office of the trustees shall begin 30 days after completion of the election. Each trustee shall hold office during his or her term unless the trustee resigns from the department, retires from the department, or is discharged from the department. If any of these three events occur, the trustee shall automatically be removed from the board and the position shall be deemed vacant. 
(d)  Vacancies on the Foreign Fire Tax Board shall be filled by election by the members of the department, and such election shall be for the balance of the unexpired term. Any person elected to fill a Foreign Fire Tax Board trustee vacancy shall assume office immediately upon completion of the election. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-552), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-508. - Election procedure. 
(a)  The Foreign Fire Tax Board shall adopt rules and regulations governing the nomination of candidates for trustee. All rules and regulations with respect to the nomination process shall be established and posted throughout the department a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the trustees' terms of office. 
(b)  The Foreign Fire Tax Board shall adopt rules and regulations for the final election of candidates for trustee. The final election procedure shall be established and posted throughout the department a minimum of 30 days prior to the expiration of the trustees' terms of office. 
(c)  The Board may adopt rules and regulations governing the selection of officers of the Board. All rules and regulations with respect to the selection of Board officers shall be established and posted throughout the department a minimum of 30 days prior to the selection of officers. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-553), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-509. - Powers, duties, and procedures. 
(a)  The trustees of the Foreign Fire Tax Board shall make all needful rules and regulations with respect to the Foreign Fire Tax Board and the management of the money to be appropriated to the Foreign Fire Tax Board. 
(b)  The officers of the Board shall develop and maintain listings of those items that the Foreign Fire Tax Board feels are appropriate expenditures under the State statutes. 
(c)  All expenditures by the Foreign Fire Tax Board shall be in accordance with all State statutes and/or Village of Glenview ordinances and policies, concerning expenditure of monies. The Foreign Fire Tax Board shall follow good and sound accounting principles regarding the holding and spending of any monies. 
(d)  The funds of the Foreign Fire Tax Board shall be annually reviewed as part of the Village of Glenview audit. The audit shall verify that purchases are by the Foreign Fire Tax Board and for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Glenview Fire Department. 
(e)  The treasurer of the Foreign Fire Tax Board shall give a sufficient bond to the Village of Glenview. This bond shall be approved by the President of the Village's Board of Trustees. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the treasurer of his or her duties under the State statutes, ordinances, and the rules and regulations adopted by the Board. 
(f)  The funds collected pursuant to the levy of the Foreign Fire Insurance Company Tax shall be appropriated annually to the Foreign Fire Tax Board. 
(g)  The treasurer of the Foreign Fire Tax Board shall receive funds appropriated by the Village and shall pay out money and or otherwise make expenditures upon the order of the Foreign Fire Tax Board. Any expenditure made by the treasurer, pursuant to the order of the Foreign Fire Tax Board shall be solely for the maintenance, use and benefit of the department. 
(h)  The Foreign Fire Tax Board shall establish a list of items and/or services from which it shall select items and/or services to be purchased for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Department. The list shall be updated from time to time as the Foreign Fire Tax Board shall determine, but no less than annually on January 1 of each year. 
(i)  Prior to the purchase of any item(s) and/or service from the list which the Foreign Fire Tax Board intends to place within any fire station(s), the Foreign Fire Tax Board shall submit a written statement to the fire chief stating the descriptions of the items and/or services and the proposed locations within any fire station(s). The fire chief has the right to refuse to allow any such item(s) and/or service(s) into any fire station(s). If the fire chief decides to allow any such item(s) and/or service into any fire station the fire chief shall also have the right to refuse the Foreign Fire Tax Board's proposed physical location of any such item(s) or rendering of service in any fire station. The fire chief must respond in writing to any written statement of the Foreign Fire Tax Board within 30 days from his receipt of same and the fire chief must explain the basis for his decision(s). Upon the purchase of any approved items, title to same shall be placed in the name of the Village. 
(j)  The Foreign Fire Tax Board may appeal any such decision rendered pursuant to subsection (i) above to the Village Manager, or his designee, who shall render his decision in writing within 30 days of his receipt of the fire chief's rejection. The decision of the Village Manager may be appealed to the Village board through a written request for review by the Village board of the Village Manager's decision within 21 days of the issuance of the Village Manager's decision. This written request for review shall be submitted to the Village president. The Village board of trustees shall consider the appeal as soon as is practicable. The decision of the Village board of trustees shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-555), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-510. - Quorum, special meetings. 
The Foreign Fire Tax Board shall, in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, establish a regular time and place for its meetings; and publish notice of same. The Foreign Fire Tax Board shall be subject to the provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act. The chairman shall preside at Foreign Fire Tax Board meetings; the secretary shall keep record of the proceedings and actions of the Foreign Fire Tax Board and may certify the same. Four members of the Foreign Fire Tax Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The chair may call a special meeting at any time, subject to the requirements of the Open Meetings Act. A special meeting may also be called upon the written notice of five members of the Foreign Fire Tax Board. Such notice shall describe in brief the nature or object of the special meeting. Any person shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter before the Foreign Fire Tax Board. Minutes of Foreign Fire Tax Board meetings shall be filed with the Village clerk. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-556), 2-19-2013)  
Secs. 2-511, 2-512. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - FIRE PENSION BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-513. - Established. 
There is hereby established a firefighter's pension fund, as required by state statute, 40 ILCS 5/4, which shall be administered by the Fire Pension Board. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-561), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-514. - Membership, meetings, elections. 
(a)  The fire pension board shall consist of two members appointed by the Village President with the approval of the board of trustees, two firefighters elected by the active firefighters, and one pension beneficiary elected by the firefighter pensioners. 
(b)  Appointed members shall serve the following terms: One member shall be appointed for a term expiring the third Monday of April, 2014, and the other member for a term ending the third Monday of April, 2015. Following the initial term, appointed members of the fire pension board shall be elected for a term of two years. 
(c)  Elected members of the fire pension board shall be elected on the third Monday of April of each applicable year, and shall serve for a term of three years. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-562), 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5657, § 9, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-515. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
(a)  The firefighters' pension fund provides retirement benefits to firefighters subject to the Municipal Code. Pursuant to state statute, the State of Illinois is authorized to establish benefit levels and the Village is authorized to approve the actuarial assumptions used in the determination of contribution levels. The firefighter's pension fund shall consist of a contribution rate, established by the State, from the pay of each firefighter. In addition, there shall be levied an annual tax sufficient to maintain the reserve of the fund at the minimum required by law and to meet all obligations payable from the fund. 
(b)  The Firefighter's Pension Fund shall operate in all other respects in compliance with the applicable state statute. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-563), 2-19-2013)  
Secs. 2-516, 2-517. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - POLICE PENSION BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-518. - Established. 
There is hereby established a Police Pension Fund, as required by state statute, 40 ILCS 5/3, which shall be administered by the Police Pension Board. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-571), 2-19-2013)  
Sec. 2-519. - Membership, meetings, elections. 
(a)  The police pension board shall consist of two members elected from and by the active police, one elected from and by the beneficiaries, and two are appointed by the Village President with the approval of the board of trustees. 
(b)  Appointed members shall serve the following terms: One member shall be appointed for a term expiring the second Tuesday of May, 2014, and the other member for a term ending the second Tuesday of May, 2015. Following the initial term, appointed members of the police pension board shall be elected for a term of two years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Elected members of the police pension board shall be elected biennially on the third Monday of April of each applicable year, and shall serve for a term of two years. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-572), 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 5657, § 8, 4-2-2013)  
Sec. 2-520. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
(a)  The police pension board administers the police pension fund, as prescribed by state statute for the benefit of its police officers and of their surviving spouses, children, and certain other dependents. Pursuant to state statute, the State of Illinois is authorized to establish benefit levels and the Village is authorized to approve the actuarial assumptions used in the determination of contribution levels. 
(b)  The police pension fund shall consist of a contribution rate established by the State of Illinois from the pay of each police officer. 
(c)  In addition, there shall be levied an annual tax sufficient to maintain the reserve of the fund at least at the minimum required by State law and to meet all obligations payable from the fund. 
(d)  The Police Pension Fund shall operate in all other respects in compliance with the municipal code and applicable state statute. 
(Ord. No. 5636, § 3(2-573), 2-19-2013)  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
 
Sec. 2-521. - Director of finance. 
The office of the director of finance is hereby created. The director of finance shall serve as the head of the department of finance and shall be appointed by the Village manager for an indefinite term, and be subject to the supervision, direction and control of the Village manager. The director of finance shall be charged with preparing and maintaining all financial records of the Village. He shall exercise and perform such further duties relating to Village finance, accounting, purchasing and information, and other duties as set forth in this Code or delegated by the Village manager. 
Cross reference— Enforcement officer of the hotel and motel tax, § 70-64.  
Secs. 2-522—2-550. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-551. - Creation. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of section 5/1-2.1-1, et seq., of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1, which authorizes a municipality to implement a system of administrative adjudication for code violations, and pursuant to section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3, et seq., which authorizes a municipality to provide a system of administrative adjudication for vehicular standing, parking and compliance violations, there is hereby created a system of administrative adjudication of charges of code violations, including vehicular standing, parking and compliance violations for the Village of Glenview. 
(b)  The Village adopts 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1, et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3, as it may be amended from time to time. In the event of a conflict between either of those statutes and this chapter, this chapter shall prevail. 
(c)  The adoption of this chapter does not preclude the Village from using other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(1-101), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-552. - Establishment and composition. 
(a)  There is hereby established within the Village manager's office an office of administrative adjudication, which shall be authorized to conduct administrative adjudication proceedings for departments and agencies of the Village. 
(b)  The office shall provide for the prompt disposition of alleged infractions of the Village Code of Ordinances (the "Code") and to afford such other adjudications as provided by law. When a hearing is set by the adjudication administrator, it must be set no sooner than 15 days from the date of the issuance of the violation unless an emergency involving public health and safety or the general welfare of the community is involved in which instance a hearing could be set immediately. 
(c)  The Village manager shall appoint an adjudication administrator who is authorized to: 
(1)  Operate and manage a system of administrative adjudication; 
(2)  Adopt, distribute and process violation notices; 
(3)  Establish procedures necessary for the prompt, fair and efficient operation of the administrative adjudication system; 
(4)  Certify copies of the final determinations of liability and factual reports, verifying that the final determination of violating liability was issued in accordance with this division and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3; 
(5)  Certify reports to the Illinois Secretary of State concerning initiation of driver's license suspensions in accordance with the provisions of this article and 625 ILCS 5/6-406.5; 
(6)  Promulgate rules and regulations pertaining to the hearing process, the content of forms and procedures, and the daily operation of the administrative adjudication system; 
(7)  Compile and maintain complete and accurate records relating to all municipal ordinance violation notices issued pursuant to this article and the dispositions thereof. 
(d)  Hearing room personnel may be appointed by the chief of police, and if so appointed, shall be any police officer or community service officer, and such persons are hereby authorized and directed to: 
(1)  Maintain hearing room decorum; 
(2)  Execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of the circuit court; 
(3)  Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and as directed by the administrative hearing officer or the adjudication administrator. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(1-102), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-553. - Administrative hearing officer—Powers and duties. 
(a)  An administrative hearing officer shall be appointed by the Village manager. The term of the administrative hearing officer shall be one year. The administrative hearing officer shall be an attorney admitted to the practice of law in the state for at least three years. 
(b)  The administrative hearing officer shall have all powers necessary to conduct fair and impartial hearings including, but not limited to, the power to: 
(1)  Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues; 
(2)  Administer oaths and affirmations; 
(3)  Hear testimony; 
(4)  Rule upon motions, objections and the admissibility of evidence; 
(5)  At the request of any party or on the administrative hearing officer's own motion, subpoena the attendance of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant books, records or other information; 
(6)  Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; 
(7)  Regulate the course of the hearing in accordance with this article, or other applicable law; 
(8)  Issue a final order which includes findings of fact and conclusions of law; and 
(9)  Impose penalties and fines as set forth in section 30-1 herein, and issue orders that are consistent with applicable code provisions and assess costs, including but not limited to, court costs, upon finding a party liable for the charged violation; an order may include the recommendation for suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of a business license, pursuant to section 22-8. However, in no event shall an administrative hearing officer have the authority to impose a penalty of imprisonment or a fine in excess of $50,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(1-103), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-554. - Jurisdiction. 
Those matters subject to the administrative adjudication system provided for by this chapter are charges of violation of any Village ordinance, except the following: a) any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or this Code governing the movement of vehicles; b) any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, 5/6-204; c) violations punishable by a penalty of incarceration; and d) violations punishable by a fine in excess of $50,000.00 per violation, excluding allowable costs; provided, however, that the maximum fine amount of $50,000.00 does not apply to cases brought to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(1-104), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-555. - Compensation of personnel. 
Authorization for compensation for each of the above-stated positions shall be made by the Village Board through the annual budget process. Compensation shall be determined by the Village manager within approved budget limitations. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(1-105), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-556. - Rules and regulations—Available for public inspection. 
The rules and regulations promulgated for the conduct of administrative adjudication proceedings shall be published and kept on file in the office of the Village manager where they shall be available to the public for inspection and copying at nominal rates during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(1-106), 6-7-2011)  
Secs. 2-557—2-565. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 2-566. - Instituting administrative adjudication proceedings. 
(a)  Any authorized department or agency of the Village may institute an administrative adjudication proceeding with the office of administrative adjudication by forwarding a copy of a notice of violation or a notice of hearing, which has been properly served, to the office of administrative adjudication, which office shall coordinate hearing dates from the various departments and agencies. 
(b)  Respondents shall be served with a copy of the written sworn pleading or complaint along with a notice of adjudicatory hearing in any manner reasonably calculated to give them actual notice of the proceeding instituted against them, including: 
(1)  Personal service upon a party or its employees or agents; 
(2)  Service by certified mail return receipt requested at the party's address; 
(3)  Service by first class mail postage prepaid at the party's address; or 
(4)  Service by posting a copy of the sworn pleading or complaint upon the property where the violation is found when the party is the owner or manager of the property. 
(c)  Notices of the adjudicatory hearing shall include: 
(1)  The type and nature of the ordinance violation to be adjudicated; 
(2)  The date and location of the adjudicatory hearing; 
(3)  The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held; and 
(4)  The penalties for failure to appear at the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-101), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-567. - Subpoenas. 
(a)  An administrative hearing officer may issue a subpoena only if he or she determines that the testimony of the witnesses or the documents or items sought by the subpoena are necessary to present evidence that it: 
(1)  Is relevant to the case; and 
(2)  Relates to a contested issue in the case. 
(b)  A subpoena issued under this article shall identify: 
(1)  The person to whom it is directed; 
(2)  The documents or other items sought by the subpoena, if any; 
(3)  The date for the appearance of the witnesses and the production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena; 
(4)  The time for the appearance of the witnesses and the production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena; and 
(5)  The place for the appearance of the witnesses and the production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena. 
(c)  In no event shall the date identified for the appearance of the witnesses or the production of the documents or other items be less than seven days after service of the subpoena. 
(d)  Within three business days of being served with a subpoena issued in accordance with this article, the recipient of the subpoena may contest the order authorizing the issuance of the subpoena to the administrative hearing officer, setting forth in detail the recipient's objections to the subpoena. Upon receipt of the contest to the subpoena, the administrative hearing officer shall review the objections and, upon review, enter the appropriate order. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-102), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-568. - Representation at hearings. 
(a)  The case for the Village may be presented by any Village employee or by an attorney designated by the Village. 
(b)  The case for the respondent may be presented by the respondent, any agent of the respondent or an attorney. An agent shall present a written authorization signed by the respondent giving the agent power to act and to bind the respondent to any orders entered by the administrative hearing officer. An attorney who appears on behalf of any person shall file with the administrative hearing officer a written appearance on a form provided by the adjudication administrator for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-103), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-569. - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)  The administrative hearing officer shall conduct the hearings in an orderly manner and insist upon proper decorum by all persons present at the hearings. The intent of the hearings is to provide the Village and the respondent with full and fair presentation of the issues. 
(b)  All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation, which shall be administered by the administrative hearing officer. Parties may present witnesses and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(c)  The hearing officer may issue subpoenas to secure the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant documents; provided, however, that a respondent who appears by an attorney shall not be compelled to attend the hearing and may submit his or her testimony, if any, by affidavit. In addition, the witnesses who have not been subpoenaed to attend the hearing may submit their testimony, if any, by affidavit. 
(d)  No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance of the evidence; provided, however, that a violation notice, or a copy thereof, issued in accordance with this article, shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts specified therein. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-104), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-570. - Hearing testimony. 
The strict laws of evidence shall not apply. Hearsay testimony may be admitted and relied upon by the administrative hearing officer in making his or her determination. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-105), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-571. - Documentary evidence. 
Relevant documents may be received into evidence without formal proof of authenticity. The administrative hearing officer shall determine the weight, if any, to be afforded documents received into evidence. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-106), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-572. - Transcript of proceedings. 
Either party may request that the proceedings be taken and transcribed by a certified court reporter. The cost of the reporter shall be borne by the party requesting the reporter. The Village may, at its cost, tape record the proceedings. If a tape recording is made, a respondent may obtain a transcript at respondent's cost. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-107), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-573. - Continuances. 
All administrative law proceedings shall be conducted on the date set for hearing. For good cause shown, a postponement may be granted in the discretion of the administrative hearing officer. The purpose of administrative law proceedings is to provide a prompt resolution of alleged code violations and, accordingly, the request for and the grant of, continuances shall be curtailed to the extent fairness permits. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-108), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-574. - Hearing—Determination of liability or of no liability—Petition to set aside. 
(a)  Upon conclusion of a hearing under this article, the administrative hearing officer shall issue a written determination of no liability or of liability in the amount of the fine for the relevant violation as provided in the Code, and the basis therefor. 
(b)  If a person fails to respond to the violation notice and opportunity for the administrative hearing and fails to appear, a determination of liability shall be entered against the respondent pursuant to this article. Such determination shall become final for purposes of judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Act upon the denial or, the expiration of the time in which to file a timely petition to set aside the determination as provided in this article. 
(c)  Within 14 days from the issuance of a determination of liability pursuant to this division, the person against whom the determination was entered may petition by submitting a written request to the adjudication administrator to set aside the determination, provided, however, the grounds for the petition shall be limited to: 
(1)  The person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited property or vehicle on the date the violation notice was first issued; 
(2)  The person having already paid the fine or penalty for the violation in question; 
(3)  The person stating he or she never received the notice; or 
(4)  Excusable failure, based upon criteria established by the administrative hearing officer, to appear at or request a new date for a hearing. 
(d)  The adjudication administrator shall set a hearing date on the petition and provide written notice of that date to the petitioner. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-109), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-575. - Final determination. 
A final determination of liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine and/or penalty after the administrative hearing officer's determination of violation liability, and the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures, including denial of a timely petition to set aside or failing to file the set aside petition within 21 days of the determination. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-110), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-576. - Notice of final determination. 
If any fine or penalty is owing and unpaid after a determination of liability under this Code has become final, and the respondent has exhausted or failed to exhaust judicial procedures for review, the adjudication administrator shall cause a notice of final determination of liability to be sent to the respondent in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-111), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-577. - Enforcement of judgment. 
(a)  Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative Review Act are a debt due and owing the Village and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Act may be sought for a final determination of an ordinance violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order of the administrative hearing officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  In any case in which a respondent has failed to comply with a judgment ordering that respondent correct an ordinance violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of an ordinance violation, any expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the judgment entered against that respondent, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the Village and may be collected in accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by the administrative hearing officer pursuant to this subsection (c), the Village shall provide a notice to the respondent that states that the respondent shall appear at a hearing before the administrative hearing officer to determine whether the respondent has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such hearing, which shall not be less than seven days from the date that notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven-day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail. 
(d)  Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/12-101, et seq.), or by the Uniform Commercial Code (810 ILCS 5/1-101, et seq.), a lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the respondent in the amount of any debt due and owing the Village under this chapter. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the Village manager, or his/her designee, may petition the administrative hearing officer to request the vacation of any final judgment and dismiss any administrative hearing action following final judgment or otherwise decline to pursue collection of any fine when the Village manager determines: 
(1)  That any such judgment was erroneously entered; 
(2)  That any such judgment previously entered is uncollectible; or 
(3)  That the party against whom such judgment was entered is in fact the wrong party in interest. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-112), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-578. - Compliance bond. 
In order to ensure that code violations are remedied or fines are paid in a timely manner, an administrative hearing officer, upon issuing a final determination of liability, may require a code violator to post with the Village a compliance bond or, as appropriate, to consent to the granting and recording of a lien against titled property. Bonds and liens shall be approved by the Village manager as to form and amount. Whenever it is necessary for the Village to make repairs or otherwise expend funds relating to a code violation for which a bond was posted, or whenever fines or costs remain unpaid after a code violator has exhausted or failed to exhaust judicial review procedures, the administrative hearing officer may, after giving the parties notice and opportunity to be heard, issue an order permitting the Village to draw against the bond in an appropriate amount, or to foreclose on the lien. The administrative hearing officer shall order the bond or the titled property or proceeds from the titled property, less the costs incurred by the Village, returned to the code violator upon proof of compliance with the applicable code provisions and the payment of applicable fines or costs. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-112), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-579. - Violations of orders. 
Any person, having received notice and an opportunity for a hearing as provided in this Code, who knowingly fails to comply with an order issued by an administrative hearing officer under this article, including the issuance of a subpoena, shall, if the order is not stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction prior to its effective date, be guilty of contempt. Contempt shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. In a prosecution under this section, it shall not be a defense that a person came into compliance with an order, sought judicial review of it, or made efforts to comply with an order, subsequent to its effective date. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-113), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-580. - Fines payable to the finance department. 
All fines and other monies paid to the Village in accordance with this article shall be remitted to the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-114), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-581. - Election of remedies. 
In no case may the office of administrative adjudication conduct an administrative adjudication proceeding for an alleged violation of this Code where the requested remedy is a punishment of imprisonment. Nothing in this article, however, shall preclude the Village from seeking the remedy of imprisonment in a court of law, including imprisonment for failure to comply with the order of an administrative hearing officer, pursuant to section 2-576 herein. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-115), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-582. - Administrative adjudication procedures not exclusive. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, neither the authority of the office of administrative adjudication to conduct administrative adjudication procedures nor the institution of such procedures under this article shall preclude the Village from seeking any remedies for code violations through the use of any other administrative procedure or court proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-116), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-583. - Other provisions not limiting. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the Code, all provisions of the Code, except for those specified in subsection (c) hereof, may be enforced by instituting an administrative adjudication proceeding with the office of administration adjudication as provided in this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the Code, any enforcement action, including but not limited to, license suspension or revocation, which may be exercised by another department or agency of the Village may also be exercised by the office of administrative adjudication. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall affect the jurisdiction of the Village liquor license commission, firefighters pension fund, police pension fund, the zoning board of appeals, or the board of fire and police commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-117), 6-7-2011)  
Sec. 2-584. - Judicial review. 
Any final determination by an administrative hearing officer shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 5454, § 2(2-118), 6-7-2011)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the Village, as a part of Supp. No. 19, ch. 6 was amended in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drugs, intoxicating compounds or any combination thereof, § 90-41. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The provisions of section 1-2 and the definitions in the Liquor Control Act of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/1-2, et seq. (the "Act"), apply to this chapter. The following definitions also apply to this chapter and in the event of a conflict between section 1-2 or the Act and any of the following definitions, the following definitions shall prevail: 
Agent of licensee means any owner, partner, director, officer, manager, and employee or authorized agent of a licensee but only while engaged in the business of such licensee or present on the licensed premises of such licensee. 
Applicant means any person, whether an individual, partnership or co-partnership, corporation or clubs who submits a written application to the local liquor control commissioner for one or more alcoholic liquor licenses. 
Keg means any original package container capable of holding more than three gallons of beer. 
Licensed premises means the place or location described in a local liquor license where alcoholic liquor is allowed to be stored, displayed or offered for sale. Not included are sidewalks, streets, parking areas and grounds adjacent to any such place or location unless expressly authorized in the applicable license. 
Licensee means a person holding a local liquor license. 
Minor means a person under the age of 21 years. 
Movie theater means any building to which the public is invited and pays consideration for the purpose of viewing motion pictures. Such premises may also broadcast via live video feed special performances. However, the main function of the theater shall be the presentation of motion pictures rated by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) or similar commercial film industry organization, or would otherwise meet such ratings standards based on content. 
Movie theater auditorium means that portion, or those portions, of a movie theater where patrons are seated for the actual viewing of motion pictures. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly served, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for patrons. 
Sale of keg means any sale of beer in a keg, even though the keg is to be returned by the purchaser to the seller. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 5901, § 2, 4-21-2015)  
Sec. 6-2. - Additional regulations not prohibited. 
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or release the owner, proprietor or person in charge of any licensed premises in the Village where alcoholic beverages are sold from the restrictions and requirements of any other provisions of this chapter or of the ordinances of the Village or of State or Federal statutes. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-3. - State law adopted. 
The Act, as amended, and the rules and regulations issued by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission as the same may, from time to time, be amended are hereby adopted by reference. In the event of a conflict between such Act and/or regulations and this chapter, this chapter shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-4. - Local liquor control commissioner. 
(a)  The Village president shall be the local liquor control commissioner for the Village (the "Commissioner") and shall be charged with the administration of the provisions of this chapter. The Commissioner may appoint deputies to assist in the administration of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The Commissioner shall exercise the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licensing of other than distillers, brewers, rectifiers, railroads and airplanes: 
(1)  Issue local licenses to qualified persons for premises in the Village. 
(2)  Issue renewal licenses on an annual basis to qualified licensees. 
(3)  Suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this article for any violation of any provision of this chapter, or for any violation of any State law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, or for failure to promptly pay any installment of the license fee upon the date on which such fee is due. 
(4)  Enter upon, or authorize law enforcement personnel to so enter, for the purpose of determining whether any provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations promulgated by him or by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission have been or are being violated and at such time, to examine the premises of the licensee involved. 
(5)  Act upon any valid complaint from any citizen that any provision of this chapter or any rules or regulations is being violated by any local licensee. 
(6)  Receive local license fees and forward same forthwith to the Village treasurer for proper deposit and accounting. 
(7)  Extend, by written order, closing hours upon occasion for good cause, as follows: 
a.  A class A license holder shall be entitled to sell alcoholic liquor for two hours beyond the normal closing hour on two different days per year. The license holder has the privilege of choosing the dates when he desires to utilize such two late closings by written notification to the Commissioner of such dates, delivered at least two weeks prior to such late closing or early opening dates. 
(8)  Permit, by written order, without payment of license or fee, the serving of alcoholic beverages for a fee or without charge for no more than 13 hours on unlicensed premises when such activity is secondary to a fund raising event sponsored by a nonprofit, charitable organization; application must be made in writing to the Commissioner at least two weeks prior to the event; unless the alcohol is served by a licensed caterer, the host shall provide evidence of dram shop insurance to the Commissioner with the application. 
(9)  Permit, by written order, the serving or giving of alcoholic beverages without charge by for-profit entities for events which are open to the public such as, but not limited to, grand openings, product introductions, anniversary celebrations, celebrity visitations, and similar public relations functions. Application must be made in writing to the Commissioner at least two weeks prior to the event. No for-profit entity may host more than three events in any calendar year. Unless the alcohol is served by a licensed caterer, the host shall provide evidence of dram shop insurance to the Commissioner with the application. 
(10)  Permit, by written order, a Class C or G licensee under this chapter to conduct wine or beer tasting events, wherein the donation of wine or beer in small and limited amounts is offered by such licensee for tasting purposes and immediate consumption on the premises, but only in conjunction with sales promotional efforts or educational programs within the premises of such licensee, and authorized and sponsored by such licensee ("Tasting Events"). Tasting Events shall be subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
a.  The licensee shall submit a request in writing to the Commissioner for permission to conduct Tasting Events. The Commissioner may issue a written order granting permission to conduct Tasting Events (the "Order") at his or her sole discretion, including taking into account the licensee's past conduct and the licensee having an area sufficient to conduct Tasting Events. The Order shall provide permission for Tasting Events for a period of the lesser of: 
1.  Twelve months; 
2.  The time remaining on the licensee's current license; or 
3.  any lesser period of time deemed appropriate by the Commissioner; 
b.  The Tasting Event shall be attended and supervised by a full-time employee of the licensee, servers must be BASSET certified and in compliance with section 6-39, and the Tasting Event shall only be held in a designated area on the licensed premises as approved by the Commissioner and designated in the Order; 
c.  The actual amount of wine or beer sampled shall not exceed the limits set forth in Section 6-31(a) of the Liquor Control Act; 
d.  The sampling shall be served in a container that shall be disposed of immediately following the sampling; and 
e.  The Commissioner may revoke the order should the licensee violate any of the foregoing provisions or if the licensee's license is suspended, revoked or terminated in any manner. 
(11)  Impose conditions on local licenses as set forth in a duly adopted resolution by the president and board of trustees. 
(12)  Conduct hearings in accordance with applicable State law for purposes of fulfilling any of the foregoing powers, functions and duties; provided, however, that all such hearings shall be on a record prepared by a certified court reporter or certified shorthand reporter. The licensee shall be responsible for all fees associated with such hearings as provided in section 6-33. 
(c)  If, in a liquor license violation hearing before the Commissioner, the person is found guilty, such person shall be subject to the general penalty provided in section 1-16, as well as the penalties set forth in section 6-5. 
(d)  All appeals to the State liquor control commission by a Village liquor licensee of a decision, order or action by the Commissioner or designee having the effect of fining the licensee and/or suspending or revoking the Village liquor license shall be limited to review of the official record of the formal proceedings before the Commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 5891, § 2, 2-3-2015)  
Sec. 6-5. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Unless provided otherwise in this chapter, the Village President may suspend or revoke any liquor licensee's license for any violation of any provision of this chapter or for any violation of the Act or other any State law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor. 
(b)  If, in a liquor license violation hearing before the Commissioner, the person is found guilty, such person shall be subject to the general penalty provided in section 1-16, as well as the fees and costs set forth in subsection 6-33(c). 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as provided in subsection (a), as well as the general penalty provided in section 1-16. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-6. - Intoxicated persons. 
(a)  Public drunkenness. No person shall be drunk or in a State of intoxication on any street, avenue or public place, to the disturbance of any other person. 
(b)  Sales prohibited. No licensee, and no agent of any licensee, shall sell, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person who is, or who appears to be, intoxicated. 
(c)  Secondary transfer prohibited. No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to any person who is, or who appears to be, intoxicated. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-7. - Persons under 21 years of age obtaining liquor by false pretenses. 
Any person under 21 years of age who shall obtain from any establishment licensed under this chapter, or from his agent or servant any intoxicating liquor, under false pretense of being then of age, shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-8. - Sales and service to and employment of underage persons. 
(a)  No licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, or any intoxicated person or any person known by him to be an habitual drunkard or mentally deficient. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any person under the age of 21 for whom he may be the parent or guardian to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(c)  The minimum age to draw, pour, mix or sell any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises or to be employed as a bartender therein shall be 21 years. The minimum age to serve any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises shall be 18 years. 
(d)  No licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, shall suffer or permit any person under the age of 21 years to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining, adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located, provided that this subsection shall not apply to any person under the age of 21 years on any licensed premises which derives its principal business from services or other commodities other than alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of any person under the age of 21 years to knowingly permit, sanction, allow, suffer or authorize such child or ward to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant of any premises located within the Village to knowingly allow or permit any person under the age of 21 years to remain on such premises while consuming alcoholic liquor thereon or while in possession of alcoholic liquor in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises or otherwise to tend bar therein. In addition to all other fines and penalties, the president may suspend or revoke the retail liquor dealer's license for any violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-9. - Purchase or acceptance of gifts of liquor by persons of non-age; identification cards; warnings. 
(a)  Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor, or have alcoholic liquor in his possession. 
(b)  If a licensee or his agent or employee believes, or has reason to believe, that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties. For the purposes of this section, "positive identification" means a document issued by a federal, State, county or municipal government, including by not limited to, a motor vehicle Operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service Act, an Illinois Identification Card, or an identification card issued to a member of the armed forces. 
(c)  No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false information. No person shall purchase, accept the delivery of or have the possession of alcoholic liquor in violation of this section. 
(d)  In every tavern or other place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall be supplied by the Village and which shall read substantially as follows: 
"Warning to all persons under the age of 21 years. You are subject to a fine up to $500.00 under the ordinances of the Village of Glenview if you purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in your possession, or if you have in your possession a false, forged, altered or defaced identification card which misrepresents your age." 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-10. - Loitering on licensed premises. 
Each liquor licensee licensed under this chapter shall post signs in two conspicuous places on or about the licensed premises stating that it is unlawful for any one or more persons in the possession of alcoholic liquor, whether packaged or not, to congregate or remain within 300 feet of the licensed premises, unless otherwise permitted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-11. - Obligations of purchasers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any one or more persons in the possession of alcoholic liquor, whether packaged or not, to congregate or remain within 300 feet of an establishment selling or offering to sell alcoholic liquor, whether packaged or not. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume alcoholic liquor in the parking area adjacent to any restaurant, tavern, liquor store, club or other business where alcoholic liquor is sold, or in any public way, whether or not adjacent to a business establishment that sells or offers to sell alcoholic liquor, whether packaged or not. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-12. - Use of alcohol in public parks. 
Consumption of alcohol in any park is prohibited. Violators shall be subject to the general penalty provided in section 1-16. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-13. - Village officials; manufacture or sale of liquor. 
The Village president or any member of the Village Board shall have no interest in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor in the Village, except as otherwise permitted by 235 ILCS 5/6-2(14). 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
ARTICLE II. - RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-14. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a class A, B, D, F, or H license holder to sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages in the Village between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on each day of the week, except that on Sunday, the closing hours shall be from 2:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. Licenses which held Class B licenses as of January 1, 2008, and are in good standing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall be permitted to maintain their existing hours of operation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a class C and G license holder to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the Village between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  All customers must be cleared from the premises of all licensed establishments in accordance with the hours set forth in this section for the cessation of sale of alcoholic beverages where the license permits consumption on the premises, provided, however, that other business or social functions of a retail store in which the sale of alcohol liquor is secondary, hotel, club or motel establishment may continue beyond such hours, provided that no alcoholic beverages are sold or served to the public, patrons, employees and/or the membership during such hours. The alcoholic beverage preparation areas shall be closed and secured in advance of the closing hours during which service of alcohol is prohibited and no service provided thereafter to ensure full and complete cessation of the prohibited activity for the applicable license. Cleaning and management personnel employed by the licensee may continue to be present upon the premises to perform assigned duties and responsibilities including, but not limited to, cleaning of the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 5121, § 2, 7-15-2008)  
Sec. 6-15. - Doors, etc. 
All doors and entryways provided for public use to the premises licensed under this article shall remain open and unlocked while customers of the licensed establishment remain within the premises. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-16. - Sanitary conditions. 
All premises used for the retail sale or storage for sale of alcoholic beverages shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be maintained in full compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter and other Village ordinances regulating the conditions or premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-17. - Health of retail establishment employees. 
No person, while affected with a disease in a communicable form that can be transmitted by foods or who is a carrier of organisms that cause such a disease or while afflicted with a boil, or infected wound, or an acute respiratory infection, shall work in a food service establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of such person contaminating food or food-contact surfaces with pathogenic organisms or transmitting disease to other persons. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-18. - Sale of kegs. 
(a)  A licensee who sells a keg shall affix to each keg sold a tag, furnished by the liquor control commissioner, containing an identification number enabling the purchaser to be identified in accordance with subsection 6-18(b). 
(b)  The licensee shall keep a logbook of all kegs sold, showing the identification number on the tag affixed to each keg, and the purchaser's name, address, telephone number, driver's license/state identification number, date of birth, and signature. The logbook shall be available for inspection by the Village police department during normal business hours. 
(c)  The licensee shall require the purchaser to deposit, at the time of the sale of a keg, at least $70.00 for sale of a keg with pumper and at least $20.00 for sale of a keg without a pumper. The deposit shall be refunded only upon the return of the keg with the tag properly affixed. Only one deposit fee will be required from a purchaser of more than one keg at any one time. 
(d)  The licensee shall require the purchaser, at the time of the sale, to sign a form to be provided by the liquor control commissioner, setting forth the provisions of this section and informing the purchaser that the deposit will be forfeited if the keg is not returned with the tag properly affixed. The licensee shall retain this form for 90 days after the sale. 
(e)  Any keg not returned with the tag properly affixed within 60 days following the date of sale shall be considered lost, and the deposit shall be forfeited. The licensee shall notify the Village police department on a monthly basis of all deposits that are forfeited. 
(f)  A licensee may retain the forfeited deposit. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to possess a keg within the Village which does not have a proper tag affixed or, if the keg was purchased outside the Village, without proof of purchase for the keg, including the name and address of the seller. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-19. - Additional business licenses. 
All liquor licensees shall be required to maintain a valid business license in the Village. The fee for such license shall be established by the Village in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 6-20. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the Village any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license or to sell liquor in violation of the terms of such license. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2(6-20), 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-21. - Application; required information. 
(a)  An applicant for a retail license from the Village shall submit to the president an application in writing, under oath, stating: 
(1)  The applicant's name and mailing address; 
(2)  The applicant's citizenship or U.S. residence status; 
(3)  The name and address of the applicant's business; 
(4)  If applicable, the date of the filing of the assumed name of the business with the County Clerk; 
(5)  In case of a co-partnership, the date of the formation of the partnership; in the case of a State corporation, the date of its incorporation; or in the case of a foreign corporation, the State where it was incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 to transact business in the State; 
(6)  The number, date of issuance and date of expiration of the applicant's current local retail liquor license; 
(7)  The name and address of the landlord if the premises are leased; 
(8)  The date of the applicant's first request for a Village liquor license and whether it was granted, denied or withdrawn; 
(9)  The address of the applicant when the first application for a Village liquor license was made; 
(10)  The applicant's current Village liquor license number; 
(11)  The date the applicant began liquor sales at his place of business; 
(12)  The address of the applicant's warehouse if he warehouses liquor; 
(13)  The applicant's retailer's occupation tax (ROT) registration number; 
(14)  The applicant's document locater number on his federal special tax stamp; 
(15)  Whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of the retailer's occupational tax (sales tax), and if so, the reasons for such delinquency; 
(16)  Whether the applicant is delinquent under the cash beer law, and if so, the reasons for such delinquency; 
(17)  In the case of a retailer, whether he is delinquent under the 30-day credit law, and if so, the reasons for such delinquency; 
(18)  Whether the applicant has made an application for a liquor license which has been denied, and if so, the reasons for such denial; 
(19)  Whether the applicant has ever had any previous liquor license suspended or revoked, and if so, the reasons for such suspension or revocation; 
(20)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gambling offense or felony, and if so, the particulars of such conviction; 
(21)  Whether the applicant possesses a current federal wagering stamp, and if so, the reasons for such possession; 
(22)  Whether the applicant or any other person directly in his place of business is a public official, and if so, the particulars thereof; 
(23)  The applicant's name, sex, date of birth, Social Security number, position and percentage of ownership in the business, and the name, sex, date of birth, Social Security number, position and percentage of ownership in the business of every sole owner, partner, corporate officer, director, manager and any person who owns five percent or more of the shares of the applicant's business entity or parent corporations of the applicant's business entity; and 
(24)  That he has not received or borrowed money or anything else of value, and that he will not receive or borrow money or anything else of value (other than merchandising credit) in the ordinary course of business for a period not to exceed 90 days as expressly permitted under 235 ILCS 5/6-5, directly or indirectly, from any manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor, or from any representative of any such manufacturer, importing distributor or distributor, nor be a party in any way, directly or indirectly, to any violation by a manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor of 235 ILCS 5/6-6. 
(b)  In addition to the information required in subsection (a), such application shall contain such other and further information as the Commissioner may, by rule or regulation not inconsistent with law, prescribe. 
(c)  If the applicant reports a felony conviction as required under subsection (a)(20), such conviction may be considered by the Commissioner in determining qualifications for licensing, but shall not operate as a bar to licensing. 
(d)  If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, firm, association, club or corporation, then the application shall be signed by one member of such partnership, the president or secretary of such corporation or an authorized agent of such partnership or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2(6-21), 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-22. - Persons ineligible for license. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to the following: 
(1)  A person who is not of good character and reputation; 
(2)  A person who is not a legal resident of the United States; 
(3)  A person is not a resident of the Village, provided that an applicant which is a partnership, co-partnership, club or corporation shall be deemed to be a resident of the Village if it owns a business operating within the Village. 
(4)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or State law, unless the Commissioner determines that such person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering matters set forth in such person's application and the commission's investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant; 
(5)  A person who has been convicted of being the keeper, or is keeping, a house of prostitution; 
(6)  A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality; (note: this is not a criteria for a State retail license); 
(7)  A person whose license issued under this Code has been revoked for cause; 
(8)  A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license issued under this Code would not be eligible for such license upon a first application; 
(9)  A co-partnership, if any general partner thereof, or any limited partner thereof, owning more than five percent of the aggregate limited partner interest in such co partnership would not be eligible to receive a license under this chapter; 
(10)  A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license under this chapter for any reason; 
(11)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee; 
(12)  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, subsequent to the adoption of this chapter, or shall have forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation; 
(13)  A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued; 
(14)  Any sworn law enforcing officer of the Village, employee of the Village, other Village officer, Village official, and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor in the Village, except as otherwise permitted by 235 ILCS 5/6-2(14); 
(15)  A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by any of subsections 28-1(a)(3)—(11) (720 ILCS 5/28-1) or section 28-1.1 or 28-3 (720 ILCS 5/28-1.1, 5/28-3) of the Criminal Code of 1961, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of such statutory provisions; 
(16)  A corporation that is not in good standing in its State of incorporation or not registered to do business in the State; or 
(17)  A person who is not eligible to receive any State retail liquor dealer's license pursuant to the provisions of the State statute, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to any person for the sale of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age, or where the principal business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors. 
(c)  Except in the case of hotels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any premises which has any access which leads from such premises to any other portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for use by the public. 
(d)  A criminal conviction of a corporation is not grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation of a license applied for or held by the corporation if the criminal conviction was not the result of a violation of any federal or State law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, the offense that led to the conviction did not result in any financial gain to the corporation and the corporation has terminated its relationship with each director, officer, employee or controlling shareholder whose actions directly contributed to the conviction of the corporation. The local liquor control Commissioner shall determine if all provisions of this subsection have been met before any action on the corporation's license is initiated. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2(6-22), 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-23. - Classes. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage licenses of the Village shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Class "A" which shall authorize the sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises where sold. The business operator must maintain the licensed premises as a bona fide eating establishment. The restaurant must maintain suitable food preparation facilities and the restaurant must also make actual and substantial sales of meals for consumption on the premises. 
If a restaurant operates as a brewpub, the following regulations also apply: 
a.  The license holder must hold a valid brewpub license from the State and adhere to all requirements therein. 
b.  Complimentary tastings offered with tours shall not exceed three servings of two ounces each, per the Illinois Liquor Control Act Section 6-31. 
(2)  Class "B" shall authorize the sale of beer and wine for consumption on the premises where sold. The business operator must maintain the licensed premises as a bona fide eating establishment. The restaurant must maintain suitable food preparation facilities and the restaurant must also make actual and substantial sales of meals for consumption on the premises. 
If a restaurant operates a brewpub, the following regulations also apply: 
a.  The license holder must hold a valid brewpub license from the state and adhere to all requirements therein. 
b.  Complimentary tastings offered with tours shall not exceed three servings of two ounces each, per the Illinois Liquor Control Act Section 6-31. 
(3)  Class "C" which shall authorize the retail sale of packaged alcoholic liquor, but not consumption on the premises where sold, in a store, establishment or facility in which the retail sale of alcoholic liquor is the primary and principal business thereof. The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in section 30-1. 
(4)  Class "D" which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors by the proprietors of clubs or daily fee golf courses, for consumption only by patrons. Controlled service only: Alcohol may not be stored in coolers or dispensers to which the public has access. The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in section 30-1, provided however, there shall be no annual fee for clubs or golf courses owned or operated by the Glenview Park District. 
(5)  Class "E" which shall authorize the retail sale of packaged beer or wine through telephone or mail order and parcel post delivery only, and not for offer on the premises. The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in section 30-1. 
(6)  Class "F" which shall have sub-classifications as follows: 
a.  Class "F-1" which shall authorize and allow the service of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with, and as an incidental part of, the catering of food for parties and special events at premises not otherwise licensed for the sale or consumption of liquor. 
b.  Class "F-2" which shall authorize the sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises, but such sales shall be limited to members of a group assembled on the premises for the purpose of attending cooking class or wine class offered by a cooking school, or in connection with an event catered by a cooking school. The sale of alcohol in bottles or other packages for consumption off the premises shall also be allowed. For purposes of this subsection, the term "cooking school" shall be defined as business which provides culinary instruction, both demonstration style and hands on, to persons of all levels of cooking experience. 
c.  Class "F-3" which shall authorize the sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises, but such sales shall be limited to members of a group assembled on the premises for the purpose of attending art or crafts classes offered by an art studio, arts and crafts school, or similar leisure/entertainment business. 
1.  At least 65 percent of the facility's total annual revenue shall be derived from sources other than the sale of alcoholic beverages and the sale of alcohol shall not be permitted except when the licensee is conducting classes. A certified record of the annual revenue shall be included with the annual liquor license renewal application and shall be considered by the Liquor Commissioner as a basis for non-renewal. 
2.  The service of alcoholic beverages shall only be allowed during the time at which the facility is open for classes. 
3.  Food must be served when alcoholic beverages are available for consumption. Such food may be prepared off-site by a licensed caterer or restaurant, and shall be served in a manner which complies with all applicable village codes and regulations. 
4.  The sale of alcohol in bottles or other packages for consumption off the premises shall not be allowed. 
d.  Class "F-4" which shall authorize the sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises where sold. The licensee must maintain the licensed premises as a movie theater, where the primary and principal business is the showing of motion pictures, and the sale of alcoholic beverages is secondary and incidental. 
1.  Alcoholic beverages shall only be served in a designated bar area located in the lobby of the movie theater. No alcoholic beverages shall be served from the main concessions area. 
2.  Alcoholic beverages may be consumed on premises in the movie theater or a movie theater auditorium. 
3.  Alcoholic beverages must be served in a clear container of a different color, size and design than those in which non-alcoholic beverages are served. 
4.  No more than one alcoholic beverage may be served to a customer at any one time. 
5.  The licensee shall not sell, or offer to sell, alcoholic beverages unless the movie theater is actually open for the showing of movies. Alcoholic beverages shall not be served more than one hour prior to the advertised showing time of the first movie to be shown on any day; and alcoholic beverages shall not be served beyond the time limitations set forth in section 6-14(a) or the conclusion of the last movie, whichever occurs first. Under no circumstance shall alcoholic beverages be served outside of the time limitations set forth in section 6-14(a). 
6.  A licensee shall be responsible for any alcohol consumption by any person younger than 21 years of age on the licensed premises, regardless of whether the alcohol was purchased from the licensee. 
7.  Food must be served in a manner that complies with all applicable village codes and regulations. 
e.  Class "F-5" which shall authorize the sale of alcohol by the glass for consumption on the premises in an establishment in which the primary and principal business is the provision of health and beauty personal services, such as a nail or hair salon, and in which the sale of alcohol is secondary and incidental. Food must be served in a manner that complies with all applicable village codes and regulations. 
(7)  Class "G" which shall authorize the retail sale of packaged alcoholic liquor, in a store, establishment or facility in which the primary and principal business is the sale at retail of other services, goods, wares and merchandise and in which the retail sale of alcoholic liquor is secondary and incidental. Consumption shall not be allowed on the premises where sold, except: 
a.  Where the licensee has also been issued a class I license; or 
b.  Where a business establishment provides short-term or long-term lodging to the public for compensation, provided however, that consumption shall be limited to the rooms of such establishment. 
The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in section 30-1. 
(8)  Class "H" which shall authorize a class A or B license holder to sell packaged alcoholic liquor from the bar on the license holder's premises during the permissible hours of operation as specified herein. Only a class A or B licensee shall be eligible to make application for a class H license. The annual fee for such license holders shall be as provided in section 30-1. 
(9)  Class "I" which shall authorize a class G license holder to sell beer or wine for consumption on license holder's premises during the permissible hours of operation as specified herein. Only a class G shall be eligible to make application for a class I license. The annual fee for such license holders shall be as provided in section 30-1. 
a.  Each class I license shall be issued subject to the applicant's compliance with all of the following conditions: 
b.  The class G licensee must be a grocery store that provides food preparation as well as the retail sale of cheeses, deli and gourmet food products and has a service counter for beer and/or wine. 
c.  A class I license may be issued only to a grocery store in which facilities for food preparation and a service counter to enable beer and/or wine to be served for consumption on the premises are also present. Table seating for service of food and/or beer and/or wine to customers may be maintained by a class I licensee but shall not be required. 
d.  The service counter area located within such grocery store shall be identified on a scale drawing of the licensed premises submitted with the application for the class I license, and shall be subject to the prior review and written approval of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. 
e.  Any beer or wine poured, served, and/or sold for consumption on the premises of the licensee shall be poured, served, and/or sold only by an employee who has completed a state-certified beverage alcohol sellers' and servers' education and training ("BASSET") program as specified in section 6-63; self-service of such alcoholic liquor for consumption on the licensed premises shall not be permitted. 
f.  A separate point of sale (i.e., a cash register) at the service counter shall be maintained and used by the licensee for all sales of beer and/or wine intended for consumption on the licensed premises. 
g.  It shall be unlawful for any patron to leave such licensed premises with an open or a partially consumed container of beer or wine, except as otherwise permitted by Section 6-33 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934. 
h.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the tasting of wine and/or beer on such licensed premises shall be permitted, subject to the limitations set forth in subsection 6-4(b)(10). 
(10)  Class "J" which shall authorize the sale of beer and wine for consumption on the premises in an establishment in which the primary and principal business is the sale of coffee or tea and in which the sale of beer and wine is secondary and incidental. 
a.  Any beer or wine poured, served, and/or sold for consumption on the premises must be served in individual servings with no individual serving of beer exceeding 12 ounces and no individual serving of wine exceeding six ounces. Such service will be provided in a clear container. Not more than one individual serving may be delivered to a customer at any one time. The sale or service of beer or wine is prohibited by drive-through facilities. 
b.  The sale of beer and wine may only occur between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
c.  Food must be served in a manner which complies with all applicable village codes and regulations. 
The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in section 30-1. 
(11)  Class "K" which shall authorize the sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises and the retail sale of packaged alcoholic liquor in a facility which manufactures beer in which the sale of alcohol for consumption on the premises is secondary to the distribution of alcohol for retail sale off the premises. 
Class K licenses shall be issued subject to the applicant's compliance with all the following conditions: 
a.  The license holder must obtain a valid craft class I or class II brewer's license from the state and adhere to all requirements therein. If the license holder is located in downtown D-D or MURC districts, the annual limit of beer manufactured onsite is 157,500 gallons. 
b.  Tours of the facility may be offered with complimentary tastings that shall not exceed three servings of two ounces each. 
c.  Retail sale of alcohol intended for consumption off the premises shall only occur if the container is sealed for transport and shall not be opened or consumed in the tasting room. 
d.  Tasting rooms must have packaged or prepared foods available. 
e.  Licensees in industrial districts shall only be permitted to have restaurants as an accessory use to a craft brewery and limited to no more than 32 seats. 
f.  Tours and retail sales for consumption on and off the premises shall be allowed from 10:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. Any additional hours would be subject to review and approval via the Village's special events process, except as otherwise allowed in this section. 
g.  Licensees who have a restaurant on premises, or an agreement with a restaurant holding a class A or class B liquor license within 500 feet of the property and point-of-sale ordering on premises, may adopt operating hours no earlier than 10:00 a.m. an no later than a class B licensee, as permitted in section 6-14. 
h.  Special events: The holder of a class K license may conduct special events on the licensed premises, either open or closed to the general public. Such special events may include, but not be limited to, special tasting events, beer classes, and private dinners. Such special events lasting longer than two hours shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
1.  Hot, catered food must be made available. 
2.  Valet parking shall be required if more than 75 percent of building capacity is reached. 
The license holder will not be required to file for a special event permit if the conditions of this subsection are met and event is not louder than during normal business hours. The license holder must have a valet parking plan on file with the Village. 
i.  The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in section 30-1. 
(12)  Class 'L,' bring your own beverage (BYOB), which shall authorize the consumption of beer and wine only that is brought onto the licensed premises of a business, restaurant, or craft brewery. 
Class L licenses shall be issued subject to the applicant's compliance with all the following conditions: 
a.  Patrons may bring onto the premises no more than 72 ounces of unopened beer and/or no more than 750 milliliters of unopened wine per two patrons over the age of 21. 
b.  Food must be served in a manner that complies with all Village codes and regulations. 
c.  All employees performing corkage duties must comply with sections 6-8 and 6-39. 
d.  The licensee may charge a corkage fee. 
e.  The licensee shall not permit any customer to leave the premises with any open beer container or any open wine container other than wine secured in compliance with the requirements of section 6-33 of the State Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/6-33). 
f.  The annual fee for such license shall be as provided in section 30-1. 
(b)  No liquor license shall be issued to any fast food or convenience-type store, establishment or facility. 
(c)  A validly issued license for an establishment located on property which is annexed to the Village shall be issued a temporary license which shall recognize such existing alcoholic beverage licensing and privileges there under until the next liquor license renewal period, subject to the payment of the license fee in this section. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 5113, § 2, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 5121, § 7-15-2008; Ord. No. 5285, § 3, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 5656, § 3, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 5661, §§ 2, 3, 4-2-2013; Ord. No. 5703, § 2, 9-3-2013; Ord. No. 5705, § 2, 10-1-2013; Ord. No. 5802, § 2, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 5887, §§ 2, 3, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 5900, § 2, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 5901, § 3, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. 5980, § 2, 4-19-2016; Ord. No. 5887, §§ 2, 11, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 6137, § 2, 12-5-2017; Ord. No. 6153, § 2, 3-6-2018; Ord. No. 6161, § 3, 6-5-2018) 
Editor's note— At the instruction of the Village, per Memo of Oct. 4, 2013, subsection 6-23(a)(8) was amended to read as set out herein.  
Sec. 6-24. - Total number of liquor licenses issued. 
The total number of liquor licenses to be issued at any time is limited to: 
LICENSE 
TYPE 	PROPOSED MAXIMUM 
LICENSES ALLOWED 
A 	49 (Includes (9)—3 a.m. licenses) 
B 	21 
C 	8 
D 	4 
E 	0 
F 	8 
G 	16 
H 	15 
I 	3 
J 	2 
K 	2 
L 	10 
TOTAL 	128 
 
In the event any one of the licenses provided for herein shall lapse, be revoked or terminated in any manner, the Board of Trustees may reduce the maximum number of such licenses. 
(Ord. No. 5095, §§ 2, 3, 5-6-2008; Ord. No. 5319, § 2, 3-16-2010; Ord. No. 5332, § 2, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 5627, § 2, 1-15-2013; Ord. No. 5656, § 5, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 5661, § 5, 4-2-2013; Ord. No. 5703, § 3, 9-3-2013; Ord. No. 5802, § 4, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 5835, § 2, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 5887, § 4, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 5899, § 2, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 5901, § 5, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. 5937, § 2, 11-17-2015; Ord. No. 5980, § 4, 4-19-2016; Ord. No. 6144, § 6, 1-2-2018; Ord. No. 6153, § 3, 3-6-2018; Ord. No. 6161, § 2, 6-5-2018; Ord. No. 6260, § 2, 6-18-2019)  
Secs. 6-25, 6-26. - Reserved.  
Sec. 6-27. - Location near churches, schools, etc. 
(a)  No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any building primarily devoted to religious worship, a school other than an institution of higher learning, a hospital, a home for aged or indigent persons or veterans, their spouses or children, or any military or naval station, provided that such prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs or restaurants, food shops or other places where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on; nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on a premises within 100 feet of any church or school where the church or school has been established within such 100 feet since the issuance of the original license. The distance of 100 feet shall be measured from the property boundaries of the applicant's premises to the property boundaries of the building used primarily for religious worship, school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or veterans, their spouses or children, or any military or naval station. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic beverages if any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages as provided by subsection 6-4(b)(9), such sale complies with that section and all other applicable sections of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-28. - Requirements for restaurant and club licenses. 
No person shall receive a license to sell alcoholic beverages upon any premises as a restaurant or as a club unless the licensed premise complies with the definitions of those terms as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-29. - Examination of applicant. 
(a)  The local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to examine, under oath, any applicant for an alcoholic beverage license or for a renewal thereof, or any person who must qualify for an alcoholic beverage license on behalf of an applicant or licensee, or any licensee upon whom notice or revocation or suspension has been served in the manner hereinafter provided; to examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant, person, or licensee; to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the performance of his duties. The Commissioner shall have the authority to issue subpoenas for such purpose which shall be effective in any part of the State and to authorize an agent to act in his behalf in obtaining the information desired. 
(b)  The local Liquor Control Commissioner, or his authorized agent, may require any persons involved in an application for an alcoholic beverage license to be fingerprinted and investigated by the police department for the purpose of verifying individual qualifications for such license. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-30. - Supplemental applications. 
If the information provided pursuant to this article by any applicant, licensee, or person who must qualify for an alcoholic beverage license on behalf of an applicant or licensee should change or become incomplete or inapplicable, the applicant or licensee shall, within 60 days, supplement the information in his alcoholic beverage application so that the information remains correct and complete. The applicant or licensee shall pay a supplemental application fee in an amount equal to one-half of the annual license fee. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-31. - Notice of application receipt; objections; hearings; appeals. 
Upon receipt of an application for license for a liquor license, the liquor Commissioner shall cause to be mailed to the owners of all adjacent properties two lots deep in all directions a written notice of receipt of an application for a liquor license. Such written notice shall specify the name and address of the applicant and the license classification applied for, and advise the adjacent owners of the time, date and location that the board of trustees will consider the application and make a recommendation to the liquor Commissioner. The decision of the liquor Commissioner will be final. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-32. - Death of licensee. 
(a)  In the event of the death of a person holding a liquor license during the period in which such license is in effect, a liquor license may, subject to all other provisions of this chapter, be issued to a person who is the father, mother, brother, sister, husband, wife, son or daughter of the licensee, for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises designated in such decedent's license, and thereafter, such licensee shall enjoy all the privileges appurtenant to the decedent's license. 
(b)  In the event any one of the licenses provided for shall lapse, be revoked or terminated in any manner, the board of trustees may reduce the maximum number of such licenses. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-33. - Fees. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  The fees for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be as established in section 30-1. Any applicant who has not previously been issued a liquor license by the Village under this section shall pay a pro-rated portion of the fees established in section 30-1 based on the number of full months that the applicant is licensed in the first calendar year, and thereafter the annual license fees shall be as established in section 30-1. 
(c)  Every licensee who is requested to appear before the Commissioner shall be subject to a non-refundable hearing fee in the amount established in the annual fee ordinance, plus the actual cost, as hereinafter defined, incurred by the Village in conducting such hearing. For the purpose of calculating the additional, "actual cost" fee due pursuant to this subsection, the actual costs incurred by the Village in conducting a hearing before the Commissioner shall be deemed to include, without limitation, the following items of direct and indirect expense: 
(1)  Court reporter (direct cost). 
(2)  Administrative preparation and review (hourly salary times a multiplier to be established from time to time by the Village manager at a level sufficient to recover 100 percent of the direct and indirect cost of such service). 
(3)  Document preparation and review (hourly salary times a multiplier to be established from time to time by the Village manager at a level sufficient to recover 100 percent of the direct and indirect cost of such service). 
(4)  Legal review, consultation and advice (direct cost). 
(5)  Copy reproduction (direct cost). 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 5162, § 2, 11-18-2008; Ord. No. 5269, § 2, 11-17-2009; Ord. No. 5285, § 3, 12-8-2009)  
Sec. 6-34. - Personal privilege; refund of fees; renewals. 
(a)  A license issued under this article shall be purely a personal privilege to expire on the next December 31 following the issuance thereof, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or be subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. In the event of the death of a person holding a liquor license during the period in which such license is in effect, a liquor license may, subject to all other provisions of this chapter, be issued to a person who is the father, mother, brother, sister, husband, wife, son or daughter of the licensee, for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor at the premises designated in such decedent's license, and thereafter, such licensee shall enjoy all the privileges appurtenant to the decedent's license until the expiration of the license. Such license shall not descend by the laws of the State or intestate devolution, but except as provided above, it shall cease upon the death of the licensee, provided that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but no longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. No other refund of license fees paid shall be made. 
(b)  Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided, he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose, and, provided further, that the renewal privilege provided for in this subsection shall not be construed as a vested right which shall, in any case, prevent the president from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the jurisdiction. 
(c)  Except as may be provided in this section as to the bankruptcy of a licensee, any sale, transfer or assignment of more than 50 percent of the outstanding shares of a corporation holding any license shall terminate such license, and the initial license issued to the same named corporation shall be subject to a payment of fee for an initial license as provided in section 6-33. 
(d)  Except as may be provided in this section as to the bankruptcy, insolvency or death of a licensee, any sale, transfer or assignment of any copartner or copartner's interest in any license held by a co-partnership, where such copartner or copartner's interest being so transferred exceeds 50 percent of the total partnership, shall terminate such license, and the initial license issued to the new co-partnership shall be subject to a payment of a fee for an initial license as provided in subsection (d); provided, however, that a transfer of interest to a father, mother, brother, sister, husband, wife, son or daughter shall not be deemed to be a sale, transfer or assignment under the provisions of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-35. - Reserved.  
Sec. 6-36. - Change of location. 
A retail dealer's liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages only on the premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed only upon formal permission issued by the local liquor control Commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages under the laws of this State, this chapter and the ordinances of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-37. - Display. 
Every licensee shall cause his current alcoholic beverage license to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-38. - Special conditions for all licenses. 
Every alcoholic beverage license shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions of operation as the Commissioner, with approval of a majority of the board of trustees, may deem necessary and appropriate in connection with the public health, safety and welfare. Any such conditions and restrictions shall be approved by a resolution duly adopted by the board of trustees, which resolution shall be incorporated by reference into the license itself by the local liquor control Commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Sec. 6-39. - Training requirements for beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training program (BASSET). 
(a)  For the purposes of this section and this chapter, the term "BASSET Program" shall mean and refer to a State certified Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education Training Program (BASSET) or its equivalent, meeting the minimum curriculum requirements of Title 77, Part 3500 of the Illinois Administrative Code. 
(b)  With respect to all classes of liquor licenses described in section 6-23 except for Class E licenses (collectively for purposes of this section, "Licenses"), all new managers and all persons who sell or serve open containers of alcoholic beverages at retail and anyone whose job description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of open containers of alcoholic beverages at retail or for entry into the licensed premises (collectively for purposes of this section, "Alcohol Servers") shall be required to complete a BASSET program by July 1, 2015, or within 120 days after the Alcohol Server begins his or her employment, whichever comes later, unless previously issued a valid server training certificate by a certified BASSET trainer between July 1, 2012, and July 1, 2015. Verification of completion of a BASSET program by all applicable personnel shall be maintained on file by the licensee and submitted by that licensee along with the next application for annual license renewal. 
(c)  All applicants for renewal of licenses shall submit proof of completion of a BASSET program by the manager of the licensed premises and all Alcohol Servers at the licensed premises. 
(d)  All applicants for licenses shall be required to submit, within 90 days after issuance of the initial license, proof of completion of a BASSET program by the manager of the licensed premises and all Alcohol Servers. If at such time any Alcohol Servers have not yet completed their BASSET training in accordance with subsection (b), the licensee shall submit such proof of training as soon as it is completed. 
(e)  Failure of a licensee to: 
(1)  Require its manager and all Alcohol Servers to complete a BASSET program as required by this section or to renew his or her BASSET training certificate upon its expiration; 
(2)  Maintain records of such completion; or 
(3)  Submit evidence of such completion when requested or required to do so, shall be cause for any one or more of the following: 
a.  Denial of an application for, or renewal of, licenses; 
b.  Imposition of a fine; 
c.  Suspension or revocation of licenses; and 
d.  Other action taken by the Commissioner as provided in section 6-5. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 5892, § 2, 2-3-2015)  
Sec. 6-40. - Alcoholic beverage sales cash register requirements. 
Any class "G" license whose primary business is not the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off premises shall be required to utilize persons over the age of 21 (who have completed a BASSET training program as stated in section 6-39) to effect the sale of alcoholic beverages. The sales may be made at any cash register. In instances where the licensee is using persons under the age of 21 to staff cash registers, an adult that has completed its BASSET training program must be called to the cash register to handle the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 5089, § 2, 4-1-2008)  
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; amusement tax, § 70-101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public place of amusement means and includes any building, space, room or enclosure to which the public may be admitted, with or without the payment of an admission fee or charge of any kind or character, where the public may engage in or witness the performance of any amateur theatrical entertainment, any exhibit, show, amusement, cabaret entertainment, whether musical or otherwise, or any dance or skating, either of patrons or other persons. 
(Code 1959, § 16.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-2. - License required. 
No person, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent of any restaurant or public place of refreshment, whether an admission fee is charged or not, shall give, conduct, produce, present or offer any cabaret or other entertainment therein without having first obtained the license required for public places of amusement as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 16.2)  
Sec. 10-3. - License application; issuance. 
(a)  The application for a license to conduct a place of public amusement within the Village shall be made to the president of the Village, setting forth the full name of the applicant, the members of the firm, if the applicant shall be such, and if a society, club or corporation, the full names and residences of the principal officers of such society, club or corporation, and a description of the place where it is proposed to conduct such place of amusement, and a description of the kind and class of entertainment the applicant proposes to give and the seating capacity of such place. 
(b)  Upon such application being made, the president shall make, or cause to be made, an investigation, and if, upon such investigation, he shall be of the opinion that the applicant is or are persons of good moral character and proper and suitable persons to be so licensed, and that the premises where such amusement is to be held are suitable for the purpose for which a license is desired, and in proper sanitary condition, he shall report such findings to the board of trustees, which may thereupon approve the issuance of such license, which shall entitle the licensee to conduct, produce, present, operate and offer the class of entertainment provided in such license at the time described in such application and for the period designated, upon payment of the license fee provided for in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 16.3)  
Sec. 10-4. - Refusal to grant license. 
If the place at which the public amusement is to be held or given shall not be a fit or proper place and not constructed, maintained and operated or conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any ordinances of the Village governing and controlling such places, including the building code of the Village, or if the amusement or entertainment desired to be produced or offered is of an obscene, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-20(b), nature, or will constitute an immediate danger to life or property, or if the applicant for such license shall not be of good moral character, the president and board of trustees may refuse to approve the application, and no license shall be issued by the Village manager. 
(Code 1959, § 16.4)  
Sec. 10-5. - License fees generally. 
The fee to be charged for a license to produce, present, operate and offer any of the amusement places as defined in section 10-1 shall be as provided in chapter 30, provided, however, that the president and board of trustees may grant a term license for any of the amusement places defined in section 10-1 for the specific number of successive days, or for such days as may be designated in the license, at the rate provided in chapter 30-1. 
(Code 1959, § 16.5; Ord. No. 5113, § 3, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 10-6. - Additional fees. 
The licensee of any place of public amusement which shall or may be conducted or operated in conjunction with any restaurant or any soft drink or ice cream parlor or any room or place where malted or vinous non-intoxicating beverages, as defined by law, are sold, shall pay, a restaurant or food establishment license fee as provided in chapter 30, in addition to the entertainment license fee as provided in chapter 30-1. 
(Code 1959, § 16.6; Ord. No. 5113, § 3, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 10-7. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-8. - Bond or insurance required. 
No license shall be issued under this article until after the applicant has filed a good and sufficient security or indemnity bond or insurance, guaranteeing that the Village will be held harmless from any and all claims for damages arising out of the exercise of such license or the conduct of the business authorized by the license. The form and content of the bond and the surety thereto shall be subject to the approval of the president and board of trustees. Such security or indemnity bond, or insurance shall cover a liability in the amount of $10,000.00 with respect to each license issued under this article, and, in the case of an insurance policy, shall include a statement to the effect that the issuing company shall not cancel the policy until after ten days' notice to the president and board of trustees of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 16.8)  
Sec. 10-9. - Closing hours. 
All places of public amusement, except bowling alleys and pool halls, within the Village, shall be closed on or before 1:00 a.m.; provided, however, that upon the application of a bona fide and responsible organization or society, the president is authorized, in his discretion, to grant such organization or society a permit to continue a dance or other amusement specified in this section until 3:00 a.m., provided further, that no tickets shall be sold or accepted for the admission and no persons admitted thereto after 1:00 a.m. 
(Code 1959, § 16.9)  
Sec. 10-10. - Violations; penalties. 
Each violation of this chapter or other laws or ordinances applicable thereto shall be punished as provided in section 1-16, and the president is authorized to revoke the license granted under this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 16.10)  
Secs. 10-11—10-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COIN-OPERATED GAME MACHINES 
 
Sec. 10-41. - License required. 
No licensee shall have on or about his premises any coin-operated game machine without having first secured a license under this chapter.  
Sec. 10-42. - Number permitted. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to have or maintain more than eight coin-operated game machines upon or within a single premises. 
(Code 1959, § 10.95)  
Sec. 10-43. - Acting without license. 
Any person who fails to license coin-operated game machines and/or exceeds the maximum limit per establishment violates this article and is subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 10.96)  
Secs. 10-44—10-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COIN-OPERATED MUSICAL DEVICES 
 
Sec. 10-71. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the location, installation, maintenance or use upon his premises of any automatic, coin-controlled or coin-operated music box or device which furnishes what is commonly referred to as "canned music," without first having obtained a license therefore, and such license shall be issued upon payment of an entertainment license fee as provided in chapter 30-1. 
(Code 1959, § 16.13; Ord. No. 5113, § 3, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 10-72. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful to use, or permit the use of, such automatic, coin-controlled or coin-operated music box or device between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sundays. 
(Code 1959, § 16.14)  
Sec. 10-73. - Nuisance declared. 
It shall be unlawful to use such coin-controlled musical devices in the Village in a manner which interferes with the health, peace and comfort of any person in the neighborhood thereof, and such use is hereby declared to be nuisance. 
(Code 1959, § 16.15)  
Sec. 10-74. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to any coin-controlled or coin-operated music box or other device furnishing music which is operated in schools or other public buildings. 
(Code 1959, § 16.16)  
Sec. 10-75. - Violations. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16 for each offense, and the license provided for in this article may be revoked by the president. 
(Code 1959, § 16.16)  
Secs. 10-76—10-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BILLIARDS, BOWLING AND SIMILAR AMUSEMENTS 
 
Sec. 10-101. - License required. 
No person shall have or keep for his profit within the Village any billiard or pool table, bowling alley or coin-operated game machine without first obtaining a license therefor, as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 16.17)  
Sec. 10-102. - License fees. 
Every person who shall run for profit billiard and pool tables, bowling alleys or coin-operated game machines shall, upon application to the president and board of trustees for approval thereof, pay an annual entertainment license fee as provided in chapter 30-1. 
(Code 1959, § 16.18; Ord. No. 5113, § 3, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 10-103. - Closing hours. 
All bowling alleys, pool halls and public billiard rooms shall be closed on or before 1:00 a.m. each day; and no such establishment shall be open to the public prior to 8:00 a.m. each weekday, except that on Sunday, no such establishment shall be open to the public prior to 12:00 noon. 
(Code 1959, § 16.19)  
Sec. 10-104. - Violations; penalties. 
For each violation of any of the provisions of this article or other laws or ordinances applicable thereto, offenders shall be punished as provided in section 1-16, and the president is authorized to revoke the license granted under this article. 
(Code 1959, § 16.20)  
Secs. 10-105—10-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SHOWS AND OTHER ENTERTAINMENT 
 
Sec. 10-131. - License required; exceptions. 
No person shall give, within the limits of the Village, any show or entertainment for gain within any hall, opera house or building, or under canvas, or in any open space, without first procuring a license to do so, subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16 for each and every violation of this section, provided that, for musical, theatrical, minstrel, school, church or other entertainment given by the citizens of the Village, and who are not engaged in the giving of such entertainment as a business, no license shall be required. Each day such offense shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1959, § 16.11)  
Sec. 10-132. - License fees. 
All entertainment held in any hall, opera house or building, or under canvas or other covering, or in any open space, of a dramatic or operatic character, or lectures, public readings, recitations, exhibitions of paintings, statuary or panoramas, performances or any feats of jugglery, sleight of hand, variety, or athletic or public dances, and all other exhibitions, performances and entertainments, including circuses and similar performances not enumerated in this section, shall pay a license fee as provided in chapter 30-1, provided that the president and board of trustees may grant a term license for any of such exhibitions, performances or entertainments for a specific number of successive days or for one or more specific days of successive weeks at such rate as they may determine, which rate shall be the same, more or less than the rate charged for the entertainment license as set forth in chapter 30-1, and, provided further, that the full amount of such term license shall be paid in advance. 
(Code 1959, § 16.12; Ord. No. 5113, § 3, 6-17-2008)  
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Dog kennels, catteries and pet shops, § 22-301 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 38. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any living creature with an exoskeleton or vertebrate, such as insects, snakes, fish, birds, reptiles and amphibians, either domesticated or wild, excluding humans. 
Cat means all animals of the feline species, both male and female. 
Dog means all animals of the canine species, both male and female. 
Owner means any person having right of property in a dog, cat or other animal, or who keeps or harbors a dog, cat or other animal, or who has such dog, cat or other animal in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog, cat or other animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by such person. 
(Code 1959, § 4.8; Ord. No. 5346, § 2, 5-18-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-2. - Running at large. 
It shall be unlawful to permit any dog or dangerous, unruly, fierce or mischievous animal to run at large in the Village at any time. Dogs or dangerous, unruly, fierce or mischievous animals which are on any street, sidewalk, alley, other public place, or on the property of a person other than the owner or keeper thereof, without being held securely on a leash, shall be deemed to be running at large. A dog that is in a marked "dog-friendly" area or dog park is not considered to be running at large if the dog is monitored or supervised by a person, and such "dog-friendly" area or dog park complies with such regulations as may be issued by Cook County for the operation of outdoor off leash areas. 
(Code 1959, § 4.1; Ord. No. 5138, § 2, 9-16-2008)  
Sec. 14-3. - Disturbances. 
No person shall keep any dog, cat or other animal in the Village which, by barking, howling, meowing or other noise, shall disturb the peace and quiet of any family, individual or neighborhood. 
(Code 1959, § 4.2)  
Sec. 14-4. - Dead animals. 
No person shall allow any dead animal, being the owner or keeper thereof, to remain for 12 hours within the Village without being buried. 
(Code 1959, § 4.3) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 58.  
Sec. 14-5. - Cruelty to animals. 
No person shall overload, overwork, cruelly beat, ill treat, torture, mutilate or cruelly kill any animal or allow such to be done. 
(Code 1959, § 4.4)  
Sec. 14-6. - Killing or wounding animals and birds. 
No person shall hunt game or shoot at, kill or wound, by the use of a firearm, bow and arrow, slingshot, blow airgun, pelting with stones or by any other weapon or means, any animal or bird within the Village, or enter upon any private enclosure or public ground in the Village for the purpose of doing any act prohibited in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 4.5)  
Sec. 14-7. - Diseased animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow an animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of a human being or animal may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner or person in control of such animal except under the supervision of a veterinarian licensed by the State of Illinois or by the Illinois Department of Agriculture, Animal Welfare Division. 
(b)  It is the duty of the owner or person in control of any diseased animal to secure the disposal of such diseased animal and treatment of the affected premises so as to prevent the communication and spread of contagious or infectious diseases from such animal in conformance with state law and the rules and regulations adopted thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 4.6; Ord. No. 5346, § 3, 5-18-2010)  
Sec. 14-8. - Keeping of swine, poultry, poisonous snakes and boa constrictors. 
No person shall keep, or suffer to be kept, any swine, poultry, poisonous snake or boa constrictor within the Village, except for poisonous snakes or boa constrictors which may be maintained for educational purposes at the Grove National Historic Landmark. 
(Code 1959, § 4.7)  
Sec. 14-9. - Maximum number of animals allowed to be kept. 
(a)  Except for fish which are kept in an aquarium or pool, or bees maintained in a hive, it shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, care for, have custody of or knowingly permit at any time more than ten animals per dwelling unit, including but not limited to any garage, yard or other structure associated with said dwelling unit. Not more than five of such animals shall be dogs and/or cats. 
(b)  The limitations of this section shall not apply to properly established and zoned veterinary hospitals, pet shops, pounds, or animal shelters. 
(Code 1959, § 4.9; Ord. No. 5346, § 4, 5-18-2010)  
Sec. 14-10. - Preventing the spread of rabies. 
The owner of any dog or other animal which exhibits symptoms of rabies, and any dog or other animal in direct contact with such dog or other animal that is known to have bitten a person, until such dog or other animal has been vaccinated, shall immediately notify the director of development and shall promptly confine such dog or other animal, or have it confined, under suitable observation, for a period of at least ten days, unless officially authorized by the director of development or his representative to release such dog or other animal sooner. 
(Code 1959, § 4.17)  
Sec. 14-11. - Nuisances prohibited. 
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or cat, or other animal shall permit any offal, fecal matter or noisome substance from such animal to remain on any public or private property in any place in the Village, other than the property of such owner or keeper. 
(Code 1959, § 4.18) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 38-281 et seq.  
Sec. 14-12. - Animals prohibited in food service establishments 
(a)  Live animals, including birds and turtles, shall be excluded from within the food service operational premises and from adjacent areas under the control of the establishment including outdoor dining areas which have been issued permits by the Village. This exclusion does not apply to edible fish, crustacea, shellfish, or to fish in aquariums. Patrol dogs accompanying security or police officers and support animals, e.g. animals, such as canines and primates trained to assist handicapped persons, accompanying such persons shall be permitted in said areas. 
(b)  The Village may post notice to such effect, in conspicuous positions within the food service establish and must not be removed, destroyed or defaced by any person. 
(c)  Nothing in this section, however, shall be deemed to prohibit the owner or proprietor of such an establishment from keeping a watch dog or cat on such premises as long as such dog or cat is barred from access to the rooms in such establishment where food is dispensed or stored. 
(Code 1959, § 4.19; Ord. No. 5346, § 5, 5-18-2010)  
Sec. 14-13. - Removal of excrement. 
No person shall appear with an animal or permit an animal upon the public ways, within public places or upon the property of another, without such other person's consent, without some means for the removal of excrement, nor shall any person fail to remove any excrement deposited by such animal. This section shall not apply to a blind person while walking his guide dog. 
(Code 1959, § 4.21)  
Sec. 14-14. - Training attack dogs or other animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to teach, practice with or otherwise train any dog or other animal to attack or inflict bites on a human being or other animal, unless such training is a part of a recognized licensed business within the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 4.26)  
Sec. 14-15. - Violations; penalties. 
In addition to the impoundment and destruction provisions provided in section 14-101, any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16 for each offense. Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, § 4.23)  
Secs. 14-16—14-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER 
 
Sec. 14-41. - Position created; powers and duties. 
There is hereby created the position of animal control officer within the organization of the police department. The individual filling the position of animal control officer shall be appointed and removed by the chief of police. The animal control officer or his agent, or any officer of the law may: 
(1)  Enter upon private premises to apprehend a stray animal, vicious animal, wild creature or an animal suspected of being infected with rabies; 
(2)  Enter upon private premises to investigate complaints of irresponsibility or inhumane animal care; and 
(3)  Seize, impound or dispose of any vicious animal of any kind when necessary for the protection of any person or property. 
(Code 1959, § 4.24)  
Secs. 14-42—14-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS 
 
Sec. 14-71. - Identification. 
(a)  Every dog or cat, when off the property of the owner, shall wear a collar, attached to which shall be an identification tag which may be issued by the Village or provided by the owner. Such tag shall include the name and address and/or telephone number of the dog's or cat's owner. Every dog or cat shall also wear a serially numbered tag issued by the Cook County Department of Animal and Rabies Control, or similar agency of another county, evidencing the dog's or cat's rabies inoculation in compliance with section 14-73. 
(b)  Identification tags shall be available through the Village. There is no fee for said tag. The identification tag provided will have an identification number for cross reference to an application that contains the name and address of the owner, and the name, sex and breed of the dog or cat, and such other description of the dog or cat, and shall fully identify such animal, and presentation of proof of rabies inoculation as required by section 14-73. Such identification tags shall be successively numbered and shall specify the year for which the dog or cat is registered. The Village shall maintain a register of issued tags which shall contain the information provided in this section. 
(c)  Every dog or cat found in the Village without such collar and identification shall be impounded as provided in this chapter. The owner shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalty section as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 4.10; Ord. No. 5113, § 4, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 5346, § 6, 5-18-2010)  
Sec. 14-72. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5346, § 6, adopted May 18, 2010, deleted § 14-72. Former § 14-72 pertained to tags; registration of dogs and cats and derived from Code 1959, § 4.11.  
Sec. 14-73. - Antirabies vaccination required. 
Every dog and cat over four months of age shall be inoculated against rabies. No identification tag shall be issued to the owner of any dog or cat within the corporate limits of the Village unless the owner of such dog or cat shall present, at the time of the making of application for each identification tag, a certificate of a licensed veterinarian that such dog or cat has been, prior to such application, inoculated with an antirabies serum. No such tag shall be issued for any dog or cat if the immunization period certified by the veterinarian has expired prior to the date of the application for a tag. 
(Code 1959, § 4.12; Ord. No. 5113, § 4, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 14-74. - Impoundment of dogs and cats running at large. 
(a)  All dogs, whether wearing a collar with owner identification or not, if found running at large within the Village, are hereby declared a public nuisance which may be summarily abated. The police, or any person that the president of the Village may designate, may take up and impound in any kennel or other place designated by the board of trustees, either within or outside the limits of the Village, any dog, whether wearing a collar with owner identification or not, found running at large within the Village, and any dog or cat which is not wearing a collar with owner identification of the cat or dog attached, along with the serially numbered tag issued by the Cook County Department of Rabies Control, or similar agency of another county, evidencing the dog's or cat's anti-rabies inoculation. If any dog impounded for running at large shall be found wearing a collar with owner identification attached as provided for in this article, the police or other person 
(b)  Any dog or cat impounded under the provisions of this section shall be held in a kennel or other place designated by the board of trustees for a period of not less than five days from the time of such impounding, and if such dog or cat is not redeemed as provided for in this section before the expiration of such five-day period, it shall be the duty of the police or such other designated person to cause such dog or cat to be slain in a humane manner, and to arrange for the removal and burial of such dog or cat; provided, however, that at any time during or at the termination of such initial five days of impoundment, the Village may release such dog or cat to the custody of a not-for-profit corporation established for the purpose of caring for stray or abandoned animals and to reimburse such not-for-profit corporation for the expenses of boarding such dog or cat for no more than five days. Fees incurred for animal impound or animal impound to a kennel shall be as provided in chapter 30-1. 
(c)  Such redemption and other payments shall be made to the Village manager, who shall issue a receipt for such amounts, and, upon presentation of such receipt to the police or other person designated to act in the premises, such dog or cat shall be released and turned over to the person presenting such receipt; provided, however, before such release, the owner must have complied with all the licensing requirements of sections 14-71 and 14-72. 
(Code 1959, § 4.15; Ord. No. 5113, § 4, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 14-75. - Dog, cat and animal bites. 
(a)  Any owner of a dog, cat or other animal which has bitten any person shall promptly notify the animal control officer or his authorized representative and shall immediately confine such dog, cat or other animal in the custody and under the observation of a licensed veterinarian; provided, however, if the owner of the dog, cat or other animal presents a current rabies inoculation certificate, issued by a licensed veterinarian, then such animal may be confined on the premises of its owner and away from the public, by a method designated by the Village manager, so as not to repeat the biting incident, for a period of ten days. The period of observation shall consist of an examination by a licensed veterinarian on the first and tenth day from 24 hours after the time of the bite. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the animal control officer or his authorized representative, a dog, cat or other animal has bitten a person on the face, he shall have such animal confined for a period of ten days in the custody and under the observation of a licensed veterinarian, whether or not such animal has been vaccinated. All expenses in connection with any confinement and veterinary observation as prescribed in this subsection shall be at the expense of the person owning, keeping or harboring the animal. It is unlawful for the owner of such dog, cat or other animal to sell, give away, kill or otherwise dispose of such dog, cat or other animal that is known to have bitten a person until it has been released by the director of development or his authorized representative. 
(c)  If the death of such dog, cat or animal should occur prior to the final inspection of such animal by the animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian, the owner shall deliver the carcass and the brain of such dog, cat or other animal to the police, who shall deliver it to the county health department. 
(Code 1959, § 4.16; Ord. No. 5346, § 7, 5-18-2010)  
Secs. 14-76—14-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 14-101. - Vicious or dangerous dogs. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term: 
(1)  Vicious dog means any individual dog: 
a.  That, when unprovoked, inflicts bites or attacks a human being either on public or private property. 
b.  With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of a human being. 
c.  That has as a trait or characteristic and a generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness or unprovoked attacks upon human beings, unless handled in a particular manner or with special equipment. Vicious dogs shall not be classified in a manner that is specific as to breed. 
d.  Which attacks a human being without provocation. 
e.  Which has been found to be a dangerous dog, as defined in this section, on at least one prior occasion. 
No dog shall be deemed vicious if it bites, attacks or menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner, or harms or menaces any person who has tormented or abused such dog or is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement or guard duties and attacks or causes injury to a person while the dog is performing its duties as trained. If a dog is found to be a vicious dog, the dog shall be subject to enclosure, as defined in subsection (3) of this section, or destruction as may be directed in the sole discretion of the animal control officer in accordance with the provisions of subsection (c)(1) of this section, or destruction as may be ordered by a judge of the circuit court of the County. 
(2)  Dangerous dog means any individual dog which, when either unmuzzled, unleashed or unattended by its owner, handler or keeper, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person or domestic animal in an apparent attitude of attack upon any street, sidewalk or public grounds or places, or private property of a person other than the owner, handler or keeper of the dog. 
(3)  Enclosure means a fence or structure of a least six feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner, handler or keeper, such as tethering of a vicious dog within the enclosure. Such enclosure shall be securely fenced and locked, and designed with secure sides, top and bottom, and shall be designed to prevent the dog from escaping from the enclosure. 
(4)  Found to be a vicious dog means that: 
a.  The animal control officer or a law enforcement officer has conducted an investigation and made a finding in writing that the dog is a vicious dog, as defined in subsection (a)(1) of this section, and based on that finding, the animal control officer has declared in writing that the dog is a vicious dog; or 
b.  A judge of the circuit court of the County has found the dog to be a vicious dog, as defined in subsection (a)(1) of this section, and has entered an order based on that finding. 
(5)  Impounded means taken into the custody of the animal control officer or other law enforcement officer. 
(b)  Any dog found to be a vicious dog, which has not been impounded and destroyed, shall be confined to an enclosure. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog unless such dog is at all times kept in an enclosure. The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure are if it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care for the dog or to comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction, provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in length, and shall be under the direct control and supervision of the owner, handler or keeper of such dog. 
(c)  Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog that has been directed to be contained in an enclosure rather than being destroyed, which is not confined to an enclosure, shall be impounded by the animal control officer or the Village police department and shall be turned over to a licensed veterinarian for destruction by lethal injection, subject to the provisions of subsection (c)(1) of this section: 
(1)  If the owner, handler or keeper of the dog, after being given written notice of the impoundment order, has not appealed the impoundment order to the circuit court of the County within seven days from the date of impoundment, the dog may be humanely destroyed by lethal injection administered by a licensed veterinarian. 
(2)  A dog found to be a vicious dog that is not destroyed shall not be released to the owner until the animal control officer approves an enclosure, as defined in subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(3)  No owner, keeper or handler of a vicious dog shall sell or give away such dog. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance by permitting any vicious dog or dangerous dog to leave the premises of its owner, keeper or handler when not under control by a leash or other recognized control methods as may be otherwise provided under this section. 
(e)  Sentry, guard or police owned dogs that attack or injure a person, while performing duties as trained, are exempt from this section; provided, however, that the owner, handler or keeper of such exempt dog has previously provided the animal control officer with the address of the premises in which such exempt dog is housed and/or maintained. To qualify for exemption under this section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with section 8 of the Illinois Animal Control Act. It shall be the duty of the owner, keeper or handler of such exempt dog to notify the animal control officer of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the animal control officer advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The animal control officer shall provide the police and fire departments with a categorized list of such exempt dogs, and shall promptly notify such departments of any address changes reported to him, as the case may be. 
(Code 1959, § 4.20)  
Sec. 14-102. - Vicious and dangerous animals other than dogs. 
(a)  For vicious and dangerous animals other than dogs, see 720 ILCS 585/0.1 et seq. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance by permitting any poisonous snake or boa constrictor to leave the premises of its owner, keeper or handler when not under control by a recognized control method as may be otherwise provided under section 14-101. 
(Code 1959, § 4.20(d))  
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, per email received Mar. 24, 2011, references in this chapter to the "building and zoning director" have been changed to reference the "director of development or his/her designee". See also Ord. Nos. 5430 and 5431, adopted Mar. 1, 2011. 
Cross reference— Director of community development, § 2-412; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; buildings with Village water and private water wells, § 38-13; planning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; moving buildings, § 62-15; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82; building sewers, connections and maintenance, § 82-131 et seq.; vegetation, ch. 86; obstruction of building exits or sprinkler system connections, § 90-281 et seq.; zoning, ch. 98; nonconformities, § 98-251 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements affecting or relating to the erection, construction, alteration, remodeling, repair, maintenance, removal and demolition of structures, and to regulate the architectural design of buildings or structures erected within the Village limits. 
(b)  This chapter is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and welfare, structural strength and stability, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and hazards incidental to the construction, alteration, repair and maintenance of structures, or portions thereof, in the Village, except federal and State buildings and possessions. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to supplement and otherwise void any existing building ordinances. 
(d)  The existing zoning ordinance set forth in chapter 98, or revisions thereof, are hereby made a part of this chapter. Should a provision in chapter 98 conflict with that of this chapter, the most restrictive provision shall govern. 
(e)  Any existing or future State laws, or revisions thereto, pertaining to the erection, maintenance or occupancy of buildings and structures are hereby made a part of this chapter. Should any provision in the State laws conflict with a similar provision in this chapter, the most restrictive provision shall govern. 
(f)  If any part of this chapter is declared invalid or unconstitutional, it shall not be held to invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other part of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 5.1.1)  
Secs. 18-2—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Purpose. 
It is hereby affirmed that the purpose of this chapter is to secure safe and sanitary construction in order to promote public health and safety, and to do equal justice, the director of community development or his/her designee shall have full power to pass upon any question arising under the provisions of this chapter, subject to the conditions, modifications and limitations contained therein. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.1; Ord. No. 5190, § 2, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-32. - Compliance with building code required. 
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to construct, erect, enlarge, remodel, alter, repair, raise, lower, underpin, move or wreck any building or structure, or portion thereof, within the Village in violation of this chapter or any other laws of the Village. It is further declared unlawful to equip, use or occupy any building or structure, or any portion thereof, in the Village with any device, or for any business or other purpose, in any manner prohibited by this chapter or any other laws of the Village. Violators of any of the provisions or requirements of this section shall be subject to punishment as set forth in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.9; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-33. - Nuisance declared. 
Any building or structure, or any portion thereof, constructed, erected, enlarged, remodeled, altered, repaired, raised, lowered, underpinned or moved within the Village in any manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any laws of the Village is hereby declared a nuisance and the person, owner, agent, architect, builder, contractor, house mover or mechanic so constructing, erecting, enlarging, remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering, underpinning or moving such building or structure, or any portion thereof, contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter or laws, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.10; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-34. - Right to complete buildings under outstanding permits. 
Authority is hereby affirmed to complete any building or structure, or portion thereof, either in the process of being, or under contract to be, constructed, erected, enlarged, remodeled, altered, repaired, raised, lowered, underpinned or moved at or prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, provided, a valid and prior permit outstands therefor; the work accords with the building regulations in force at issuance of such a permit; and the building or structure, and various portions thereof, will be safe and sanitary upon completion, and will fully accord with the building and other laws of the Village in force at the time the permit was issued. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.11; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-35. - Compliance of enlarged, remodeled or repaired buildings. 
Any building or structure, or major portion thereof, which is enlarged, remodeled or repaired within the Village shall be made to comply throughout with the provisions of this chapter as if applied to new or original work, provided, the cost of the work proposed to be done exceeds one-half of the estimated fair value of the building or structure, or major portion thereof, proposed to be altered or repaired. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.12; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-36. - Restoration of damaged buildings. 
(a)  Any building or structure, or major portion thereof, that has been damaged by reason of decay, fire or other cause may be restored to its original condition, provided, such condition is then consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the public health and safety, and, provided, the cost of the restoration work does not exceed one-half of the estimated fair value of the building or structure, or major portion thereof, proposed to be restored. 
(b)  Any building or structure, or any major portion thereof, in the Village that has suffered damage by reason of decay, fire or otherwise may be considered and dealt with as an unsafe building unless repairs are promptly made as ordered by the director of community development or his/her designee and as prescribed by this chapter. 
(c)  The value and cost referred to in this section shall be determined or approved by director of community development or his/her designee. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.13; Ord. No. 5190, § 2, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-37. - Compliance of moved buildings. 
(a)  Buildings or structures moved from one block to another within the Village, or upon, along or across any street or alley used by and for the public that are worth more than one-third of the cost of duplicating such buildings or structures in their proposed new location with new construction and materials, shall be made to comply throughout with this chapter, and the acceptance of a permit for moving such buildings or structures shall impose the obligation to cause such buildings or structures to be made to comply with this chapter, and failure to cause such buildings or structures to be made to comply with this chapter shall constitute a violation of such code. 
(b)  No building or structure worth less than one-third of the cost of duplicating it in its proposed new location with new construction and materials shall be moved from its present location to another. 
(c)  The costs and values referred to and made necessary to be determined in applying this section shall be furnished by the owner and shall be verified and approved by the director of community development or his/her designee. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.14; Ord. No. 5190, § 2, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-38. - Inspection of buildings required. 
(a)  The general contractor shall obtain inspections by the community development department of all buildings and structures, and portions thereof, under his jurisdiction which are in the course of being constructed, erected, enlarged, remodeled, altered, repaired, raised, lowered, underpinned, moved or wrecked under a permit issued by the Village for the work, and in compliance with SUBsection 18-102(c). The inspection shall be made as required in this subsection and in such manner as shall serve the purpose intended, which purpose shall be to ascertain and record whether the work is being undertaken and performed in a safe manner, and complies with the requirements of this chapter and all other ordinances of the Village. 
(b)  The director of community development or his/her designee shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all buildings or structures, or portions thereof, damaged by fire or other accidents, in order to ascertain, if possible, the cause or origin of the fire or accident, and to make a record of such damage sustained. 
(c)  The director of community development or his/her designee shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all buildings or structures for which application for a permit to move may be made. Such inspection shall be made for the purpose of ascertaining and recording information as to risks to be incurred, and the strength, size, value and general sanitary and structural features of the building or structure proposed to be moved. The reports shall be placed on file in the develoment department before the permit sought shall be approved for issuance by the director of community development or his/her designee. The inspection required under this subsection shall be recorded on forms prepared and furnished especially for such use by the community development department, and shall be filed by such department. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.15; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-39. - Procedure upon deviation or violation. 
The procedure in all cases of unauthorized deviations from, or violations of, the provisions of this chapter found on inspections required by section 18-38 shall be as follows: 
(1)  A verbal notice shall be immediately served by the director of community development or his/her designee at the site and on the person doing or in charge of the work being done, or responsible for or capable of correcting, or of causing to be corrected the deviation observed. If a verbal notice cannot be served on the site, or if served, is disregarded or deemed inadequate by the director of community development or his/her designee for the purpose, then a written notice, on forms prepared for the purpose and designating the deviation observed, shall be posted at the site, in as safe and conspicuous a place as practical, and where, if unmolested, it must come to the notice of any person either employed on the work, or frequenting or occupying the building, structure or premises, and a copy of the notice so posted shall be mailed to the last known address of the owner, agent or person in control of the building or structure involved. 
(2)  If the verbal and/or written notice is respected and steps are promptly taken to correct the deviation observed, and if such deviation is promptly corrected, on notice, to the satisfaction of the director of community development or his/her designee and consistent with the requirements of this chapter, then, and for such case, the deviation observed shall not be deemed a willful violation of this chapter, nor be subject to any penalty therein provided. 
(3)  If a written notice of a deviation observed from the provisions of this chapter has been posted and mailed, as set forth in this section, and the work or condition continues in defiance thereof, or if the deviation, of whatever nature, is not promptly corrected in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the urgency of the case, then the deviation shall be considered a willful violation, and the director of community development or his/her designee shall promptly stop the work, and, if need be, shall close the building or structure to the public. The facts pertaining to the case and the steps so far taken therein shall forthwith be reported in writing, on forms prepared for such purpose, to the director of community development or his/her designee, who, in turn, shall proceed to enforce the provisions and penalties of this chapter for and in such case provided. 
(4)  The chief of police and Village attorney, pursuant to and consistent with the duties of their respective offices, shall assist in enforcing this chapter against violators who defiantly refuse to comply with notices from the director of community development or his/her designee, and each officer named in this subsection shall act in conjunction with the director of community development in so far as may be necessary and practical. Nothing contained in this subsection is intended, or shall be construed, to disqualify or exempt any officer of the Village not named in this subsection from the duty of assisting in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(5)  The director of community development or his/her designee, and other officers named in subsection (4) of this section who may assist them in case of flagrant or defiant violations of this chapter, are hereby authorized to use the police power of the Village in such manner and to such extent as the character of the violation and the urgency, hazards, rights and interests of public health and safety may justify and demand for the case involved. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.16; Ord. No. 5190, § 2, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-40. - Stop work order. 
(a)  The director of community development or his/her designee is hereby empowered and directed to stop work on any building or structure, or portion thereof, that is being done in a reckless, unsafe or unsanitary manner, or with the use of defective or improper material; and on any building or structure, or portion thereof, proposed for unlawful purposes as regards location, intended use or occupancy; and any work that in any other respect is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or to the requirements of any other laws of the Village. Such right and duty shall exist and be performed irrespective of any permit that may or may not have been either required or issued for the work, building or structure, or any portion thereof, involved. The suspension of work shall be for such time as may be necessary to secure a correction of the particular violations and features complained of, or until a satisfactory agreement and arrangement, approved by the director of community development or his/her designee, is reached that such correction will be made, and if a court trial is had, then the work shall be suspended and held in abeyance until the court renders its decision. 
(b)  Any person having charge of, directing, or in any way engaged in work that violates this chapter, who shall refuse or fail to promptly desist from such work on written notice from any director of community development or his/her designee, or who, having desisted on either verbal or written notice, shall resume the work before the violation which occasioned the order is corrected or agreed to be corrected to the satisfaction of the director of community development or his/her designee and consistent with the purposes of this chapter, or who, before having been authorized by the director of community development or his/her designee, resumes work stopped, shall be deemed guilty of violating this chapter and shall be subject to the general penalty provided in section 1-16. Permits for work being done in violation of this chapter may be canceled or revoked on order of the director of community development or his/her designee. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.17; Ord. No. 5190, § 2, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-41. - Authority to direct removal of defective and dangerous walls, buildings and structures. 
The director of community development or his/her designee shall have the authority to direct the fire chief to tear down any defective or dangerous wall or structure, or any building or structure, or part thereof, which may be constructed in violation of the terms of this chapter, after written notice has been served upon the owner, lessee, occupant, agent or person in possession, charge or control, directing him to tear down or remove any defective wall, building or structure, or any part thereof, which is in a dangerous condition, or which has been or is being constructed or maintained in violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.18; Ord. No. 5190, § 2, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5411, § 7, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 18-42, which pertained to certificate of final inspection and derived from Code 1959, § 5.2.19; and Ord. No. 5190, § 2, adopted Jan. 3, 2009.  
Sec. 18-43. - Conflicts between general and specific provisions. 
When a general provision or requirement of this chapter conflicts with specific provisions thereof relating to the construction, equipment, maintenance, use or location of any building or structure, or any portion thereof, in the Village, then and for such case, the specific provision or requirement shall prevail and govern. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.20; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-44. - Hours of construction. 
Construction subject to this chapter shall be conducted only during the following hours: 
(1)  Weekdays, 7:00 a.m.—7:00 p.m. 
(2)  Saturdays, 9:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. 
(3)  Sundays, 9:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. 
(4)  Holidays, as designated by the State. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.21; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-45. - Boarded up buildings. 
If the property owner or director of community development or his/her designee requires a building to be boarded up for more than 30 days, it shall be the owner's responsibility to paint the exterior boards a color to be agreed upon between the owner and the director of community development or his/her designee. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.22; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Secs. 18-46—18-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5431, § 4, adopted Mar. 1, 2011, deleted Div. 2, § 18-81, which pertained to building department created and established and derived from Code 1959, § 5.2.2; and Ord. No. 5190, § 3, adopted Jan. 3, 2009. 
 
Secs. 18-81—18-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION RELATED REGULATORY ACTIVITIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5431, § 5, adopted Mar. 1, 2011, amended Div. 3, §§ 18-101, 18-102, to read as set out herein. Former Div. 3, §§ 18-101, 18-102, pertained to buildings and zoning director and derived from Code 1959, §§ 5.2.3, 5.2.4; and Ord. No. 5190, § 3, adopted Jan. 3, 2009. 
 
Sec. 18-101. - [Director designated.] 
The director of community development, as defined in chapter 2, section 2-412 of the Municipal Code shall have responsibility for the management, direction and control of the construction related regulatory activities within the Village, including but not limited to the duties outlined in section 18-102. 
(Ord. No. 5431, § 5, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-102. - Duties. 
(a)  In general. The director of community development shall have general charge and supervision of the inspection of all buildings or structures, or portions thereof, within the Village that are required to be inspected by this chapter, and shall enforce all ordinances related thereto. 
(b)  Applications and permits. The director of community development shall receive applications and issue permits for the erection, construction, alteration, repair and removal of buildings and structures. 
(c)  Inspections. 
(1)  The director of community development shall cause to be inspected all buildings and structures, and portions thereof, which are in the course of being constructed, erected, remodeled, enlarged, altered, repaired, raised, lowered, underpinned, moved or wrecked under a permit issued by the Village for such work. It shall be the responsibility of the general contractor to obtain inspections required by the Village and not to permit work to progress beyond any inspection point until such work has been inspected and approved, and a written record made of such work as provided in subsection (d) of this section. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as not permitting partial inspections in any category to facilitate an orderly progression of the construction progress. 
(d)  Records. 
(1)  The director of community development shall keep comprehensive records of applications received, permits or certificates issued, inspections made, reports rendered and notices or orders issued and shall retain on file essential portions of required plans and essential documents relating to building work as long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence. 
(2)  All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the director of community development without his written consent. 
(Ord. No. 5431, § 5, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Secs. 18-103—18-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 3, adopted December 9, 2014, amended the title of div. 4 to read as set out herein. Previously div. 4 was titled director of development. 
 
Sec. 18-121. - Titles. 
The title or phrase, "director of community development," "building commissioner" or "director of community development or his/her designee," when and where used in this chapter, shall mean and include the director of community development or his/her designee and all subordinates and assistants in his department. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.5; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-122. - Identification. 
The director of community development or his/her designee shall be provided by the Village with an identification of their respective office and indicative of their authority. The director of community development or his/her designee, when performing their respective duties, shall show the identification of their office, upon request or necessity. Such identification shall be and remain the property of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.6; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-123. - Power of entry. 
The director of community development or his/her designee are hereby empowered to lawfully enter upon any premises or into any building or structure, or portion thereof, upon showing their identification of office, when necessary to do so in the performance of any duty imposed upon them by this chapter, and it is hereby made unlawful for any person to hinder or prevent, or attempt to hinder or prevent, director of community development or his/her designee from so doing. Any person hindering, or attempting to hinder, resisting, or attempting to resist, any director of community development or his/her designee in the performance of their duty shall be charged with resisting an officer and the person convicted of such offense shall be subject to the general penalty provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.7; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-124. - Personal liability. 
In all cases where any action is taken by the director of community development or his/her designee or any other officers of the Village to enforce the provisions of any of the sections contained in this chapter or any of the laws of the Village, whether such action is taken in pursuance of the express provisions of such sections or laws, or, in a case where discretionary power is given by this chapter or other laws of the Village, such acts shall be done in the name of and on behalf of the Village, shall not render themselves liable personally, and they are hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any such act committed or permitted, in good faith, in the discharge of their duty. Any suit brought against such director of community development or his/her designee, by reason thereof, shall be defended by the law department of the Village until final termination of the proceedings therein. 
(Code 1959, § 5.2.8; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Secs. 18-125—18-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PERMITS AND FEES 
 
Sec. 18-141. - Permit required for building operations. 
(a)  It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to commence or perform any work in connection with the construction, erection, enlargement, remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering, underpinning, moving or wrecking of any building or structure, or portion thereof, or any other work or action for which a fee is prescribed in this article without having first made application to and secured from the director of community development or his/her designee the necessary permit therefor, except as otherwise provided, and any person so doing shall be subjected to the general penalty set forth in section 1-16. The building permit shall carry with it the right to install any crane, derrick, material elevator, heating or lighting apparatus inside the lot line, which may be required for temporary use during the progress of the work. Building permits will be issued only to a person in charge of all work to be performed and who will be designated as the general contractor. 
(b)  Before any permit is issued granting authority to any person to perform any work in connection with the construction, erection, enlargement, remodeling, altering, repairing (except normal repairs), raising, lowering or underpinning any building or structure, or portion thereof, or any other work or action for which a fee is prescribed in this article, the person (except an owner living on the premises, doing or having direct control of the work being done) engaged in such work shall file with the community development department a bond in the penal sum of $25,000.00, with sureties to be approved by the director of community development or his/her designee, to guarantee payment in full to the Village and to duly franchised utility companies entitled to a use of public property, for any and all damage inflicted on public property by reason of the pursuance of work prescribed on the permit. Any costs incurred by the Village for any actions necessitated by the failure of the such person to protect persons, property or things on the site of, adjacent to or in connection with the work shall also be recoverable from the $25,000.00 bond. 
(c)  Before any permit is issued granting authority to any person to perform any work in connection with the construction, erection, enlargement, remodeling, altering, repairing (except normal repairs), raising, lowering or underpinning of any building or structure, or portion thereof, or any other work for which a fee is prescribed in this article, the person (except an owner living on the premises, doing or having direct control of the work being done) engaged in the work shall file with the community development department certificates of workmen's compensation, general liability and automobile liability insurances. 
(d)  Before any permit is issued granting authority to any person to perform any work, excluding work performed solely on the interior of a building, in connection with the construction, erection, enlargement, remodeling, altering, repairing (except normal repairs), raising, lowering or underpinning of any building or structure, or portion thereof, or any other work for which a fee is prescribed in this article, the owner or developer shall file with the director of community development or his/her designee a survey of the property or other evidence indicating that the property is a "lot," as such term is defined in section 98-4, nor shall that person be in violation of any federal, State or local law or regulation. 
(e)  Before any permit is issued granting authority to any person to perform any work in connection with the construction, erection, enlargement, remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering or underpinning of any building or structure, or portion thereof, or any other work for which a fee is prescribed in this article, the person engaged in the work shall be in compliance with all Village ordinances and/or regulations as determined by the Village and shall not be in default of any monetary obligation owed to the Village as determined by the Village manager, based upon an analysis of the books and records of the Village. 
(f)  Before any permit is issued granting authority to any person to perform any work in connection with construction, erection, enlargement, remodeling, altering, repairing (except normal repairs), raising, lowering, or underpinning any building or structure, or portion thereof, or any other work or action for which a fee is prescribed in this article, the owner or developer shall provide written documentation evidencing that the owner or developer, as the case may be, has the right to connect or reconnect to any privately owned or maintained utilities including storm sewer, sanitary sewer and water main. Additionally, the owner or developer must provide documentation, as determined in the sole discretion of the Village, verifying existing easement rights to access said utilities, if necessary, and similarly provide ingress/egress easement rights for access to any private roads or driveways. If, after thorough investigation, as determined in the sole discretion of the Village, the documentation granting rights to connect to private utilities or ingress/egress easements are not available, then separate documentation must be submitted, in a form acceptable to the Village prior to the issuance of any Village permit, that evidences existing prescriptive rights to the subject utility, accompanied by a statement signed by the attorney for the person seeking to connect to the utility that the owner or developer will undertake to complete such work at their own risk and expense. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.1B; Ord. No. 4371, § 2, 2-19-2002; Ord. No. 4904, § 2, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-142. - Waiver of permit for ordinary repairs. 
A permit will not be required for ordinary repair work incidental to the upkeep of a building or structure. The following shall not be considered ordinary repair work, and a permit will be required for the: 
(1)  Change in classification of any building; 
(2)  The removal or installation of any interior or exterior wall; 
(3)  Removal or installation of any supporting wall, column, post, truss, girder or beam; 
(4)  Installing, closing or changing of any stair hall, fire escape, scuttle, skylight, door or other means of communication, ingress or egress; 
(5)  Change of the number, location or connections of the fixtures, traps, vents, waste, soil or drain, or connections of the fixtures of the lighting system; 
(6)  Changing to a different system of heating, cooling or ventilation; or 
(7)  Reshingling or recovering of roofs or renewing of the exterior siding of any frame building or structure, or portion thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.2; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-143. - Permit expiration time limits. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Force majeure means delays resulting from fire, flood, strikes, lockouts, civil disturbance, order of any government, court or regulatory body claiming jurisdiction, act of public enemy, war, riot, sabotage, blockage, embargo or material shortage, discovery of hazardous or toxic materials, tornado or other natural disaster. 
(b)  Duration of permit. Any building permit issued by the director of community development or his/her designee, subject to force majeure delays, under which no work is commenced as established in accordance with the period set forth in section 54-2, shall automatically expire without further action by the director of community development or his/her designee and such permit shall be surrendered to the director of community development or his/her designee within ten days after its expiration. A cessation of work for more than 90 consecutive days shall have the same effect as if work was not commenced within the required number of days from the date of issuance of a building permit. 
(c)  Force majeure. Cessation in construction work, by reason of force majeure, commenced pursuant to the issuance of a building permit, will stay the time limits set forth in subsection (a) of this section, day for day that a force majeure delay is in effect. 
(d)  Failure to complete construction. Failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy as established in accordance with the period set forth in section 54-2, for any reason, including force majeure delay, may result in any structure constructed on the premises pursuant to a building permit being declared a public nuisance, subject to demolition as described in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Public nuisance; demolition of structure. 
(1)  If a structure is declared to be a public nuisance, the director of community development or his/her designee shall issue a demolition order to the titleholder of the premises upon which the structure is located to demolish the structure, and clear the premises of demolition debris. 
(2)  A written demolition order issued by the director of community development or his/her designee shall be served upon the titleholder, and each lienholder and mortgagee of the premises, if ascertainable, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the addressee. The date of mailing shall be the date of service. 
(3)  The demolition order shall provide the titleholder within not less than 30 days nor more than 45 days to demolish the affected structure, and to remove the demolition debris from the premises, or request a hearing to contest the demolition order. The demolition order shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name of the titleholder of the premises upon which the structure is located; 
b.  A description of the structure; 
c.  The address where the structure is located; 
d.  The reason for the demolition order; 
e.  The date of the issuance of the order; 
f.  The day on which the Village intends to demolish the structure in the event the titleholder fails to comply with the demolition order; 
g.  The titleholder's right to appear and be heard at a hearing before the Village manager to contest the demolition order; and 
h.  The hearing date, which must be requested in writing and delivered or otherwise served upon the Village manager not more than ten days from the date of service of the demolition order. 
(4)  The request for a hearing must, at a minimum, include a detailed statement as to the reasons the demolition order should be vacated or stayed. The burden of proof at the hearing shall be on the titleholder. 
(5)  The hearing shall be noticed and scheduled by the Village manager or the manager's nominee within 15 days after receipt by the Village manager of the titleholder's request for a hearing. The hearing shall be scheduled to commence no later than 30 days after receipt by the Village manager of the titleholder's request for a hearing. 
(6)  At the hearing, the titleholder, or a representative of the titleholder, shall be given the opportunity to be heard, to present testimony, to admit documents, and to confront and cross examine any witnesses. 
(7)  If the Village manager finds in favor of the titleholder, the demolition order shall be vacated. If the Village manager finds against the titleholder, the demolition order shall remain in full force and effect and be deemed final. The Village manager shall have the power to fashion other relief as he may deem equitable under the circumstances. 
(8)  The decision of the Village manager shall be in writing, and served by certified mail as provided in this subsection (e). The decision shall be subject to review by a court of competent jurisdiction, pursuant to a common law writ of certiorari filed in the circuit court of the County not more than 35 days from the date of service. 
(9)  If a hearing is not requested in writing in accordance with the provisions of subsections (e)(3)h. and (e)(4) of this section, the demolition order shall be deemed final. 
(10)  If the titleholder fails to comply with a final demolition order within the time proscribed in the demolition order, the director of community development or his/her designee shall cause the structure to be demolished and the demolition debris removed from the premises. 
(11)  The costs incurred by the Village to demolish the structure and remove the demolition debris, plus interest at the statutory rate, shall constitute a lien upon the premises and the Village manager or nominee is hereby authorized to cause a notice of such lien to be filed in the County office of the recorder of deeds. 
(12)  The lien may be foreclosed in accordance with State law and the Village shall be entitled to reimbursement of its attorneys' fees, and all costs associated with the foreclosure action. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.3; Ord. No. 4549, § 2, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5352, § 2, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-144. - Action on permit application. 
The director of community development or his/her designee shall examine applications for permits within a reasonable time after filing. If, upon any examination, he finds no objections to the application and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable thereto and the proposed construction or work will be safe, he shall approve such application and issue a permit for the proposed work as soon as practical. If his examination reveals otherwise, he shall reject such application, note his findings in a written report to be attached to the application and deliver a copy thereof to the applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.4; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-145. - Payment of fees required. 
No permit, or amendment to a permit, issued by the director of community development or his/her designee for constructing, erecting, enlarging, remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering, underpinning, moving or wrecking buildings or structures, or portions thereof, or any permit for which a fee is prescribed by the Village ordinances shall be in force until the fees prescribed therefor shall have been paid to the Village collector and the Village collector's receipt therefor shall have been stamped on such permit. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.5; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-146. - Permit application contents. 
(a)  The application for a building permit shall consist of a complete set of forms for the work to be done, with subcontractors identified thereon, and such forms shall be completely filled out and presented by any person to perform any work in connection with and responsible for the proposed work. Such application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Plot plan and survey. Three copies of a survey of the premises that have been prepared by a land surveyor duly registered under the laws of the State. Such survey shall show all the building lines, easements and required angles with reference to such premises. The plot plan shall show appropriate grades, both existing and new, in relation to the proposed structure or other work to be done on the site. 
(2)  Plans and specifications. Copies of completed plans and specifications in compliance with sections 18-148 through 18-151. 
(3)  Agreement. An agreement, to be signed by the general contractor, conditioned that he will, if granted the permit sought, construct the work in accordance with the description set forth in the application, plans and specifications as set forth in subsections (1) and (2), and that all general and detail work connected with such erection, construction, alteration or repair of any such building or structure, or part thereof, as the case may be, shall be done in strict compliance with the ordinances of the Village and the provisions of such permit. 
(4)  Certificate. A certificate of arrangement to protect against interference with underground public utility facilities, wherein the general contractor certifies that the public utilities (i.e., gas company, electric company and telephone company) have been notified of the proposal to do excavating, grading or other work below the surface of the ground, and that arrangements have been made for adequate protection against interference with underground public utility facilities upon and adjacent to the building site. 
(b)  If the applicant for a permit shall fail, in the opinion of the director of community development or his/her designee, to give a correct statement of the work for which a permit is requested, the director of community development or his/her designee may order the estimate changed and made in accordance with his best knowledge and belief. All applications, plans and specifications shall be dated upon receipt in the office of the community development department and taken up in their regular order as received, and no plans or specifications shall be passed on out of their order as received, unless buildings or structures are of a complex character which require prolonged examination and inspection. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.6; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 6, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 6, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 6083, § 2, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 18-147. - Permits not requiring plans and specifications. 
The director of community development or his/her designee may issue permits for the erection of sheds or small one-story accessory buildings upon the description given in the application and not accompanied by drawings, and this shall also apply to alterations and repairs of buildings whenever, in the judgment of the director of community development or his/her designee, drawings are not necessary to show the full character of the work to be done. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.7; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-148. - Number of architect drawings and specifications to be submitted. 
Triplicate sets of the architect's general drawings and complete specifications shall be submitted for single family home permits and quadruplicate sets of the same for commercial permits, one of which will be returned to the party that receives the permit. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.8; Ord. No. 5431, § 7, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-149. - Plan and specification requirements. 
All plans and drawings shall be drawn to an appropriate scale and presented by a process that will not fade or obliterate. Each set of drawings shall consist of a foundation and footing plan, basement or cellar plan, the plans of the upper floors and roofs, a transverse and a longitudinal section, at least two elevations and the necessary framing drawings to show the complete framing of the building structure. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the front and side lot lines, the entire sewerage and drain pipes and the location of all plumbing fixtures within such building. The dimensions of the structural members shall be given on the drawings, whether or not shown in the specifications. The specifications shall describe all the materials to be used in the proposed building. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.9; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-150. - Alterations and deviations to stamped plans. 
It shall be unlawful to erase, alter or modify any lines, figures or colorings contained upon the drawings stamped by the director of community development or his/her designee or filed by him for reference. If, during the progress of the work authorized, it is desired to deviate in any manner affecting the construction or other essentials of the building from the terms of the application or drawing, notice of such intention to alter or deviate shall be given to the director of community development or his/her designee, and his written consent shall first be obtained before such alterations or deviations may be made. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.10; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-151. - Signing and sealing of plans required; exception. 
(a)  No permit shall be granted, or plans approved, for any construction, remodeling or repairing of any building where the modifications exceed $45,000.00, or are structural in nature, excluding cabinets, millwork or other decorative features, unless such plans are signed and sealed by a licensed architect or a licensed structural engineer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any architect or other person permitted under the State law to prepare plans, or prepare and submit to the director of community development or his/her designee, for his approval, any final plans for any building or structure without such plans containing a certification of such architect or such other person preparing plans that the architect or such other person has prepared, or supervised the preparation of, the plans and specifications, and that, to the best of his knowledge, they comply with the provisions of this chapter. The certification shall be required to be incorporated in each set of drawings submitted with an application for a building permit. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.11; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-152. - Permit, plans and specifications required to be kept on the job site. 
The permit issued for any work, to which this chapter is applicable, together with a set of the approved plans and specifications, if any, must be kept on the job while the work is in progress, and must be shown for inspection upon the request of any director of community development or his/her designee. Inability or refusal to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute sufficient cause for stopping either all or such portions of the work as may be involved in the violation. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.12; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-153. - Plans and specifications to remain on file. 
One or more copies, as may be required by the director of community development or his/her designee, of the plans and specifications as finally stamped and approved shall be left on file in the office of the community development department. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.13; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-154. - Wrecking and tearing down buildings. 
(a)  Before proceeding with the wrecking or tearing down of any building or other structure more than one story in height or any structure of a greater area than 750 square feet, a permit for such wrecking or tearing down shall first be obtained by the owner or his agent from the director of community development or his/her designee, provided that all the work done under such permit shall be subject to the supervision of the director of community development or his/her designee and to such reasonable restrictions as he may impose in regard to elements of safety and health, and further, that sufficient scaffolding be provided to ensure safety to human life. In the case of masonry buildings, the work shall be kept sprinkled to minimize dust. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Before any permit is issued granting authority to wreck a building or structure for which such permit is required, the person engaged in the work of wrecking shall file with the community development department a certificate of insurance certifying that the applicant is insured for comprehensive general liability to indemnify the Village against any loss, cost, damage, expense, judgment or liability of any kind whatsoever which the Village may suffer, or which may accrue against, be charged to or be recovered from the Village or any of its officials from or by reason or on account of accidents to persons or property during any such wrecking operations, and from or by reason or on account of anything done under or by virtue of any permit granted for any such wrecking operations 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.14; Ord. No. 4371, § 2, 2-19-2002; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 6083, §§ 3, 4, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 18-155. - Moving buildings. 
(a)  No house or other building shall be moved into, over, across or along any street, alley or other public place, or from one location to another on the same lot or in the same block in the Village, without first securing a written permit therefor from the director of community development or his/her designee. Such permit shall set forth the route to be taken in moving such building, which route shall be determined so as to cause the least injury to public or private property and the least interference with the public convenience. No variation from such route shall be permitted, and the following regulations shall be strictly observed: 
(1)  Before any permit is issued for moving a building, the director of public works shall be notified, and his approval shall be secured as to the route proposed to be taken. If such moving necessitates the removal or trimming of any trees, such work shall be done only under the direction of the director of public works, and the expense thereof shall be paid by the person securing the permit. 
(2)  No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to public or private property on account of such moving. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "unnecessary damage or injury" means such damage or injury as may, by reasonable diligence and intelligent care, be avoided. 
(3)  Notice shall be given to each local agent of any telegraph, telephone, electric light or power, or railroad company interested, of the day and hour when, and the place where, such moving necessitates the cutting of any wire, or the stopping of any train, of such company. Such notice shall be served not less than 24 hours prior to the time therein fixed and no such wire shall be cut unless such notice has been duly served. 
(4)  No building in the process of being moved shall be allowed to stand in any street for more than four hours at any one time, except on legal holidays and at night or in case of an accident and unavoidable delay due to accident. 
(5)  Red lights and/or other suitable warning devices shall be displayed at night to warn passers of all danger about any building in the process of being moved. 
(6)  No chains, tools or other moving implements shall be allowed to litter the streets when moving is not in progress. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Before any permit is issued granting authority to move a building or structure for which such permit is required, the person engaged in the work of moving shall file with the community development department a certificate of insurance certifying that the applicant is insured for comprehensive general liability to indemnify the Village against any loss, cost, damage, expense, judgment or which may accrue against, be charged to or be recovered from the Village or any of its officials from or by reason or on account of accidents to persons or property during any such moving operations, and from or by reason or on account of anything done under or by virtue of any permit granted for any such moving operations. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.15; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 6083, §§ 5, 6, 6-8-2017) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62.  
Sec. 18-156. - Revocation of permit; reissuance. 
If the work in, upon or about any building or structure shall be conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the director of community development or his/her designee to revoke the permit for the building or wrecking operations in connection with which such violation shall have taken place. It shall be unlawful, after the revocation of such permit, to proceed with such building or wrecking operations unless such permit shall first have been reinstated or reissued by the director of community development or his/her designee. Before a permit so revoked may be lawfully reissued, the entire building and building site shall first be put into a condition corresponding with the requirements of this chapter and any work or material applied thereto in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall first be removed from such building, and for such permit, as reissued, the fee required for a new permit shall be paid. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.16; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 18-157. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Upon the completion of any building, or any addition or alteration to an existing structure wherein a change of use is intended, the general contractor will request an occupancy certificate, for which application will have been made coincidental with the application for a building permit. If, on final inspection, the building is found to conform to the requirements of all codes and ordinances of the Village, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the community development department stating such fact and shall set forth the purpose for which the building is to be occupied. No occupancy will be permitted without an occupancy permit. There shall be no fee for said certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  If a change of use of any building or structure is contemplated that does not involve a building or remodeling operation, the owner or tenant shall apply for a certificate of occupancy permit. The director of community development or his/her designee shall cause an inspection to be made of the premises and, if such building is found to comply with fire and safety provisions of all codes and ordinances of the Village, a certificate of occupancy permit shall be issued stating such fact and shall set forth the purpose for which the structure is to be occupied. The fee for the certificate of occupancy shall be equal to the initial business registration or license fee as provided in section 22-5 of the Municipal Code. 
(c)  If any building is occupied in violation of this section, it shall forthwith be subject to notice from the director of community development or his/her designee and shall be vacated on such notice and shall not again be occupied until made to conform with the provisions of this chapter, nor until after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1959, § 5.3.17; Ord. No. 5190, § 3, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5411, § 8, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 5431, § 3, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 3, 12-9-2014)  
Secs. 18-158—18-164. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5411, § 8, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 18-158, which pertained to fee schedule and derived from Code 1959, § 3.18; Ord. No. 4640, § 2, adopted May 4, 2004; and Ord. No. 5113, § 5, adopted June 17, 2008.  
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5636, § 2(g), adopted Feb. 19, 2013, repealed art. II, div. 6, building commission, § 18-165, which pertained to created; members; powers and duties and was derived from Ord. No. 4810, § 2, adopted November 1, 2005; and Ord. No. 5190, § 4, adopted January 3, 2009. 
 
Secs. 18-165—18-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Codes, § 34-151 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-191. - International Code Council (ICC) Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings adopted; amendments. 
The 2012 edition of the ICC International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is hereby adopted with the following amendments: 
(1)  Section R101.1 Title. Amended to read as follows: "These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the Village of Glenview, Cook County, Illinois (the "Village") and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as 'this code.'" 
(2)  Section R102.4 Reference codes and standards. Amended to read as follows: "The codes and standards referenced in the code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer's instructions shall apply. The following codes and standards are not adopted by reference and thus are not considered part of the requirements of this code: 
IPC-2012 International Plumbing Code 
IPSDC-2012 International Private Sewage Disposal Code 
IWUIC-2012 International Wildlife-Urban Interface Code 
IZC-2012 International Zoning Code" 
(3)  Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Deleted in its entirety. 
(4)  Section R105.3.1.1 Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings in areas prone to flooding. Deleted in its entirety. 
(5)  Section R105.3.2 Time limit of application. Deleted in its entirety. 
(6)  Section R105.5 Expiration. Deleted in its entirety. 
(7)  Section R106.1.3 Information for construction in areas prone to flooding. Deleted in its entirety. 
(8)  Section R106.2 Site plan or plot plan. Amended to read as follows: "The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted." 
(9)  Section R106. 2 Site plan or plot plan. Amended by adding a new subsection, R106.2.1 Compliance with site plan, which reads as follows: "It shall be the responsibility of the builder/developer to submit to the Village's Community Development Department a spot survey prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor after the foundation is installed. This survey must be at a scale of not less than one inch equal to thirty feet (1" = 30'). The survey must also indicate the elevation above sea level of the top of foundation wall and the top of the curb and sidewalk at lot lines extended relative to a United State Geological Survey benchmark. No construction will be allowed to proceed except for decking, underground sewer and water, and related items until the spot survey is approved by the Village's Community Development Department. This section applies to principal structures generally, but may apply to additions or accessory structures if, in the opinion of the Village's Inspectional Services Manager or his designee, it is necessary to confirm compliance." 
(10)  Section R109.1.3 Flood plain inspections. Deleted in its entirety. 
(11)  Section R112 Board of Appeals. Deleted in its entirety. 
(12)  Section R113.4 Violation penalties. Amended by adding the following new sentence at the end of the paragraph: "Penalties for violations of the provisions of this code shall be as provided in Section 1-16 of the Glenview Municipal Code for any given offense." 
(13)  Section R113.4 Violation penalties. Amended by adding a new subsection, 113.4.1 Work prior to permit, as follows: 
"Any person, firm, or corporation who starts construction prior to the issuance of a building permit shall be subject to a fine equal to that of double the normal permit fees, excluding bonds and escrows, but not less than $100.00, at the discretion of the Village's Inspectional Services Manager." 
(14)  Section R202 Definitions - Attic, Habitable. Amended by adding Line No. 4, as follows: "Habitable Attics are required to be accessed by a stair complaint with Section R311.7 of this code." 
(15)  Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria. Amended to read as follows: 
TABLE INSET: 
Ground Snow Load 	30 lbs/ft 2 
Wind Design Speed (mph) 	90 miles per hour 
Wind Design Topographical effects 	0 
Seismic Design Category 	0 
Weathering 	Severe 
Frost line depth 	42 inches below grade 
Termite 	Moderate to heavy 
Winter Design Temp 	97 ½%, 2°F 
Ice Barrier Underlayment Required 	Yes 
Flood Hazards 	N/A 
Air Freezing Index 	2,000 
Mean Annual Temp 	50 degrees Fahrenheit 
 
(16)  Section R302.3 Two-family dwellings. Exception 2 is amended to read as follows: "Wall assemblies need not extend through attic spaces when the ceiling is protected by not less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board and an attic draft stop constructed as specified in Section R302.12.1 of this code is provided above and along the wall assembly separating the dwellings. The structural framing supporting the ceiling shall also be protected by not less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) gypsum board or equivalent." 
(17)  Section R302.6 Dwelling/garage fire separation. Amended to read as follows: "The garage shall be separated from the residence and its attic area by not less than 5/8" gypsum board applied to the garage side. Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be separated from all habitable rooms above by not less than 5/8" Type X gypsum board or equivalent. Where the separation is a floor-ceiling assembly, the structure supporting the separation shall also be protected by not less than 5/8" gypsum board or equivalent. Garages located less than 3' from a dwelling unit on the same lot shall be protected with not less than 5/8" gypsum board applied to the interior side of exterior walls that are within this area. Openings in these walls shall be regulated by Section R309.8 of this code. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Garages that are fire sprinkled to comply with Section R309.5 of this code." 
(18)  Table R302.6 Dwelling/Garage Separation. Amended to read as follows: 
TABLE INSET: 
SEPARATION 	MATERIAL 
From the residence and attics 	Not less than 5/8-inch Type X gypsum board or equivalent applied to the garage side 
From all habitable rooms above the garage 	Not less than 5/8-inch Type X gypsum board or equivalent 
Structure(s) supporting floor/ceiling assemblies used for separation required by this section 	Not less than 5/8-inch Type X gypsum board or equivalent 
Garages located less than 3 feet from a dwelling unit on the same lot 	Not less than 5/8-inch Type X gypsum board or equivalent applied to the interior side of exterior walls that are within this area 
 
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm. 
(19)  Section R302.7 Under-stair protection. Amended to read as follows: "All enclosed, accessible and open space under stairs shall have walls, under-stair surface and any soffits protected on the enclosed side with 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) gypsum board." 
(20)  Section R309.5 Garages and carports - fire sprinklers. Deleted in its entirety. 
(21)  Section R309 Garages and Carports. Amended by adding a new subsection, R309.7 Spill containment , which reads as follows: "The sill of the doors between garages or carports and interior spaces shall be raised not less than four (4) inches above the garage or carport floor." 
(22)  Section R310.1.1 Minimum opening area. Amended by adding Exception No. 2, which reads as follows: "2. Additions and remodelings with a ceiling height of eight (8) feet or less, may have emergency escape and rescue openings with a minimum net clear opening of 5.0 square feet." 
(23)  Section R310.1.2 Minimum opening height. Amended by adding an exception, which reads as follows: "Exception: Additions and remodelings with a ceiling height of eight (8) feet or less, may have emergency escape and rescue openings with a minimum net clear height of twenty-two (22) inches." 
(24)  Section R314.3.1 Alterations, repairs and additions. Amended by adding Exception No. 3, which reads as follows: "3. Interconnection and hard-wiring of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required where the alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl or basement available which could provide access for hard wiring and interconnection without the removal of interior finishes." 
(25)  Section R316 Foam plastic. Amended by adding a new subsection, R316.8 Weather protection , which reads as follows: "Insulation shall not be installed until the building envelope has been protected from weather." 
(26)  Section R320 Accessibility. Deleted in its entirety. 
(27)  Section R321.3 Elevator and platform lift - accessibility. Amended to read as follows: "Elevators or platform lifts that are part of an accessible route required by Title 71, Part 400 of the Illinois Administrative Code (the "Illinois Accessibility Code") shall comply with ICC A17.1." 
(28)  Section R322 Flood Resistant Construction. Deleted in its entirety. 
(29)  Section R402.1 Wood foundations. Deleted in its entirety. 
(30)  Section R403 Footings. Amended by deleting all references to "wood foundations." 
(31)  Table R403.1 Minimum Width of Concrete, Precast or Masonry Footings. Amended to read as follows: 
TABLE INSET: 
	LOAD-BEARING VALUE OF SOIL (psf) 
	1,500 	2,000 	3,000 	= 4,000 
Convention light-frame
construction 
1-story 	18 	18 	18 	18 
2-story 	18 	18 	18 	18 
3-story 	23 	18 	18 	18 
4-inch brick veneer over light frame or 8-inch hollow concrete masonry 
1-story 	20 	20 	20 	20 
2-story 	21 	20 	20 	20 
3-story 	32 	24 	20 	20 
8-inch solid or fully grouted
masonry 
1-story 	20 	20 	20 	20 
2-story 	29 	21 	20 	20 
3-story 	42 	32 	21 	20 
 
(32)  Figure R403.1(1) Concrete and Masonry Foundation Details. Amended by including the following statement: "Monolithic trench thickened slabs are allowed for detached structures. Monolithic trench thickened slabs for detached garages shall be a minimum of 10 inches deep and 20 inches wide. Attached structures may be constructed with a monolithic trench footing of not less than 16 inches wide or a bell footing of 12 inches increasing to 20 inches at the base, to a depth of 42 inches below grade." 
(33)  R403.1.1 Minimum size. Amended to read as follows: "Minimum sizes for concrete and masonry footings shall be as set forth in Table R403.1 and Figure R403.1(1) of this code. The footing width, W, shall be based on the load-bearing value of the soil in accordance with Table R401.4.1. Spread footings shall be at least eight (8) inches (203 mm) in thickness, T, for conventional light-frame construction and 10 inches (254 mm) in thickness, T, for brick veneer or solid masonry construction. Footing projections, P, shall be at least two (2) inches (51 mm) and shall not exceed the thickness of the footing. The size of footings supporting piers and columns shall be based on the tributary load and allowable soil pressure in accordance with Table R401.4.1 of this code. Footings for wood foundations shall be in accordance with the details set forth in Section R403.2, and Figures R403.1(2) and R403.1(3) of this code." 
(34)  Section R403.3.1 Foundations adjoining frost protected shallow foundations. Deleted in its entirety. 
(35)  Section R403.3.1.1 Attachment to unheated slab-on-ground structure. Deleted in its entirety. 
(36)  Section R403.3.1.2 Attachment to heated structure. Deleted in its entirety. 
(37)  Section 404.1.8 Rubble stone masonry. Deleted in its entirety. 
(38)  Table 404.1.2(1) Minimum Horizontal Reinforcement for Concrete Basement Walls. Amended to read as follows: 
MAXIMUM UNSUPPORTED HEIGHT OF BASEMENT WALL (feet) 	LOCATION OF HORIZONTAL REINFORCEMENT 
=8 	Two No. 5 bars within 12 inches of the top of the wall story and one No. 4 bar near mid-height of the wall story. 
>8 	Two No. 5 bars within 12 inches of the top of the wall story and on No. 4 bar near third points in the wall story. 
 
(39)  Section 404.2 Wood foundation walls. Deleted in its entirety. 
(40)  Section 404.1.2.3.7 Reinforcement. Amended by adding new subsection, R404.1.2.3.7.9 Steel dowel bars , which reads as follows: "Provide steel dowel bar anchorage for porch and terrace slabs, concrete or masonry steps and concrete area wells which adjoin foundation walls. For shallow foundations adjacent to a basement and for attached garages, embed four ½-inch round hooked bars, four feet long, into the main mall, two near the top, and two near the bottom of the attached wall. For intersecting walls of additions to existing structures, provide ½-inch round bars, 24 inches long, spaced 18 inches on center vertically and embedded not less than 4 inches." 
(41)  Section R405.2 Wood foundations. Deleted in its entirety. 
(42)  Section R406.3 Dampproofing for wood foundations. Deleted in its entirety. 
(43)  Section R407 Columns. Amended by adding a new subsection, R407.4 Foundation, which reads as follows: "Column footings shall have a minimum area of 6.25 sq. ft. and a minimum depth of 12 inches." 
(44)  Section R407 Columns. Amended by adding a new subsection, R407.5 Deck and screened porch foundation, which reads as follows: "Decks posts footings shall be a minimum of 10-inch round diameter ft. and 42 inches below grade. Screened porch or roofed-over porch footings shall be sized to support the imposed loads and extend 42 inches below grade. Porches with glazed panels or windows, such as three season rooms, shall be supported on a full footing and foundation." 
(45)  Section R501.3 Fire protection of floors. Amended to read as follows: "Floor assemblies, not required elsewhere in this code to be fire-resistance rated, shall be provided with a 5/8-inch (16 mm) gypsum wallboard membrane or equivalent on the underside of the floor framing member. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Floor assemblies located directly over a space protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904 of this code, NFPA13D, or other approved equivalent sprinkler system. 
2.  Floor assemblies located directly over a crawl space not intended for storage or fuel-fired appliances. 
3.  Portions of floor assemblies can be unprotected when complying with the following: 
3.1.  The aggregate area of the unprotected portions shall not exceed 80 square feet per story 
3.2.  Fire blocking in accordance with Section R302.11.1 of this code shall be installed along the perimeter of the unprotected portion to separate the unprotected portion from the remainder of the floor assembly. 
4.  Wood floor assemblies using dimension lumber or structural composite lumber equal to or greater than 2-inch by 10-inch (50.8 mm by 254 mm) nominal dimension, or other approved floor assemblies demonstrating equivalent fire performance." 
(46)  Section R504 Pressure Preservatively Treated - Wood Floors (On Ground). Deleted in its entirety. 
(47)  Section R506.2.3 Vapor retarder. Exception Number 1 is amended to read as follows: "From detached garages, utility building and other unheated accessory structures." 
(48)  Section R602.10.4.3 Braced wall panel interior finish material. Amended to read as follows: "Braced wall panels shall have gypsum wall board installed on the side of the wall opposite the bracing material. Gypsum wall board shall be not less than 5/8 inch in thickness and be fastened with nails or screws in accordance with Table R602.3(1) for exterior sheathing or Table R702.3.5 for interior gypsum wall board. Spacing of fasteners at panel edges for gypsum wall board opposite Method LIB bracing shall not exceed 8 inches (203 mm). Interior finish material shall not be glued in Seismic Design Categories D 0 , D 1 and D 2 . 
Exceptions: 
1.  Interior finish material is not required opposite wall panels that are braced in accordance with Methods GB, BV-WSP, ABW, PFH, PFG and CS-PF, unless otherwise required by Section R302.6. 
2.  An approved interior finish material with an in-plane shear resistance equivalent to gypsum board shall be permitted to be substituted, unless otherwise required by Section R302.6. 
3.  Except for Method LIB, gypsum wall board is permitted to be omitted provided the required length of bracing in Tables R602.10.3(1) and R602.10.3(3) is multiplied by the appropriate adjustment factor in Tables R602.10.3(2) and R602.10.3(4) respectively, unless otherwise required by Section R302.6. 
(49)  Table R702. 3.5 Minimum Thickness and Application of Gypsum Board. Amended to read as follows: 
Thickness of Gypsum Board (inches) 	Application 	Orientation of Gypsum Board to Framing 	Maximum Spacing of Framing Members (inches o.c.) 	Maximum Spacing of Fasteners (inches) 	Size of Nails for Application to Wood Framing c 
				Nails a 	Screws b 	
Application without adhesive 
5/8 	Ceiling 	Either direction 	16 	7 	12 	13 gage, 1 5/8" long, 19/64" head; 0.098" diameter, 1 3/8" long, annular-ringed; 6d cooler nail, 0.092" diameter, 1 7/8" long, ¼" head; or gypsum board nail, 0.0915" diameter, 1 7/8" long, 19/64" head. 
	Ceiling d 	Perpendicular 	24 	7 	12 	
	Wall 	Either direction 	24 	8 	12 	
	Wall 	Either direction 	16 	8 	16 	
Application with adhesive 
5/8 	Ceiling 	Either direction 	16 	16 	16 	Same as above for 5/8" gypsum board 
	Ceiling 	Perpendicular 	24 	12 	16 	
	Wall 	Either direction 	24 	16 	24 	
 
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 
a.  For application without adhesive, a pair of nails spaced not less than 2 inches apart or more than 2 1 / 2 inches apart may be used with the pair of nails spaced 12 inches on center. 
b.  Screws shall be in accordance with Section R702.3.6 of this code. Screws for attaching gypsum board to structural insulated panels shall penetrate the wood structural panel facing not less than 7 / 16 inch. 
c.  Where cold-formed steel framing is used with a clinching design to receive nails by two edges of metal, the nails shall be not less than 5 / 8 inch longer than the gypsum board thickness and shall have ringed shanks. Where the cold-formed steel framing has a nailing groove formed to receive the nails, the nails shall have barbed shanks or be 6d, 13 gage, 1 7 / 8 inches long, 15 / 64 -inch head for 5 / 8 -inch gypsum board. 
d.  Type X gypsum board for garage ceilings beneath habitable rooms shall be installed perpendicular to the ceiling framing and shall be fastened at maximum 6 inches o.c. by minimum 1 7 / 8 inches 6d coated nails or equivalent drywall screws. 
(50)  Table R702.3.7 Shear Capacity for Horizontal Wood-framed Gypsum Board Diaphragm Ceiling Assemblies. Amended to read as follows: 
MATERIAL 	THICKNESS OF MATERIAL (min.) (inch) 	SPACING OF FRAMING MEMBERS (max.) (inch) 	SHEAR VALUE a, b (plf of ceiling) 	MINIMUM FASTENER SIZE c, d 
Gypsum board 	5/8 	16 o.c. 	90 	6d cooler or wallboard nail; 1 7/8-inch long; 0.092-inch shank; 1/4-inch head 
Gypsum board 	5/8 	24 o.c. 	70 	6d cooler or wallboard nail; 1 7/8-inch long; 0.092-inch shank; 1/4-inch head 
 
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 pound per linear foot = 1.488 kg/m. 
a.  Values are not cumulative with other horizontal diaphragm values and are for short-term loading caused by wind or seismic loading. Values shall be reduced 25 percent for normal loading. 
b.  Values shall be reduced 50 percent in Seismic Design Categories D 0 , D 1 , D 2 and E. 
c.  1 1 / 4 -inch, #6 Type S or W screws may be substituted for the listed nails. 
d.  Fasteners shall be spaced not more than 7 inches on center at all supports, including perimeter blocking, and not less than 3 / 8 inch from the edges and ends of the gypsum board. 
(51)  Section R702.3.8 Water-resistant gypsum backing board. Amended to read as follows: "Gypsum board used as the base or backer for adhesive application of ceramic tile or other required nonabsorbent finish material shall conform to ASTM C 1396, C 1178 or C1278. Use of water-resistant gypsum backing board shall be permitted on ceilings where framing spacing does not exceed sixteen (16) inches (406 mm) for 5/8-inch-thick (16 mm) gypsum board. Water-resistant gypsum board shall not be installed over a Class I or II vapor retarder in a shower or tub compartment. Cut or exposed edges, including those at wall intersections, shall be sealed as recommended by the manufacturer." 
(52)  Section R703.9 Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS)/EIFS with drainage. Amended by adding the following new sentence to the end of the paragraph: "Exterior insulation finishing systems (EIFS) must be drainable systems." 
(53)  Chapter 25 - Plumbing Administration; Chapter 26 - General Plumbing Requirements; Chapter 27 - Plumbing Fixtures, and Chapter 28 - Water Heaters. Deleted in their entirety. 
(54)  Chapter 29 - Water Supply and Distribution. Sections P2901 through P2903 and Sections P2905 through P2908 are deleted in their entirety. 
(55)  Section P2904.1.1 - Required sprinkler locations. Amended to read as follows: "Sprinklers shall be installed to protect all areas of a dwelling unit. 
Exceptions: 
A.  When solid dimensional lumber is used to construct the floor-framing systems (i.e. 2"x members); 
B.  When type X 5/8" gypsum board is used to protect non-dimensional engineered floor systems (i.e. end-jointed lumber, prefabricated wood I-joists, structural composite lumber, or other non-dimensional floor framing products) throughout the home; or 
C.  When non-dimensional floor members (i.e. end-jointed lumber, prefabricated wood I-joists, structural composite lumber, or other non-dimensional floor framing products) are protected with an approved intumescent paint product. 
Exceptions A, B, and C shall not apply to additions where existing building is equipped with a fire sprinkler. 
When Exceptions A, B or C, above, are not chosen, sprinklers are required to protect all areas of a dwelling unit, except as follows: 
1.  Attics, crawl spaces and normally unoccupied concealed spaces that do not contain fuel-fired appliances do not require sprinklers. In attics, crawl spaces and normally unoccupied concealed spaces that contain fuel-fired equipment, a sprinkler shall be installed above the equipment; however, sprinklers shall not be required in the remainder of the space. 
2.  Clothes closets, linen closets and pantries not exceeding 24 square feet (2.2 m 2 ) in area, with the smallest dimension not greater than 3 feet (915 mm) and having wall and ceiling surfaces of gypsum board. 
3.  Bathrooms not more than 55 square feet (5.1 m 2 ) in area. 
4.  Garages; carports; exterior porches; unheated entry areas, such as mud room, that are adjacent to an exterior door; and similar areas." 
(56)  Chapter 30 - Sanitary Drainage through Chapter 33 - Storm Drainage. Deleted in their entirety. 
(57)  Chapter 34 - General Requirements through Chapter 40 - Devices and Luminaries. Deleted in their entirety. 
(58)  Chapter 44 - Referenced Standards. The text under the heading "NFPA" is amended to read as follows: "Pursuant to the Village's home rule authority, the following National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Codes and Standards are adopted by reference and supersede those codes and standards listed in Chapter 44 of this code. 
1.  NFPA 13 2013 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems 
2.  NFPA 13D 2013 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One and Two Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes 
3.  NFPA 20 2013 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Stationary Fire Pumps 
4.  NFPA 31 2011 Edition: Installation of Oil-burning Equipment 
5.  NFPA 58 2014 Edition: Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code 
6.  NFPA 70 2011 Edition: National Electrical Code 
7.  NFPA 72 2013 Edition: National Fire Alarm Code 
8.  NFPA 85 2011 Edition: Boiler and Construction Systems Hazards Code 
9.  NFPA 211 2010 Edition: Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel Burning Appliances 
10.  NFPA 259 2008 Edition: Test Method for Potential Heat of Building Materials 
11.  NFPA 275 2009 Edition: Standard Method of Fire Tests for the Evaluation of Thermal Barriers Used Over Foam Plastic Insulation 
12.  NFPA 286 2011 Edition: Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Evaluating Contribution of Wall and Ceiling Interior Finish to Room Fire Growth 
13.  NFPA 501 2010 Edition: Standard on Manufactured Housing 
14.  NFPA 720 2009 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Carbon Monoxide (CO) Detectors and Warning Equipment 
15.  NFPA 853 2010 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Stationary Fuel Cell Power Systems" 
(59)  Appendices. The following appendices are adopted in their entirety: 
Appendix A: Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping 
Appendix B: Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances, and Appliances Listed for Use with Type B Vents 
Appendix C: Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-vent Venting Systems 
Appendix F: Radon Control Methods 
Appendix O: Automatic Vehicular Gates 
Appendix Q: ICC International Residential Code Electrical Provisions/National Electrical Code Cross-Reference 
(Ord. No. 5190, § 5, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5367, § 5, 7-20-2010; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 4, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 6083, § 7, 6-8-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 4, adopted December 9, 2014, amended § 18-191 to read as set out herein. Previously § 18-191 was titled International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings.  
Sec. 18-192. - International Code Council (ICC) International Building Code adopted; amendments. 
The 2012 edition of the ICC International Building Code is hereby adopted for all construction other than one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhomes) with the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1 Title. Amended to read as follows: "These provisions shall be known as the Building Code of the Village of Glenview, Cook County, Illinois (the "Village"), hereinafter referred to as 'this code.'" 
(2)  Section 101.4.3 Plumbing. Amended to read as follows: "The provisions of Title 77, Part 890 of the Illinois Administrative Code (the "Illinois Plumbing Code") shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. The provisions of the Illinois Plumbing Code shall apply to private sewage disposal systems." 
(3)  Section 102.4. Referenced codes and standards. Amended to read as follows: "The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. The following codes and standards are not adopted by reference and thus are not considered part of the requirements of this code: 
IPC 2012 International Plumbing Code 
IPSDC 2012 International Private Sewage Disposal Code 
IZC 2012 International Zoning Code 
IWUIC 2012 International Wildland-Urban Interface Code 
ISPSC 2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code" 
(4)  Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Deleted in its entirety. 
(5)  Section 107.2.5 Site plan. Amended by adding a new subsection, 107.2.5.2. Compliance with site plan, which reads as follows: "It shall be the responsibility of the builder/developer to submit to the Village's Community Development Department a spot survey prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor after the foundation is installed. This survey must be at a scale of not less than one inch equal to thirty feet (1" = 30'). The survey must also indicate the elevation above sea level of the top of foundation wall and the top of the curb and sidewalk at lot lines extended relative to a United State Geological Survey benchmark. No construction will be allowed to proceed except for decking, underground sewer and water, and related items until the spot survey is approved by the Village's Community Development Department. This section applies to principal structures generally, but may apply to additions or accessory structures if, in the opinion of the Village's Inspectional Services Manager or his designee, it is necessary to confirm compliance." 
(6)  Section 114.4. Violation penalties. Amended by adding a new subsection, 114.4.1 Fines, which reads as follows: "Penalties shall be as provided in Section 1-16 of the Glenview Municipal Code for any given offense or as determined by the Judge in the Administrative Adjudication Process." 
(7)  Section 202 Definitions - Fire Alarm Control Unit. Amended to read as follows: " Fire Alarm Control Unit . A system component that receives inputs from automatic and manual fire alarm devices and may be capable of supplying power to detection devices and transponders or off-premises transmitters. The control unit is capable of providing a transfer of power to the notification appliances and transfer of conditions to relays or devices. The control unit shall be used for the fire alarm only." 
(8)  Section 202 Definitions - Fire Area. Amended to read as follows: " Fire Area . The aggregate floor area bounded by the exterior walls of a building; regardless of fire walls, fire barriers, or fire resistant-rated horizontal assemblies." 
(9)  Section 406.3.4 Separation. Requirement No. 3 is amended to read as follows: "3. A separation is not required between a Group R-3 and U carport, provided the carport is entirely open on two or more sides and there are not enclosed areas above. Attached private garages shall be completely separated from adjacent tenant vehicle spaces by means of a floor to rated ceiling partition or by a partition extending to the underside of the roof deck. All interior combustible framing shall be covered with 5/8" Type X gypsum board or the equivalent. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Garages of Type 1 or 2 construction. 
2.  Fully sprinkled garages complying with NFPA 13." 
(10)  Section 406.6 Enclosed parking garages. Amended by adding a new subsection, 406.6.4 Separation, which reads as follows: "Adjacent tenant vehicle spaces in public garages shall be completely separated by means of a floor to rated ceiling partition or by a partition extending to the underside of the roof deck. All interior combustible framing shall be covered with 5/8" Type X gypsum board of the equivalent. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Garages of Type 1 or 2 construction. 
2.  Fully sprinkled garages complying with NFPA 13." 
(11)  Section 415.8.4 Dry cleaning plants. Amended to read as follows: "The construction and installation of dry cleaning plants shall be in accordance with the requirements of this code, the ICC International Mechanical Code, the Illinois Plumbing Code and NFPA 32. Dry cleaning solvents shall be classified in accordance with the ICC International Fire Code." 
(12)  Section 603.1.2 Piping. Amended to read as follows: "The use of combustible piping materials shall be permitted when installed in accordance with the provisions of the ICC International Mechanical Code and the Illinois Plumbing Code." 
(13)  Section 708.6 Openings. Amended by adding a new subsection, 708.6.1 Closing device, which reads as follows: "The exit access door for each dwelling unit shall be equipped with an approved self-closing device." 
(14)  Section 903.2 Where required. Amended to read as follows: "Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in all new buildings regardless of materials used in construction and / or use group classification. Automatic fire suppression systems shall comply with the 2010 edition of the NFPA Standards. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Detached accessory building with an intended use that is incidental to that primary building on the same lot of record as a detached one-family dwelling. Detached accessory buildings shall include, but not be limited to, detached garages, storage sheds, and animal habitats. 
2.  Detached accessory buildings with an intended use that is incidental to that of the primary building on the same lot of record where the primary building is classified as a Use Group B, F, I, M, S, and U that are less than 250 square feet in size. This exception shall not apply if the horizontal separation between the accessory building is less than 25 feet from any other building or accessory building and/or structure is used for the following hazardous materials: 
a.  Flammable and/or combustible liquids classified as Class 1A, 1B, 1C, and 111A and if the combined quantity exceeds 30 gallons. 
b.  Flammable gas if the quantity exceeds 10 gallons and/or 333 cubic feet of gas. 
c.  Corrosives. 
d.  Toxic agents. 
e.  Oxidizers classified as Class 2, 3, or 4. Class 1 oxidizers shall not exceed 100 gallons and/or 1,000 pounds. 
f.  Unstable/reactives. 
g.  Water reactives if the quantity exceeds 100 gallons and/or 1,000 pounds. 
h.  Pyrophoric materials (All classifications). 
i.  Organic peroxides (All classifications). 
j.  Explosives (All classifications). 
3.  Picnic shelters, gazebos, pergolas, and detached public restroom facilities with a minimum horizontal separation of 25 feet from all other buildings. This exception shall not apply if the picnic shelter, gazebo, pergola, or detached public restroom is equipped with a permanent heat-producing appliance that utilizes natural gas and/or propane as a fuel supply or if the detached public restroom facility exceeds a total of 400 square feet in size. 
4.  In telecommunications equipment buildings, a manual dry fire suppression system shall be installed in those spaces or areas equipped exclusively for telecommunications equipment, association electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines provided that those spaces or areas are equipped with an automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907 and are separated from the remainder of the building wire fire separation assemblies consisting of one-hour fire resistance rated walls and two-hour fire resistance rated floor/ceiling assemblies. 
(15)  Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.11 Where required. Deleted in their entirety. 
(16)  Section 903.2.12 During construction. Renumbered as Section 903.2.1. 
(17)  Section 903.3.5 Water supplies. Amended to read as follows: "Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1 of this code. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements of this section and the Illinois Plumbing Code. Hydrant flow data used for the design of any sprinkler system shall be no more than one (1) year old." 
(18)  Section 903.3.5. Water supplies. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.3.5.3 Low water pressure factor, which reads as follows: "Provide a minimum ten percent (10%), but not less than five (5) psi, safety factor in the fire protection system hydraulic calculation. The system demand shall be a minimum 5 psi below the annual water flow test supply." 
(19)  Section 903.4.2 Alarms. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.4.2.1 Additional alarm location, which reads as follows: "A weatherproof visual strobe activated by water flow shall be provided on the exterior of the building or structure and located over the fire department connection or in a location approved by the authority having jurisdiction." 
(20)  Section 903.4.2 Alarms. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.4.2.2 Location, which reads as follows: "Alarm notification appliance and approved audio/visual devices shall be provided and located per NFPA 72. Automatic fire alarm systems shall comply with the 2010 edition of the NFPA 72 Standard." 
(21)  Section 903.4.3 Floor control valves. Amended to read as follows: "Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor of the building or structure." 
(22)  Section 903.5 Testing and maintenance. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.5.1 Accessibility, which reads as follows: "Fire sprinkler systems' inspection test valves shall be accessible at all times and located no more than six (6) feet above the finished floor surface. On multiple riser systems test valves shall be clearly identified in permanent marking as to the riser and area served." 
(23)  Section 903 Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.6. Fire pump test header, which reads as follows: "Automatic sprinkler systems that are equipped with an approved fire pump shall be provided with an OS&Y (or approved equal) control valve on the fire pump test header(s). Fire pump installations shall include an exterior test header." 
(24)  Section 903 Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Amend by adding a new subsection, 903.7 Private fire hydrants, which reads as follows: "In developed lots, subdivisions or parcels except R-3 occupancies, fire hydrants shall be located no more than three hundred (300) feet apart. Fire hydrants shall be provided on all sides of a developed lot, subdivision or parcel except R-3 occupancies as approved by the authority having jurisdiction. One (1) fire hydrant shall be located not more than 100 feet from the fire department connection on the fire protection water supply to the building or structure." 
(25)  Section 903 Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.8 Fire department access, which reads as follows: "Rooms or spaces containing an automatic sprinkler system riser valve and/or a fire pump shall be provided with direct access from the exterior of the building or structure." 
(26)  Section 903 Automatic Sprinkler Systems. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.9 Warehouse storage, which reads as follows: "A two and one-half (2 ½) inch fire hose valve with a one and one-half (1 ½) inch reducer to a one and one-half (1 ½) inch connection shall be provided at each means of egress to warehouse storage areas greater than 20,000 square feet in which storage exceeds twelve (12) feet in height. The two and one-half (2 ½) inch fire hose valve(s) shall be installed on a separate riser piping system and shall be provided with a four (4) inch water supply and a two and one-half (2 ½) inch brand water supplies. Each two and one-half (2 ½) inch fire hose valve shall be installed so no distance from the nearest two and one-half (2 ½) inch fire hose valve is greater than 120 feet." 
(27)  Section 905 Standpipe Systems. Amended by adding a new subsection, 905.3.9 Three story buildings, which reads as follows: "Any building that has three (3) stories or more above grade, or has any horizontal dimension exceeding 150 feet between exterior walls, shall be equipped with a standpipe system designed and installed in accordance with NFPA standard 14 for standpipe and hose systems (Class 1 service) as defined therein. Dry standpipe systems are prohibited unless written approval is received from the Fire Code Official or his /her designee." 
(28)  Section 907.2 Where required - new buildings and structures. Deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following, 907.2 Where required- New and existing structures and buildings : "An approved manual, automatic or combination manual and automatic fire alarm monitored system in accordance with the provision of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new buildings and structures in all use groups. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two-family dwelling units. 
2.  In existing residential multi-family use groups, initiating and notification devices required by NFPA 72 may be omitted from within the dwelling unit provided that such devices located within the adjacent common areas "outside the dwelling unit" shall provide an audible level acceptable to the fire marshal." 
907.2.1 Fire alarm and detection systems - requirement. Fire Alarm Control Units shall be configured to be silenced with a key and no other method. 
907.2.2 Fire alarm and detection systems - Group I occupancies. A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in Group I occupancies. An electrically supervised, automatic smoke detection system shall be provided in accordance with Sections 907.2.2.1, 907.2.2.2, and 907.2.2.3 of this code. 
Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes in resident or patient sleeping areas of Group I-1 and I-2 occupancies shall not be required at exits located at all nurse's control stations or other constantly attended staff locations, provided such stations are visible and continuously accessible and that travel distances required in Section 903.7.1 of this code are not exceeded. 
907.2.2.1. Group I-1. Corridors, habitable spaces other than sleeping units and kitchens and waiting areas that are open to corridors shall be equipped with an automatic smoke detection system. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Smoke detection in habitable spaces is not required where the facility is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system. 
2.  Smoke detection is not required for exterior balconies. 
907.2.2.2. Group I-2. Corridors in nursing homes (both intermediate care and skilled nursing facilities), detoxification facilities and spaces permitted to be open to the corridors by Section 407.2 of this code shall be equipped with an automatic fire detection system. Hospital shall be equipped with smoke detection as required in Section 407.2 of this code. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Corridor smoke detection is not required in smoke compartments that contain patient sleeping units where patient sleeping units are provided with smoke detectors that comply with UL268. Such detectors shall be provided a visual display on the corridor side of each patient sleeping unit and an audible and visual alarm at the nursing station attending each unit. 
2.  Corridor smoke detection is not required in smoke compartments that contain patient sleeping units where patient sleeping unit doors are equipped with automatic door-closing devices with integral smoke detectors on the unit sides installed in accordance with their listing, provided that the integral detectors perform the required alerting function. 
907.2.2.3. Group I-3. Group I-3 occupancies shall be equipped with a manual and automatic fire alarm system install for alerting staff. 
907.2.2.3.1 System initiation. Actuation of an automatic fire-extinguishing system, a manual fire alarm box or a fire detector shall initiate an approved fire alarm signal which automatically notifies staff. Pre-signal systems shall not be used. 
907.2.2.3.2 Manual fire alarm boxes. Manual fire alarm boxes are not required to be located in accordance with Section 907.3 of this code where the fire alarm boxes are provided at staff-attended locations having direct supervision over areas where manual fire alarm boxes have been omitted. 
Manual fire alarm boxes shall be permitted to be locked in areas occupied by detainees, provided that staff members are present within the subject area and have keys readily available to operate the manual fire alarm boxes. 
907.2.2.3.3 Smoke detectors. An approved automatic smoke detection system shall be installed throughout resident housing areas, including sleeping units and contiguous day rooms, group activity spaces and other common spaces normally accessible to residents. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Other approved smoke detection arrangements providing equivalent protection including, but not limited to placing detectors in exhaust ducts from cells or behind protective guards listed for the purposed are allowed when necessary to prevent damage or tampering. 
2.  Sleeping units in Use Condition 2 and 3. 
3.  Smoke detectors are not required in sleeping units with four or fewer occupants in smoke compartments that are required throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
907.2.3 Automatic fire detection system required. An approved automatic fire detection system shall be installed in all use groups, not provided with an automatic sprinkler system, and in accordance with NFPA 72. Devices, combination of devices, appliances, and equipment shall comply with Section 907.1.2 of this code. The automatic fire detectors shall be smoke detectors, except that an approved alternative type of detector shall be installed in spaces such as boiler rooms where, during normal operation, products of combustion are present in sufficient quantity to activate a smoke detector. Automatic fire alarm systems shall comply with the 2010 edition of the NFPA 72 Standard. 
907.2.4 Control panel locations. All fire alarm control panels of full function annunciator panels shall be installed within ten (10) feet of the main entrance, or in a location approved by the fire code official. 
(29)  Section 907.3 Fire safety functions. Amended to read as follows: "Automatic fire detectors utilized for the purpose of performing fire safety function shall be connected to the building's fire alarm control panel where a fire alarm system is required by Section 907.2 of this code. Detectors shall, upon actuation, perform the intended function and activate the alarm notification appliances or a visible and audible supervisory signal at a constantly attended location. The detectors shall be located in accordance with Chapter 5 of NFPA72. Multi-tenant Group M buildings will be activated by individual tenant space by the automatic sprinkler system flow switch for that space or an automatic fire detection system." 
(30)  Section 912 Fire department connections. Amended by adding a new subsection, 912.1.1. Local fire department connections, which reads as follows: "All fire department connections shall be a NST four- (4) inch, non-swivel Storz connection with a fixed 30-degree downturn and shall be located on the building wall, 24 inches to 42 inches above the finished grade." 
(31)  Section 1006.3 Emergency power illumination. Amended by adding a new line Number 6, which reads as follows: "6. All rooms containing the building sprinkler riser(s), fire pump(s), and fire alarm control panel(s) shall be provided with approved emergency lighting." 
(32)  Section 1007.6 Areas of refuge. Amended by adding a new subsection, 1007.6.4 Identification, which reads as follows: "Each door providing access to an area of refuge from an adjacent floor area shall be identified by a sign complying with ICC A117.1, stating: AREA OF REFUGE, and include the International Symbol of Accessibility. Where exit sign illumination is required by Section 1011.2 of this code, the area of refuge sign shall be internally illuminated. Additionally, tactile signage complying with ICC A117.1 shall be located at each door to an area of refuge." 
(33)  Section 1011.3 Illumination. Amended to read as follows: "Exit signs shall only be internally illuminated." 
(34)  Section 1011.6 Externally illuminated exit signs. Deleted in its entirety. 
(35)  Chapter 11 - Accessibility. Deleted in its entirety. 
(36)  Section 1203.4.1.2 Openings below grade. Amended to read as follows: "Where openings below grade provide required natural ventilation, the outside horizontal clear space measured perpendicular to the opening shall be one and one-half times the depth of the opening. The depth of the opening shall be measured from the average adjoining ground level to the bottom of the opening. The opening shall be protected with a metal grate or other approved covers." 
(37)  Section 1207.2 Air-borne sound. Amended to read as follows: "Walls, partitions and floor/ceiling assemblies separating dwelling units from each other or from public or service areas shall have a sound transmission class of not less than 55 for airborne noise and an impact insulation class of not less than 55 when tested in accordance with ASTM-E90 and ASTM-E492. Penetrations or openings in construction assemblies for piping; electrical devices; recessed cabinets; bathtubs; soffits; or heating, ventilating or exhaust ducts shall be sealed, lined, insulated or otherwise treated to maintain the required ratings. This requirement shall not apply to dwelling unit entrance doors; however such doors shall be tight fitting to the frame and sill." 
(38)  Section 1404.5.3 Lead-coated copper. Deleted in its entirety. 
(39)  Section 1404.11 Exterior insulation and finish systems. Amended to read as follows: "Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS) must be drainable systems. EIFS with drainage shall comply with Section 1408 of this code." 
(40)  Table 1405.2 Minimum Thickness of Weather Coverings. Amended by deleting all references to "lead coated copper." 
(41)  Section 1408.5 Installation. Amended to read as follows: "Installation of EIFS with drainage shall be in accordance with EIFS manufacturer's installation instructions." 
(42)  Section 1503.4 Roof drainage. Amended to read as follows: "Design and installation of roof drainage systems shall comply with Section 1503 of this code, Sections 1106 and 1108 of this code, as applicable, the Illinois Plumbing Code and the Glenview Municipal Code." 
(43)  Table 1507.2.9.2 Valley lining material. Amended by deleting all references to "lead coated copper." 
(44)  Section 1809.4 Depth and width of footings. Amended to read as follows: "The minimum depth of footings below the undisturbed surface shall be 42 inches where applicable; the depth of footings shall also conform to Section 1809.5 of this code." 
(45)  Section 1809.5 Frost protection. Amended to read as follows: "Except where otherwise protected from frost, foundation wall, piers, and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be protected by one or more of the following methods: 
1.  Extend a minimum of 42 inches below grade; 
2.  Constructing in accordance with ASCE32; or 
3.  Erecting on solid bedrock. 
Footings shall not bear on frozen soil unless such frozen condition is of a permanent character." 
(46)  Section 1809.12 Timber footings. Deleted in its entirety. 
(47)  Section 2406.4 Hazardous locations. Amended by adding a new subsection, 2406.4.8 Retail use districts, which reads as follows: "All new glazing installed in a ground floor location in every business located in the Village's D-D, B-1, B-2 and B-3 zoning districts, and in every retail use located in the Village's I zoning districts, shall be safety glass. Each pane of tempered glass except tempered spandrel glass shall be permanently identified by the manufacturer. The identification label shall be acid etched, sand blasted, ceramic fired, embossed, or shall be of a type that once applied cannot be removed without being destroyed and shall be visible when the unit is glazed. The installation or replacement glass shall be the same as required for new installations." 
(48)  Chapter 27 - Electrical. Deleted in its entirety. 
(49)  Chapter 29 - Plumbing Systems. Deleted in its entirety. 
(50)  Section 3001.2 Referenced standards. Amended to read as follows: "Conveyance for which a building permit is issued as of the effective date of October 1 , 2012 (building permit for new construction or a permit issued for the repair/modification of a conveyance) must be designed, constructed, installed, operated, inspected, tested, maintained, altered, and repaired in accordance with the following standards and recommended practices: 
1.  American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
Three Park Ave. 
New York, NY 10016-5990 
A.  Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1-2010/CSA B44-10) and Performance-Based Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.7-2007/CSA B44.7-07); 
B.  Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators and Moving Sidewalks (ASME A17.2-2012); 
C.  Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.3-2005) 
D.  Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts (ASME A18.1-2008); 
E.  Standard for Qualification of Elevator Inspectors (ASME QEI-1-2010). 
2.  American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 
West 43 rd Street, 4 th Floor 
New York, NY 10036 
A.  Safety Requirements for Personnel Hoists and Employee Elevators (ANSI A10.4-2007) 
3.  American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) 
1801 Alexander Bell Drive 
Reston, VA 20191-4400 
A.  Automate people Mover Standards (ASCE 21, Part 1-2005/2006, ASCE 21, Parts 2 through 4-2008)." 
(51)  Section 3001.3 Accessibility. Amended to read as follows: "Passenger elevators required to be accessible by Title 71, Part 400 of the Illinois Administrative Code (the "Illinois Accessibility Code") shall conform to ICC A117.1." 
(52)  Section 3109 Swimming pool enclosures and safety devices. Deleted in its entirety. 
(53)  Chapter 32 - Encroachments into public right-of-way. Deleted in its entirety. 
(54)  Section 3401.3 Compliance. Amended to read as follows: "Alterations, repairs, additions, and changes of occupancy to existing structures shall comply with the provisions for alternations, repairs, additions, and changes of occupancy in the ICC International Fire Code, ICC International Fuel Gas Code, ICC International Mechanical Code, Illinois Plumbing Code, ICC International Property Maintenance Code, ICC International Residential Code, and National Electric Code." 
(55)  Chapter 35 - Referenced Standards. The text under the heading "NFPA" is amended to read as follows: "Pursuant to the Village's home rule authority, the following national Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Codes and Standards are adopted by reference and supersede those codes and standards listed in Chapter 35 of this code. 
1.  NFPA 10 2013 Edition: Standards for the Installation of Portable Fire Extinguishers 
2.  NFPA 13 2013 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems 
3.  NFPA 13D 2013 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One and Two Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes 
4.  NFPA 13R 2013 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies Up To and Including Four Stories in Height 
5.  NFPA 14 2013 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Standpipes, Private Hydrants, and Hose Systems 
6.  NFPA 17A 2013 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Wet Chemical Fire Extinguishing Systems 
7.  NFPA 20 2013 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Stationary Fire Pumps 
8.  NFPA 30 2015 Edition: Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code 
9.  NFPA 30B 2015 Edition: Standard for the Manufacture and Storage of Aerosol Products 
10.  NFPA 33 2011 Edition: Standard for Dipping and Coating Processes Using Flammable Liquids 
11.  NFPA 58 2014 Edition: Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code 
12.  NFPA 72 2013 Edition: National Fire Alarm Code 
13.  NFPA 96 2014 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Hood and Duct Systems 
14.  NFPA 1123 2014 Edition: Code for Outdoor Fireworks Displays 
15.  NFPA 1124 2013 Edition: Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Fireworks 
16.  NFPA 1126 2011 Edition: Standard for Proximate Audience Pyrotechnics" 
(Code 1959, § 5.5.3; Ord. No. 4528, § 2, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 4706, § 2, 11-16-2004; Ord. No. 4808, § 2, 11-1-2005; Ord. No. 4872, § 2, 6-6-2006; Ord. No. 4930, § 2, 12-5-2006; Ord. No. 4993, § 3, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 5190, § 6, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5380, § 7, 10-5-2010; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5879, § 5, 12-9-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 5, adopted December 9, 2014, amended § 18-192 to read as set out herein. Previously § 18-192 was titled International Building Code.  
Secs. 18-193—18-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-221. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 7, adopted Jan. 3, 2009, deleted § 18-221 in its entirety. Former § 18-221 pertained to definitions and derived from Code 1959, § 23.1.  
Sec. 18-222. - Compliance required. 
Upon the adoption, by ordinance, of such standards, specifications, rules and regulations, and fees, they shall be operative and, thereafter, no electrical equipment shall be installed or altered except upon permit approved by the development department. The development department shall approve permits for such installations and alterations of electrical equipment in all cases where application shall have been made in accordance with the rules and regulations established as provided in this article. The development department shall inspect all such installed or altered electrical equipment, and shall require that such equipment conform to the standards and specifications applicable thereto, which have been recommended and adopted as provided in this article. The requirements of this article specify minimum acceptable electrical equipment and wiring methods. Other equipment and methods not specified in this article may be approved for use by the director of development or his/her designee. 
(Code 1959, § 23.7; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-223. - Liability for damages. 
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or installing any electrical wires, appliances, apparatus, construction or equipment for damages to any person injured by any defect therein by reason of the inspections authorized in this chapter or the certificate of inspection issued by the development department, nor shall the Village be held liable for any damages resulting from the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 23.13; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-224. - Subcontracts. 
When contracts to install electrical work have been obtained by persons that are not registered as electrical contractors, as provided for in this article, and the contract is assigned or sublet to a registered electrician on a subcontract or percentage basis, the name of such registered electrical contractor shall immediately be disclosed by the nonregistered electrical contractor to the other party to the contract and to the development department in writing. 
(Code 1959, § 23.14; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-225. - Alterations, changes, etc., of existing wiring. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, disturb, alter or change any electrical wiring, or to permit such electrical wiring to be cut, disturbed, altered or changed, unless done in conformity with the provisions of this article. Where a building is undergoing remodeling, any changes to be made in the electrical installation must first have the approval of the development department before work is commenced. 
(Code 1959, § 23.17; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-226. - Overfusing conductors, motors or apparatus. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to overfuse any conductor, motor or apparatus in excess of the maximum allowed by this article for such conductor, motor or apparatus, or to install any substitute in lieu of an approved fuse or device so as to remove or reduce the factor of safety thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 23.18)  
Sec. 18-227. - Permit required to repair or alteration wiring and equipment damaged by fire or flood. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to alter or repair any electrical wire or apparatus damaged, directly or indirectly, by fire or flood without first obtaining a permit for such work in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 23.19)  
Sec. 18-228. - Electrical contractor registration and fees. 
(a)  All persons doing work in the Village as an electrical contractor, shall first register as such in the office of the clerk and shall pay an annual registration fee. 
(b)  The term of registration required in accordance with this chapter shall be January 1 through December 31 of the same calendar year. 
(c)  The annual fee for an electrical contractor's registration shall be established by the director of development or his/her designee, and as set forth in section 30-1 of the Code. 
(d)  The term "electrical contractor", as used in this section, means any person engaged in the business of installing or altering, by contract, electrical equipment for the utilization of electrical supplied light, heat or power, not including radio apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, and not including apparatus, conductors and other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers which are under the jurisdiction of the State commerce commission, for use in their operation as public utilities. Such term shall be also not include employees employed by such contractor to do or supervise such work. 
(e)  Any electrical contractor failing to register and pay the fee as set forth in section shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 23.20; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5411, § 4, 12-13-2010)  
Sec. 18-229. - Electrical contractors; additional registration requirements. 
An applicant seeking to register as an electrical contractor, in addition to the registration requirements set out in section 18-228, shall comply with the following provisions: 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Supervising electrician. 
(1)  Before the issuance of a permit to install or alter electrical work to any electrical contractor, the electrical contractor shall appoint or employ a person, who may be himself or some other person, who, for the purposes of this section, shall be known as a "supervising electrician." 
(2)  The supervising electrician shall have had at least three years' experience in the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of electrical wires, equipment and apparatus, or an experience thereto. Proof of such experience shall be furnished to the director of development or his/her designee upon his request. 
(d)  Duties of supervising electrician. The supervising electrician shall perform the work or supervise and direct the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of electrical wires and apparatus authorized by permits issued under the authority of this article. The supervising electrician shall be responsible to see that required electrical inspections are scheduled through and performed by the development department. If requested by the director of development or his/her designee, the supervising electrician or his representative shall be present for inspections. 
(e)  Notice of discharge or resignation of supervising electrician. Whenever a supervising electrician shall leave or be discharged from the employ of any person who is required by this article to appoint or employ a supervising electrician, a notice in writing thereof shall be given to the development department within five business days by both the employer and the supervising electrician, and the permit privileges of such person shall, without further order or action by the development department, stand suspended until the employment or appointment by such person of a supervising electrician as provided for in this section. 
(f)  Homeowners. 
(1)  For the purpose of this section the term "homeowner" means the owner and occupant of a residential dwelling within the corporate limits of the Village. 
(2)  Every homeowner acting as electrical contractor shall, at the time of application of permit, submit proof, to the director of development or his/her designee, that he/her has sufficient knowledge and technical training and experience to perform the installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of electrical wiring and equipment of a residential occupancy. The director of development or his/her designee shall approve, or deny, at his discretion, the application of a homeowner acting as an electrical contractor. 
(3)  Permits issued to a homeowner, acting as an electrical contractor, shall be for electrical work on the premises of the said homeowner only. 
(g)  Reserved. 
(Code 1959, § 23.21; Ord. No. 4371, § 3, 2-19-2002; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 6083, § 8, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 18-230. - Adoption by reference. 
The 2011 edition of the National Electrical Code is adopted by reference. 
(Code 1959, § 23.25; Ord. No. 4385, § 2, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 4605, § 2, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 4705, §§ 2, 3, 11-16-2004; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5379, § 2, 10-5-2010; Ord. No. 5536, § 2, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 18-231. - Amendments. 
Any electrical equipment or method of installation not specifically covered by section 18-231 shall be governed by the rules and regulations in the 2011 edition of the National Fire Protection Association, under the auspices of the American National Standards Institute, now on file in the Development Department, and referred to in this article. Any and all references to the National Electrical Code in this article shall mean the edition referred to in this section. 
The 2011 edition of the National Electrical Code is amended as follows: 
(1)  Article 100 Definitions. (Add the following definitions) 
Alter shall mean to make different, modify, or vary. 
Repair shall mean to restore to a good operating condition as in the original state, without alteration. 
(2)  Article 110.24 Identification of the electrical contractor. (Add this section). The name of the electrical contractor performing the work on all new electrical services shall be displayed on the service panel cover. 
(3)  Article 210.50 III Required Outlet. (Amend by adding the following). 
Commercial or industrial office areas shall have receptacles installed within six feet of doorways and every twelve feet on wall spaces two feet or greater in length. 
(4)  Article 210.8 Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel. (Amend section (A) by adding). When feed through GFCI receptacles are used, they shall feed only receptacles on the same floor. 
(5)  Article 210.8(B). Ground-Fault Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel. (Amend by adding the following). Bathroom switches and receptacles shall not be located within 30 inches measured horizontally, from the outside edge of a bathtub, whirlpool tub, shower or similar fixture. This requirement shall not apply to sink basins. 
Wall mounted lighting fixtures shall not be located within 30 inches measured horizontally, from the outside edge of a bathtub, whirlpool tub, shower or similar fixture unless provided with GFCI protection. 
(6)  Article 210.52(A) General Provisions. (Amend by adding the following). 
(1)  Counter top and work bench areas, other than kitchen counter tops shall be served by at least one receptacle for every six feet of length or fraction thereof. 
(7)  Article 230 Services. (Amend by adding section 230.1(A)). All services shall be installed with an outdoor disconnecting means capable of being secured to prevent tampering. Services that are 200 amps or less shall have a single main disconnect. Multiple disconnects in a common enclosure shall be permitted for services greater than 200 amps. 
(8)  Article 230 Services. (Amend by adding section 230.1(B)). System design drawings shall be submitted for all services greater than 200 amps at the time of permit application. 
(9)  Article 230 Services. (Amend by adding section 230.11 Service Entrance Conductors). 
(A)  Service entrance conductors shall be installed in rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit or rigid nonmetallic conduit. The use of a subpanel shall require the written approval of the Director of inspectional services or his/her designee after submission and approval of complete load calculations. 
(B)  All service conductors shall be installed underground unless special permission is granted by the director of inspectional services. 
(C)  In new residential construction the electrical service shall have a minimum rating of 200 amps and an electrical distribution panel sized for 40 circuits. An interior disconnecting means shall be provided in addition to the exterior disconnect. Fuse box pullouts shall not be used as a service disconnect. 
Exception: Electric service upgrades in existing residences shall have a minimum 100 ampere rating and an electrical distribution panel sized for 30 circuits. Electrical distribution panel replacement and/or riser replacement shall not constitute a service upgrade. 
(D)  In commercial construction an interior disconnecting means shall be provided in addition to the exterior disconnect. Fuse box pullouts shall not be used as a service disconnect. 
(E)  Half-size breakers are not approved for use in new construction. In existing residential dwelling units half-size breakers are limited to manufacturer's specifications. Half-size breakers shall not be permitted in existing commercial or industrial units. 
(F)  Three-phase circuit panels supplied by three-phase, four wire Delta 120/240 volt service shall not be used to directly supply 120 volt single phase loads. 
(G)  Service entrances for underground services shall be governed by the requirements published by Commonwealth Edison entitled "Information and Requirements for the Supply of Electric Service." 
(10)  Article 230.31(B) Minimum Size. (Amend to read as follows). The conductors shall not be smaller than 8 AWG copper or smaller than 2 AWG for aluminum and copper clad aluminum conductors. 
(11)  Article 230.43 Wiring Methods for 600 volts, Nominal, or less. (Amend to read as follows). Service entrance conductors shall be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of this code covering the type of wiring methods used and shall be limited to the following methods: 
(1)  Rigid metal conduit 
(2)  Intermediate metal conduit 
(3)  Rigid nonmetallic conduit 
(12)  Article 250.50 Grounding Electrode System and Grounding Electrode Conductor. (Amend by adding the following after the first paragraph). 
All grounding conductors shall be: 
(1)  Enclosed in a metal raceway or metal conduit; 
(2)  Connected to the first five (5) feet of the metal water pipe from the point of entrance to the building or structure on the street side of the water meter; 
(3)  Tagged with an approved WARNING tag; and 
(4)  A properly sized bonding jumper shall be installed across the water meter. 
(13)  Article 250.64 Grounding Electrode Conductor Material. (Amend to read as follows). The grounding electrode conductor shall be copper. The use of aluminum or copper clad aluminum for the purpose of grounding is prohibited. 
(14)  Article 310.2(B) Conductor Material. (Amend to read as follows). The use of compact aluminum and copper clad aluminum conductors shall be prohibited if smaller the 2 AWG. 
(15)  Article 314.27(C) Boxes at Ceiling-suspended Paddle Fan Outlets. (Amend to read as follows). Any outlet box which is being installed in an area that can reasonably accommodate a ceiling fan shall be identified for ceiling fan support. 
(16)  Article 320.10 Uses Permitted. (Amend to read as follows). Metal-clad and armored type cable (BX) shall be permitted for remodeling work where the installation of electric metallic tubing and/or intermediate metal conduit presents a hardship and is approved by the Director of Inspectional Services or his/her designee. 
(17)  Article 324 Flat Conductor Cable: Type FCC. (Delete this section) 
(18)  Article 330.10 Uses Permitted. (Amend to read as follows). Type MC cable shall be permitted for remodeling work where the installation of electrical metallic tubing and/or intermediate metal conduit presents a hardship and is approved for use by the Director of Inspectional Services or his/her designee. 
(19)  Article 334 Nonmetallic-sheathed Cable: Types NM, NMC, and NMS. (Delete this section) 
(20)  Article 338 Service-Entrance Cable: Types SE and Use. (Delete this section). This does not apply to USE cable. 
(21)  Article 340 UF Wiring. (Amend to read as follows). UF wiring is permitted in exterior uses when installed underground only. 
(22)  Article 352.10 Rigid Nonmetallic Conduit: Type RNC subsections (A), (C), (D), (E), and (F) Use Permitted. (Delete these sections) 
(23)  Article 348 Flexible Metal Conduit. (Amend by adding the following) 
Flexible metal conduit shall not exceed six feet in length except by written approval by the Director of Inspectional Services or his/her designee. 
(24)  Article 352.12 Uses Not Permitted. (Amend by adding the following section). 
(G)  Where conduits are placed in concrete cast in place on earth, or in direct contact with the earth, only galvanized rigid metal conduit, intermediate conduit or rigid nonmetallic conduit shall be used. Electrical metal conduit, with fittings approved for immersion in concrete, may be placed in concrete above grade, with 2 inches of space below the conduit. 
(25)  Article 362 Electrical Nonmetallic Tubing. (Delete this section) 
(26)  Article 382 Nonmetallic Extensions. (Delete this section) 
(27)  Article 394 Concealed Knob-and-tube Wiring. (Delete this section) 
(28)  Article 398 Open Wiring on Insulators. ..... (Delete this section) 
(29)  Article 410.116 Recessed Light Clearances. (Amend to read as follows). 
Recessed lighting fixtures installed in insulated ceilings are required to be I.C. type. This requirement cannot be obviated through the removal of insulation in the vicinity of the lighting luminar. 
(30)  Article 450.3 Over-Current Protection. (Amend to read as follows). All transformers rated at 150 volts and greater shall have both primary and secondary load break disconnects located within sight of the transformer. 
(31)  Article 450.27 Oil-insulated Transformers Installed Outdoors. (Amend to read as follows). Space separations shall be no less than five (5) feet horizontally from a doorway or window and twenty (20) feet from a fire escape except with written permission of the fire code official or his/her designee. 
(32)  Article 600.6(A) Sign Disconnects. (Amend to read as follows) 
Outdoor disconnects and raceways used in connection with illuminated signage shall be located in accordance with one of the following methods: 
1.  Within an enclosed building within sight of the sign(s), or 
2.  Behind a parapet wall within sight of the sign(s), or 
3.  Completely enclosed within the sign. 
(33)  Article 604 Manufactured Wiring Systems. (Amend to read as follows) 
Manufactured wiring systems shall be permitted for use with furniture systems only. 
(37)  Article 680.23(A) (4) Voltage Limitation. (Amend to read as follows) 
Lighting fixtures installed in swimming pools, fountains, and the like, shall not operate at more than 15 volts, as measured between conductors. 
(38)  Article 720 Low Voltage Wiring. (Amend by adding the following). 
Low voltage wiring shall be installed in conduit in areas made inaccessible by building construction or where subject to damage. 
(Code 1959, § 23.26; Ord. No. 4913, § 2, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5379, § 3, 10-5-2010; Ord. No. 5536, § 3, 1-3-2012)  
Sec. 18-232. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person who violates any section of this article, or who shall fail or refuse to comply with this article, shall constitute an offense punishable, upon conviction, as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 23.28)  
Secs. 18-233—18-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 18-251. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 7, adopted Jan. 3, 2009, deleted § 18-251 in its entirety. Former § 18-251 pertained to office of chief electrical inspector and derived from Code 1959, § 23.2.  
Sec. 18-252. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 7, adopted Jan. 3, 2009, deleted § 18-252 in its entirety. Former § 18-252 pertained to appointment of chief electrical inspector; cause for removal from office and derived from Code 1959, § 23.3.  
Sec. 18-253. - Administration and enforcement of electrical code. 
The director of development or his/her designee shall have general charge and supervision for the regulation of the installation, alteration and use of all electrical equipment as provided in this article within the Village that is required to be inspected by this article, and shall enforce all ordinances related thereto. Any reference in the Glenview Electrical Code or the National Electrical Code to the authority having jurisdiction shall not be construed to mean the Village electrical commission, as a whole. 
(Code 1959, § 23.4; Ord. No. 5079, § 2, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 8, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-254. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3656, § 2(f), adopted Feb. 19, 2013, deleted § 18-254, which pertained to Electrical Commission and derived from code 1959, § 23.5; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, adopted Jan. 3, 2009; and Ord. No. 5431, § 2, adopted Mar. 1, 2011.  
Sec. 18-255. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3656, § 2(f), adopted Feb. 19, 2013, deleted § 18-255, which pertained to recommendations of Electrical Commission and derived from Code 1959, § 23.6; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, adopted Jan. 3, 2009; and Ord. No. 5431, § 3, adopted Mar. 1, 2011.  
Sec. 18-256. - Right to entry for inspection. 
The director of development or his/her designee or such other electrical inspectors shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation or alterations of electrical equipment contained therein, or for the purpose of reinspecting present wiring installations to determine whether or not such wiring installations conform to the provisions of this article, and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electrical currents and to cut or disconnect, in cases of emergency, any wire where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property, or may interfere with the work of the fire department. The provisions for inspection of work authorized by the permits issued in accordance with this article shall not be construed as prohibiting the inspection of any electrical equipment installed, whenever the director of development or his/her designee shall determine that the public safety requires such inspection. 
(Code 1959, § 23.8; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-257. - Certificates of inspection. 
(a)  Upon the completion of the wiring or an electrical installation in or on any building or structure, it shall be the duty of the person doing the wiring or electrical installation to notify the development department, which shall cause the wiring or electrical installation to be inspected, and if the wiring or electrical installation conforms to the requirements of this article, the development department shall cause to be issued a written certificate of satisfactory inspection, in triplicate, one copy of which shall be delivered to the person who is to furnish electricity or electrical service and the third copy shall remain for Village files. The certificate of inspection shall contain the date of such inspection, the location or address of the wiring or electrical installation by street number or lot number, the name of the person actually completing the work and the name of the person for whom the work was performed. 
(b)  In no case shall the development department issue a certificate of inspection unless the electrical power or heating installations and all apparatus, wire or appurtenances attached thereto conform with the regulations set forth in this article; and electric current shall not be supplied to any such electrical installation by any person until such certificate of satisfactory inspection shall be issued and delivered to the person contemplated to furnish electrical current. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install electrical energy recording meters on any electrical equipment that has been installed or connect any electric distribution system or circuit to an electricity system previous to the issuance by the chief electrical inspector of a temporary current permit or a certificate of inspection authorizing the use of current on such installation. 
(Code 1959, § 23.9; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-258. - Stop work order. 
No person shall install any electrical conduit, electrical wire, equipment or apparatus in any building or structure for which a permit is required until such permit shall have been secured. If any work is begun on the installation of electrical conduits, raceways of the installation, alterations or repair of electrical wires or apparatus in any building or structure without a permit authorizing such work, the work shall be stopped until the necessary permit is issued. 
(Code 1959, § 23.11)  
Sec. 18-259. - Records. 
The development department shall keep complete records of all permits issued and inspections made, and other official work performed under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 23.12; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-260. - Impersonating an electrical inspector. 
No person who is not a lawful Village electrical inspector shall impersonate an electrical inspector of the development department. 
(Code 1959, § 23.15; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-261. - Official notice and seal. 
The director of development or his/her designee or other electrical inspectors who may be designated are hereby empowered to attach to electrical cabinets and equipment an official notice or seal to prevent use of electricity, and it shall be unlawful for any other person to attach such seal, or to break, change, destroy, tear, mutilate, cover or otherwise deface or injure any such official notice or seal posted by the development department. 
(Code 1959, § 23.16; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-262. - Suspension or revocation of permits. 
The director of development or his/her designee may suspend any permit for work being executed contrary to the provisions of this article until acted upon by the electrical commission or, at his discretion, he may reinstate the revoked or suspended permit after the violations have been corrected or rectified. 
(Code 1959, § 23.22; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-263. - Suspension or revocation of registration. 
The director of development or his/her designee may suspend any appointment or registration of persons executing electrical installations contrary to the provisions of this article until acted upon by the electrical commission or, at his discretion, he may reinstate the suspended or revoked appointment or registration after the violations have been corrected or rectified. 
(Code 1959, § 23.23; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-264. - Permits, fees and inspections. 
(a)  Permit required. It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to commence or perform any work in connection with the installation or alteration of electrical equipment without first having made application to and secured from the office of the director of development or his/her designee the necessary permit for such work, and any person so doing shall be subjected to the general penalty set forth in section 1-16. Repairs, except repair of wiring or equipment damaged by fire (see section 18-227), wherein the same type of electrical equipment is utilized, may be accomplished without the necessity of obtaining a permit, provided further, that such repair complies in all other respects with the provisions of this article. Repairs shall be performed by a person who is qualified to obtain electrical permits. For associated permit and inspection fees, see section 30-1. 
(b)  Other apparatus. Inspections of temporary installations and all other inspections not specifically provided for in this section shall be charged at not less than the minimum fee. The chief electrical inspector shall determine the fee to be charged in accordance with the schedule set forth in section 30-1. 
(Code 1959, § 23.24; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 6140, § 2, 12-5-2017)  
Sec. 18-265. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6083, § 9, adopted June 8, 2017, repealed § 18-265, in its entirety. Former § 18-265 pertained to "Appeals," and was derived from Code 1959, § 23.27; Ord. No. 5190, § 7, adopted January 3, 2009 and Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, adopted March 1, 2011.  
Secs. 18-266—18-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 18-301. - International Code Council (ICC) International Mechanical Code adopted; amendments. 
The 2012 edition of the ICC International Mechanical Code is hereby adopted with the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1. Title. Amend this section to read as follows: "These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the Village of Glenview, Cook County, Illinois (the "Village"), herein referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 102. 8 Referenced codes and standards. Amended to read as follows: "The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 15 of this code, and such codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. The following codes and standards are not adopted by reference and thus are not considered part of the requirements of this code: 
IPC 2012 International Plumbing Code 
IPSDC 2012 International Private Sewage Disposal Code 
IZC 2012 International Zoning Code 
IWUIC 2012 International Wildland-Urban Interface Code 
ISPSC 2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code" 
(3)  Section 108.4 Violation penalties. Amended to read as follows: "Persons who violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirement thereto or who shall erect, alter, or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or certificate issued under the provision of this code shall be subject to penalties as provided in Section 1-16 of the Glenview Municipal Code." 
(Code 1959, § 5.5.4; Ord. No. 4993, § 4, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 5190, § 8, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5879, § 6, 12-9-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 6, adopted December 9, 2014, amended § 18-301 to read as set out herein. Previously § 18-301 was titled adopted; amendments.  
Secs. 18-302—18-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PLUMBING CODE[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-331. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements affecting or relating to the proper installation of a permanent, efficient system for furnishing a potable water supply and sanitary disposal system for each and every habitable building, and to obtain a serviceable plumbing system for the comfort, convenience, health and safety of the occupants in the Village limits. 
(Code 1959, § 26.1.1)  
Sec. 18-332. - Effect. 
This article is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and welfare, through the promulgation of minimum plumbing standards in the Village, except federal and State buildings and possessions. 
(Code 1959, § 26.1.2)  
Sec. 18-333. - Existing plumbing ordinances voided. 
The provisions of this article shall be deemed to supplant and otherwise void any existing plumbing ordinances. 
(Code 1959, § 26.1.3)  
Sec. 18-334. - Conflicting provisions. 
Any State laws or revisions thereto pertaining to plumbing are hereby made a part of this article. Should any provision in the State laws conflict with a similar provision in this article, the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890) shall govern. 
(Code 1959, § 26.1.4; Ord. No. 5928, § 3, 8-18-2015)  
Secs. 18-335—18-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 18-351. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5928, § 4, adopted August 18, 2015, repealed § 18-351, in its entirety. Former § 18-351 pertained to "Affirmation of aim and purpose," and was derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.1; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, adopted January 3, 2009 and Ord. No. 5431, § 2, adopted March 1, 2011.  
Sec. 18-352. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 9, adopted Jan. 3, 2009, deleted § 18-352 in its entirety. Former § 18-352 pertained to plumbing inspection department established and derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.2. 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-391 et seq.  
Sec. 18-353. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5928, § 4, adopted August 18, 2015, repealed § 18-353, in its entirety. Former § 18-353 pertained to "Duties of director of development," and was derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.3; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, adopted January 3, 2009 and Ord. No. 5431, § 2, adopted March 1, 2011.  
Sec. 18-354. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 9, adopted Jan. 3, 2009, deleted § 18-354 in its entirety. Former § 18-354 pertained to duties of plumbing inspector and derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.4.  
Sec. 18-355. - Adoption of standards and specifications and rules and regulations. 
Upon the adoption by ordinance of such standards and specifications and rules and regulations they shall become operative, and thereafter no plumbing fixtures and apparatus shall be installed or altered, except upon a permit approved by the development department. The develop department shall approve permits for such installation and alteration of plumbing fixtures and apparatus in all cases where application shall have been made in accordance with the rules and regulations established. The plumbing inspection department shall inspect such plumbing fixtures and apparatus installed or altered, and shall require that such fixtures and apparatus conform to the standards and specifications applicable thereto, which have been recommended and adopted as provided in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 26.2.5; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5928, § 5, 8-18-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5928, § 5, adopted August 18, 2015 amended § 18-355 to read as set out herein. Previously § 18-355 was titled "Adoption of standards and specifications, rules and regulations, and fees."  
Sec. 18-356. - Right of entry for inspection. 
The director of development or his/her designee or such other plumbing inspectors, after proper identification, shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation or alterations of plumbing fixtures or apparatus contained therein, or for the purpose of reinspecting present plumbing installations to determine whether or not such plumbing installations conform to the provisions of this article. The provisions for inspection of work authorized by the permits issued in accordance with this article shall not be construed as prohibiting the inspection of any plumbing installation installed whenever the plumbing inspector shall determine that the public safety requires such inspection. 
(Code 1959, § 26.2.6; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-357. - Inspection upon completion of installation. 
Upon the completion of the plumbing installation in or on any building or structure, it shall be the duty of the person installing such plumbing to notify the development department, which shall cause the plumbing installation to be inspected. 
(Code 1959, § 26.2.7; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-358. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5928, § 4, adopted August 18, 2015, repealed § 18-358, in its entirety. Former § 18-358 pertained to "Police powers," and was derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.8; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, adopted January 3, 2009 and Ord. No. 5431, § 2, adopted March 1, 2011.  
Sec. 18-359. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5928, § 4, adopted August 18, 2015, repealed § 18-359, in its entirety. Former § 18-359 pertained to "Stop work order," and was derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.9; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, adopted January 3, 2009 and Ord. No. 5431, § 2, adopted March 1, 2011.  
Sec. 18-360. - Records. 
The development department shall keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections made and other official work performed under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 26.2.10; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-361. - Liability for damages. 
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or installing any plumbing fixtures and apparatus for damages to any person injured by any defect therein by reason of the inspections authorized in this article; nor shall the Village be held liable for any damages resulting from the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 26.2.11)  
Sec. 18-362. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5928, § 4, adopted August 18, 2015, repealed § 18-362, in its entirety. Former § 18-362 pertained to "Impersonating a plumbing inspector," and was derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.12; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, adopted January 3, 2009 and Ord. No. 5431, § 3, adopted March 1, 2011.  
Sec. 18-363. - Suspension of permits. 
The director of development or his/her designee may suspend any permit for work being executed contrary to the provisions of this article until the violations have been corrected or rectified. 
(Code 1959, § 26.2.13; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-364. - Performing work without a permit. 
(a)  Any person who shall install plumbing in any building, except for minor repairs, without having first obtained a written permit for such work from the development department shall be in violation of this article. No unwritten permit will be recognized. 
(b)  No work of plumbing or drainlaying shall be started or continued without the permit being on the premises and in the possession of the person doing such work. 
(c)  Any person who shall install a water softener, or lawn or garden sprinkler system without having first obtained a written permit for such work from the development department shall be in violation of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 26.2.14; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-365. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 9, adopted Jan. 3, 2009, deleted § 18-365 in its entirety. Former § 18-365 pertained to remodeling and replacing plumbing and derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.15.  
Sec. 18-366. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 9, adopted Jan. 3, 2009, deleted § 18-366 in its entirety. Former § 18-366 pertained to moved buildings and derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.16.  
Sec. 18-367. - Location of building drains and sewers. 
All appurtenances to building drains and building sewers, including catchbasins, manholes, cleanouts, backwater valves and fittings, shall be located within the property lines of the premises served by such drains and sewers. 
(Code 1959, § 26.2.17)  
Sec. 18-368. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5928, § 4, adopted August 18, 2015, repealed § 18-368, in its entirety. Former § 18-368 pertained to "Toilet facilities for workmen," and was derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.18; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, adopted January 3, 2009 and Ord. No. 5431, § 3, adopted March 1, 2011.  
Sec. 18-369. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 9, adopted Jan. 3, 2009, deleted § 18-369 in its entirety. Former § 18-369 pertained to delay in work and derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.19.  
Sec. 18-370. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5928, § 4, adopted August 18, 2015, repealed § 18-370, in its entirety. Former § 18-370 pertained to "Abatement of nuisances," and was derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.20; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, adopted January 3, 2009 and Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, adopted March 1, 2011.  
Sec. 18-371. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009, deleted § 18-371 in its entirety. Former § 18-371 pertained to plumbing and drainage generally and derived from Code 1959, § 26.2.21.  
Sec. 18-372. - Plans required. 
Plans may be required for all new plumbing installations. Plans shall show the plumbing system completely, including drains, soil, waste, vents, revent pipes, traps and all plumbing fixtures and water supply pipes within the building. Plans are requried for remodeling work unless approved by the director of development or his/her designee. The director of [the] development department or his/her designee shall be notified if plans are to be changed and such change shall be approved before work is installed. 
(Code 1959, § 26.2.22; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011)  
Secs. 18-373—18-390. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS, BONDS AND FEES 
 
Sec. 18-391. - Permit for repairs 
No plumbing work of any kind, except minor repairs, within buildings, shall be done in the Village without a permit first issued therefor by the development department. 
(Code 1959, § 26.3.1; Ord. No. 4371, § 4, 2-19-2002; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5928, § 6, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 18-392. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009, deleted § 18-392 in its entirety. Former § 18-392 pertained to permit and inspection fees generally and derived from Code 1959, § 26.3.2; and Ord. No. 5113, § 6, adopted June 17, 2008.  
Sec. 18-393. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009, deleted § 18-393 in its entirety. Former § 18-3932 pertained to sewer permit and inspection fees and derived from Code 1959, § 26.3.3.  
Sec. 18-394. - Duration of permit. 
Any plumbing permit issued by the director of development or his/her designee, and under which no work is commenced within six months from the date of issuance thereof, shall expire by limitation and, unless such permit is surrendered to the director of development or his/her designee within two months (60 days) after its expiration for such cause, all fees paid therefor shall be forfeited to the Village. A cessation of work for more than three continuous months (90 days) shall have the same effect in terminating plumbing permits as a failure to begin work. Any delay to start work or continue work already started caused by a natural disaster commonly referred to as an "act of God," or by insurrection, strike by construction workers or at the source of supply, or by legal delay (judicial or civil authority) will constitute no part of the expiration time limits set forth in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 26.3.4; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-395. - Action on permit application. 
The director of development or his/her designee shall examine applications for permits within a reasonable time after filing of such applications. If, after examination, the director of development or his/her designee finds no objections to the application and it appears that the proposed work will be in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and the proposed plumbing or work will be safe, he shall approve such application and issue a permit for the proposed work as soon as practical. If his examination reveals otherwise, he shall reject such application, note his findings in a written report to be attached to the application and deliver a copy thereof to the applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 26.3.5; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-396. - When permit is valid. 
No permit or amendment to a permit issued by the director of development or his/her designee for plumbing work for which a fee is prescribed by Village ordinances shall be in force until the fees prescribed therefor shall have been paid to the Village collector and the Village collector's receipt therefor shall have been stamped on such permit. 
(Code 1959, § 26.3.6; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-397. - Application for plumbing permit. 
When any person shall be desirous to do work for which a permit is required by this article, he shall make written application to the director of development or his/her designee, upon blank forms furnished by the development department, for a permit for such purpose. The application for a plumbing permit shall consist of a complete set of forms for the work to be done, and with properly licensed subcontractors identified thereon. Such forms shall be completely filled out and presented by the general contractor responsible for the proposed work. 
(Code 1959, § 26.3.7; Ord. No. 5190, § 9, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, §§ 2, 3, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 6083, § 10, 6-8-2017)  
Secs. 18-398—18-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - STATE PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 18-421. - Adopted. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by the general assembly to local government in 50 ILCS 220/0.01 et seq., to incorporate, by reference, the provisions of nationally recognized technical codes and public records, the Village hereby adopts, by reference, the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890), adopted by the State department of public health, division of sanitary engineering, as certified by the director thereof on December 1, 1998, as authorized by 225 ILCS 320/36, save and except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended and as supplemented and added in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 4.1; Ord. No. 5190, § 10, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5928, § 2, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 18-422. - Administrative authority. 
Any references in the State of Illinois Plumbing Code [Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890)] to the "administrative authority" shall mean the Village of Glenview. 
(Code 1959, § 4.2; Ord. No. 5190, § 10, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5928, § 2, 8-18-2015)  
Sec. 18-423. - Amendments. 
The Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890) is hereby adopted with the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 890. Appendix A. Table A Approved Materials for water service pipe (amend by deleting the following). 
(4)  Chlorinated Polyvinyl Chloride (CPVC) Pipe. 
(7)  Poly Butylene (PB) Pipe Tubing. 
(2)  Section 890. Appendix A. Table A Approved Materials for water distribution pipe (amend by deleting the following). 
(2)  Chlorinated Polyvinyl Chloride (CPVC) Pipe/Tubing. 
(5)  Cross Linked Polyethylene. 
(7)  Poly Butylene (PB) Pipe/Tubing. 
(3)  Pursuant to 17 Ill. Adm. Code 3730.307 4) and subject to the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890) and the Lawn Irrigation Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 892), be it hereby ordained that in the Village of Glenview, all new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall bear the WaterSense label (as designed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program), when such labeled fixtures are available. 
(Code 1959, § 4.3; Ord. No. 5190, § 10, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 5928, § 2, 8-18-2015)  
Secs. 18-424—18-490. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 18-491. - International Code Council (ICC) International Property Maintenance Code adopted; amendments. 
The 2012 edition of the ICC International Property Maintenance Code is hereby adopted with the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1 Title. Amended to read as follows: "These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the Village of Glenview, Cook County, Illinois (the "Village"), herein referred to as 'this code.'" 
(2)  Section 102.7 Referenced codes and standards. Amended to read as follows: "The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extend of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provision of this code shall apply. The following codes and standards are not adopted by reference and thus are not considered part of the requirement of this code. 
IPC-2012 International Plumbing Code 
IPSDC-2012 International Private Sewage Disposal Code 
IWUIC-2012 International Wildlife-Urban Interface Code 
IZC-2012 International Zoning Code" 
(3)  Section 106.4 Violation penalties. Amend this section to read as follows: "Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to penalties as provided in Section 1-16 of the Municipal code." 
(4)  Section 111.1 Application for appeal. Amended to read as follows: "Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have a right to appeal to the Village manager, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the code official's decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means." 
(5)  Section 111.2 Membership of board. Deleted in its entirety. 
(6)  Section 111.3 Notice of meeting. Deleted in its entirety. 
(7)  Section 111.4 Open hearing. Deleted in its entirety. 
(8)  Section 111.5 Postponed hearing. Deleted in its entirety. 
(9)  Section 111.6 Board decision. Deleted in its entirety. 
(10)  Section 111.7 Court review. Deleted in its entirety. 
(11)  Section 111.8 Stays of enforcement. Deleted in its entirety. 
(12)  Section 302.4 Weeds. The first sentence is amended to read as follows: "All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight (8) inches." 
(13)  Section 302.5 Rodent harborage. Amended to read as follows: "All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by a licensed pest control operator, by an approved process which will not be injurious to human health. After pest elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation." 
(14)  Section 304.14 Insect screens. Amended to read as follows: "Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any area where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per square inch, and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception : Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed." 
(15)  Section 308.3.1 Garbage facilities. Amended to read as follows: "The owner of every dwelling shall supply an approved leak-proof, covered, outside garbage container." 
(16)  Section 501.2 Responsibility. Amended to read as follows: "The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with Title 77, Part 890 of the Illinois Administrative Code (the "Illinois Plumbing Code"), as amended." 
(17)  Section 602.3 Heat supply. Amended to read as follows: "Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a minimum temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in the 2012 International Mechanical Code. 
2.  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C) minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained. 
(18)  Section 602.4. Occupiable work spaces. Amended by deleting all references to dates. 
(Ord. No. 4066, § 1, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4993, § 5, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 5190, § 11, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5879, § 7, 12-9-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 7, adopted December 9, 2014, amended § 18-491 to read as set out herein. Previously § 18-491 was titled adopted.  
Secs. 18-492—18-560. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 
 
Sec. 18-561. - International Code Council (ICC) International Energy Conservation Code adopted; amendments. 
The 2012 edition of the ICC International Energy Conservation Code is hereby adopted with the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1 Title. Amended to read as follows: "These regulations shall be known as the Energy Conservation Code of the Village of Glenview, Cook County, Illinois (the "Village") herein referred to as 'this code.'" 
(Ord. No. 4370, § 3(5.5.5), 2-19-2002; Ord. No. 4995, § 6, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 5190, § 12, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5386, § 2, 10-5-2010; Ord. No. 5879, § 8, 12-9-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 8, adopted December 9, 2014, amended § 18-561 to read as set out herein. Previously § 18-561 was titled International Energy Conservation Code; adopted.  
Sec. 18-562. - International Code Council (ICC) International Fuel Gas Code adopted; amendments. 
The 2012 edition of the ICC International Fuel Gas Code is hereby adopted with the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1 Title. Amended to read as follows: "These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the Village of Glenview, Cook County, Illinois (the "Village") herein referred to as 'this code.'" 
(2)  Section 102.8 Referenced codes and standards. Amended to read as follows: "The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and such codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. 
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer's installation instructions shall apply. The follow codes and standards are not adopted by reference and thus are not considered part of this code. 
IPC-2006 International Plumbing Code 
IPSDC-2012 International Private Sewage Disposal Code 
IWUIC-2012 International Wildlife-Urban Interface Code 
IZC-2012 International Zoning Code" 
(3)  Section 108.4 Violation penalties. Amended to read as follows: "Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to penalties as provided in Section 1-16 of the Glenview Municipal Code." 
(4)  Section 108.5 Stop work orders. Amended to read as follows: "Upon notice from the code official that work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's agent, or the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the code official shall not be required to give written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation of unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as provided in Section 1-16 of the Glenview Municipal Code." 
(5)  Section 109.1 Application for appeal. Amended to read as follows: "Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have a right to appeal to the Village manager, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within twenty (20) days after the code official's decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means." 
(6)  Section 109.2 Membership of board. Deleted in its entirety. 
(7)  Section 109.3 Notice of meeting. Deleted in its entirety. 
(8)  Section 109.4 Open hearing. Deleted in its entirety. 
(9)  Section 109.5 Postponed hearing. Deleted in its entirety. 
(10)  Section 109.6 Board decision. Deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 4993, § 7, 6-4-2007; Ord. No. 5190, § 13, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5879, § 9, 12-9-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 9, adopted December 9, 2014, amended § 18-562 to read as set out herein. Previously § 18-562 was titled International Fuel Gas Code; adopted.  
Secs. 18-563—18-590. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS CODE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the adoption of Ord. No. 5383 on Oct. 5, 2010, Ord. No. 5245, § 2, adopted Aug. 18, 2009, deleted Art. IX in its entirety. Former Art. IX pertained to swimming pools, spas and hot tubs code and derived from Code 1959, §§ 22.1—22.42. 
 
Sec. 18-591. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Purpose. This article provides the minimum requirements and standards for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration, addition, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of any private pool system, including swimming pools, wading pools, spas, hot tubs, hydrotherapy spas, soaking tubs and jacuzzis. 
(c)  Existing installations. 
(1)  Any pool system lawfully installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may have its existing use, maintenance or repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and location, and no hazard to the public health, safety or welfare has been created by such system. 
(2)  The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for maintaining the pool system in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(d)  Nuisance declared, abatement. 
(1)  Any portion of a pool system found by the director of development or designee (referred to in this article as the "director") to be unsanitary, as defined in this article, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(2)  Where a nuisance exists or a pool system is maintained in violation of this article or any notice issued pursuant to this article, the director shall require the nuisance or violation to be abated and, where necessary, shall be subject to the general penalty provided in section 1-16 for violations of this Code or laws. 
(e)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the director, has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which makes such pool system unsafe, the director, may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the building or premises, or to perform any duty imposed upon the director by this article, provided that, if such building or premises shall be occupied, they shall first present proper credentials and demand entry, and if such building or premises shall be unoccupied, they shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the director, shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  No owner or occupant, or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises, shall fail or neglect, after proper demand is made as provided in subsection (b)(1) of this section, to properly permit entry therein by the director, for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-592. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessible, when applied to a fixture, connection, appliance or equipment, means having access thereto, but which first may require the removal of an access panel, door or similar obstruction. The term "readily accessible" means direct access without the necessity of removing any panel, door or similar obstruction. 
Airbreak means a physical separation which may be a low inlet into the indirect waste receptor from the fixture, appliance or device indirectly connected. 
Airgap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet conveying water or waste to a tank, plumbing fixture receptor or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle. 
Approved means accepted or acceptable under an applicable specification stated or cited in this article, or accepted as suitable for the proposed use under procedures and the power of the director of development (director). 
Bather means any person using the pool system and adjoining deck area for the purpose of water sports, recreation, therapy or related activities. 
Body feed means the continuous addition of small amounts of filter aid during the operation of a diatomaceous earth filter. 
Cartridge filter means a filter which operates through a disposable cartridge. There are two general types of such filters as follows: 
(1)  The surface or area type, where the suspended matter is removed at the surface; and 
(2)  The depth type, in which the interstices vary from large to small in depth. 
Circulation piping system means the piping between the pool structure and the mechanical equipment, and usually includes suction piping, face piping and return piping. 
Design head means the total head requirement of the circulation system at the design rate of flow. 
Design rate of flow and design filter rate mean the rate of flow in a system which is used for design calculation (the volume of the pool, in gallons, divided by the number of minutes in the turnover time). 
Diatomite filter means a filter designed to filter water through a thin layer of filter aid, such as diatomaceous earth or volcanic ash. Diatomite filters may be of the pressure, gravity, suction or vacuum type. 
Face piping means the piping, with all valves and fittings, which is used to connect the filter system together as a unit. 
Filter means any material or apparatus by which water is clarified. 
Filter element means the part of a filter which supports the surface upon which the filter aid is deposited. 
Filter rate means the rate of application of water to a filter, expressed in gallons per minute, per square foot of effective filter area. 
Filter waste discharge piping means piping that conducts wastewater from a filter to a drainage system. Connection to the drainage system is made through an air gap or other approved method. 
Hot tub means a hydrotherapy spa, constructed of wood, with the sides and bottom formed separately, and the whole shaped to join together by pressure from the surrounding hoops, bands or rods, as distinct from spa units formed of plastic, concrete, metal and other materials. 
Hydrotherapy spa means a unit designed for recreational and therapeutic use, which is not drained, cleaned or refilled for each user, including, but not limited to, hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water mineral baths, air induction bubbles or any combination thereof. Industry terminology for a spa includes, but is not limited to, "therapeutic pool," "hydrotherapy pool," "whirlpool," "hot spa," "hot tubs," etc. This standard excludes facilities used or under the direct supervision and control of licensed medical personnel. 
Indirect waste pipe means a pipe that does not connect directly with the drainage system, but conveys liquid wastes by discharging into a plumbing fixture, interceptor or receptacle which is directly connected to the drainage system. 
Inlet fitting means the fitting or fixture through which circulated water enters the pool. 
Listed means equipment or materials included in a list published by a listing agency that maintains periodic inspection on current production of listed equipment or materials and whose listing states either that the equipment or material complies with approved standards or has been tested and found suitable for use in a specified manner. 
Listing agency means an agency accepted by the director of development or his/her designee, which is in the business of listing or labeling and which maintains a periodic inspection program on the current production of listed models, and which makes available a published report of such listing in which specific information is included that the product has been tested to approved standards and found safe for use in a specified manner. 
Main outlet means the outlet fittings at the bottom of a swimming pool, through which water passes to the recirculating pump. 
Pool depth means the distance between the floor of the pool and the maximum operating water level. 
Pool plumbing means all chemical, circulation and filter waste discharge piping, deck drainage and water filling system. 
Pool and pool system include the following: 
(1)  Aboveground pool system means a pool of any shape that is deeper than 24 inches, holds more than 2,500 gallons of water or has a water surface area in excess of 150 square feet. The aboveground pool is located entirely aboveground (i.e., with no excavated portions) and has a constant depth. 
(2)  Inground pool system means any pool of which the sides reside partially or fully below the natural ground level and meets one of the conditions set forth in the definition of the term "aboveground pool system." 
(3)  Nonpermanently installed pool system means any pool that is so constructed that it may be readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to its original integrity. 
(4)  Permanently installed pool system means a pool that is constructed in the ground or in a building in such manner that the pool cannot be readily disassembled for storage. 
(5)  Residential swimming pool and wading pool mean any constructed pool, whether indoors or outdoors, above or below the surface of the ground, or both, permanent or nonportable, which is intended for noncommercial use as a swimming pool by the owner's family and their guests, and which is over 24 inches in depth and has a surface area exceeding 250 square feet. 
Rapid sand filter means a filter designed to be used with sand as the filter media which produces a reading of five gpm in residential pools. 
Receptor means an approved plumbing fixture or device of such material, shape and capacity as to adequately receive the discharge from indirect waste piping, and constructed and located so as to be readily cleaned. 
Recirculating piping means the piping from the pool to the filter and return to the pool, through which the water circulates. 
Return piping means the part of the pool piping between the filter and the pool, through which the filtered water passes. 
Skim filter means a surface skimmer combined with a vacuum filter. 
Spa means a hydrotherapy unit of an irregular or geometric shell design (see Hydrotherapy spa). 
Suction piping means the portion of the circulation piping located between the pool structure and the inlet side of the pump and usually includes the main outlet piping, skimmer piping, vacuum piping and surge tank piping. 
Surface skimmer and recirculating overflow mean a device designed to continuously remove surface film and water, and returns it through the filter as part of the recirculation system, usually incorporating a self-adjusting weir, a collection tank and a means to prevent air lock of the pump (sometimes referred to as a "recirculating overflow," "mechanical skimmer" or "automatic skimmer"). 
Trap means a fitting or device that is designed and constructed so as to provide, when properly vented, a liquid seal which will prevent the back passage of air without materially affecting the flow of sewage or wastewater through it. 
Turnover time means the time, in hours, required for the circulation system to filter and recirculate a volume of water equal to the pool volume. 
Vacuum fitting means the fitting in the wall of the pool which is used as a convenient outlet for connecting the underwater suction cleaning equipment or a recirculating skimmer. 
Vacuum piping means the piping which connects the vacuum fitting to the pump suction. 
Waste piping. See Filter waste discharge piping. 
Width and/or length means the actual water dimension taken from wall to wall at the maximum operating water level. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-593. - Compliance required. 
It shall be unlawful to construct, install, alter, maintain or use any pool in the Village, except in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-594. - Permit required; application requirements. 
(a)  No person or organization of any kind shall construct, install or alter any pool in the Village, unless a construction permit shall first have been obtained from the director. 
(b)  The application for a construction permit shall be in writing, in the form prescribed by the director for a proper understanding of the proposed work. 
(c)  The application for a pool construction permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans, drawings and specifications. 
(d)  Clear and detailed drawings, plans and specifications for the construction, installation or alteration of any pool and appurtenances shall be presented to the director for examination and approval as to proper location, construction and use. All plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth-inch to the foot, on paper or cloth, in ink or by some process that will not fade or obliterate. A plot plan shall be submitted, showing the location of the proposed pool and all buildings and structures on the premises. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot lines, and including information pertaining to the pool, walk and fence construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems and all appurtenances pertaining to the pool. Detail plans and vertical elevations shall also be provided. Along with such application and plot plan, the owner or agent shall submit drawings and specifications with the following information: 
(1)  Pool dimensions, depths and volume, in gallons. 
(2)  Type and size of filter systems, filtration and backwash capacities. 
(3)  Pool piping layout, with all pipe sizes and valves shown and types of materials to be used. 
(4)  The rated capacity and head at filtration and backwash flows of the pool pump, in gallons per minute, with the size and type of motor. 
(5)  The wiring method and grounding method to be employed, type of electrical equipment to be installed, and circuited, voltage and system to be utilized. 
(e)  Structural information, calculations and details must be prepared and signed by an engineer or architect registered in the State. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-595. - Permit fees. 
(a)  The permit fee for the installation, alteration or repair of a pool, pool system or spa shall be as set forth in section 30-1. 
(b)  Any person who shall commence any pool work for which a permit is required by this article without having obtained a permit for such work shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee fixed by this section for such work; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit for such work before the commencement of the work. In all such cases, a permit must be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so, and if there be an unreasonable delay in obtaining such permit, a double fee as provided in this subsection shall be charged. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-596. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-597. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5579, § 2, adopted Sept. 18, 2012, deleted § 18-597, which pertained to location and derived from Ord. No. 5383, § 2, adopted Oct. 5, 2010.  
Sec. 18-598. - Compliance with codes and ordinances; current-carrying electrical conductors. 
(a)  All pools regulated by this article shall comply with all codes and ordinances of the Village, including, but not limited to, article III of this chapter relating to the building code, article IV of this chapter relating to electricity, article VI of this chapter relating to the plumbing code, chapter 98 pertaining to zoning and other government agencies who may have jurisdiction. 
(b)  No current-carrying electrical conductors shall cross pools, either overhead or underground, nor shall current-carrying electrical conductors cross laterally within ten feet if overhead, or five feet if underground of such pools. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-599. - Lights. 
Lights used to illuminate any pool shall be arranged and shaded so as to reflect light away from adjoining premises in accordance with this code. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-600. - Electrical requirements. 
The National Electrical Code, Article 680, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, and adopted by the Village, shall be used for the wiring and grounding of all electrical equipment associated with a pool and the bonding and grounding of all metallic appurtenances. Electric hot tubs and spas shall also comply with the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., Standard UL 1563, Standard for Electric Hot Tubs, Spas and Associated Equipment, dated September 30, 1983. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-601. - Heaters and temperature requirements. 
(a)  Gas-fired pool heaters, oil-burning heaters or electrical heaters must be approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., American Gas Association or another nationally recognized testing agency. All such equipment shall carry the corresponding seal of approval by the appropriate agency. When solar heating panels are used, they shall be included on the permit plans, showing location and type of construction. 
(b)  Electric heaters for spas or hot tubs shall be tested by a recognized agency and listed for the purpose intended. Current collectors having a separate ground shall be installed at each inlet and outlet of the electric heater. The maximum temperature of the spa or hot tub water shall be 104 degrees Fahrenheit. A thermostatic control is required and must ensure that such limit will not be exceeded. The thermostatic control must be accessible only to the operator. Maximum spa or hot tub water temperature limits shall be included in the consumer use label provided with each spa and shall be posted in a prominent place on or in close proximity to the spa or hot tub itself. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-602. - Materials and dimensional design. 
(a)  The materials of components and accessories used in and around pools shall be compatible with man and the environment in which they are installed. The materials shall be capable of fulfilling the design, installation and intended use requirements. 
(b)  The selection of all materials for components and accessories to be used in and around pools shall be such that all parts with external surfaces and edges that may come in contact with the user are assembled, arranged and/or finished (deburred, polished, etc.) so that they will not constitute a cutting, pinching, puncturing or abrasion hazard under casual contact and intended use by users. 
(c)  The selection of materials used in components and accessories to be used in and around pools shall be such that the assembled and installed product shall not be harmful to man or the environment under intended use and reasonable foreseeable abuse or disposal. 
(d)  Swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank, with a white or light colored finished, and easily cleanable surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a nonslip finish, as smooth as possible. The side and end walls of a pool shall present a smooth finish and shall have a slope or curvature meeting one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The pool wall may be vertical for 30 inches from the water level, below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius at any point equal to the difference between the depth, at that point, and 30 inches. 
(2)  To a depth of six feet, except as in subsection (d)(1) of this section, the walls' slope shall not be less than one foot horizontal in six feet vertical. 
(e)  Swimming pool walls that are to be lined with plastic or other approved liners shall be constructed of masonry, reinforced concrete or other materials accepted by a federal or State bureau, national technical organization, or the National Board of Fire Underwriters or other testing agencies. 
(f)  Spas and hot tubs shall meet the following requirements; 
(1)  The maximum water depth shall be four feet when measured from the water line as determined by the design of the product. 
(2)  The maximum depth of any seat or sitting bench shall be two feet when measured from the water line. 
(3)  The slope of the floor shall not exceed one foot of fall in 12 feet. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-603. - Construction, structural design and materials. 
(a)  The construction, structural design and materials used in pools shall be in accordance with generally accepted good structural engineering practice, providing a sound, durable, watertight structure which will safely sustain all of the dead loads, live loads, liquid, hydrostatic and earth pressures involved in each case. 
(b)  The pool shell and appurtenances, piping, filter system, pump and motor, and other components will be designed and constructed so as to be easily winterized and/or protected from deleterious effect of frost and freezing. 
(c)  Indoor pools shall comply with all requirements of outdoor pools and shall have such structural materials, ventilation and lighting as may be required by the director to assure health and safety. 
(d)  Swimming pools shall be engineered and designed to withstand the water pressure from within, and to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure of 2,200 pounds per square foot. The slope of the bottom of any part of a pool in which the water is less than five feet in depth shall not be more than one foot in each seven feet. The maximum slope where the water is five feet or more in depth shall not exceed one foot in two feet. 
(e)  Roofs or canopies over spas or hot tubs shall be constructed so that moisture or condensation from the roof or canopy will not drain into the spa or hot tub. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-604. - Fences and enclosures. 
(a)  Every pool shall be enclosed to make the pool inaccessible to small children. All fence openings or points of entry to the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates or doors having self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate or door, or made inaccessible to small children. The fence and gates or doors shall be at least four feet in height above the grade walk level, any openings in the fence shall not allow a four-inch sphere to pass through, shall not have a ladder effect, and shall be constructed of decay or corrosion-resistant material approved by the director. A fence on adjoining property, meeting the requirements specified in this subsection, or a building or existing wall complying with the height requirements set forth in this subsection may be used as part of the enclosure, with the approval of the director, if the resultant enclosure is sufficient to make the pool inaccessible to small children. If, at any time, such existing fence or wall being used as part of the enclosure is removed, the enclosure shall be made complete, meeting the requirements set forth in this subsection, at the pool owner's expense. All gates or doors shall be kept locked when the pool is not attended by a responsible swimmer. 
(b)  Aboveground pools need not be enclosed by a fence if the pool has a side wall at least four feet high, when measured from the ground surface to the top of the side wall. Indoor pools need not be fenced when enclosed by other means so as to make the pool inaccessible to small children. Unless the pool is attended by a responsible swimmer, all ladders or steps of aboveground pools shall be removed and all gates or doors securely locked. 
(c)  Outdoor spas and hot tubs shall be protected by a fence, wall, building enclosure, solid wall of durable material or impenetrable cover with hardware for locking. The fence, wall, building enclosure or solid wall should be constructed so as to afford no external handholds or footholds, of materials which are impenetrable by toddlers, and at least four feet in height so that small children cannot grasp its top by jumping or reaching, and equipped with a self-closing and positive self-latching closure mechanism at a height above the reach of small children and provided with hardware for permanent locking. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-605. - Water supply. 
(a)  Water shall be secured either from the Village waterworks distribution system or any other sanitary source approved by the sanitarian. Water shall not be drawn to fill the pool from the Village waterworks system at any time that the Village president may determine that a water shortage exists. 
(b)  An over-the-rim spout, if used with compatible equipment, shall be properly shielded so as not to create a hazard. The open end of the spout shall have no sharp edges and shall not protrude more than two inches beyond the edge of the spa or hot tub. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-606. - Recirculation system and appurtenances. 
(a)  Pool recirculation systems shall consist of pumping equipment, hair and lint catcher, filters, together with the necessary pipe connections to the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe connections necessary for backwashing filters, and facilities and equipment for disinfecting the pool water. 
(b)  Swimming pools shall be equipped with a recirculating system capable of filtering the entire contents of the pool in 12 hours or less for private residential swimming pools. The recirculating pump shall have a sufficient capacity to discharge the volume of water required for the required turnover of the pool against the maximum head in the recirculation system. The pump shall be capable of backwashing pressure filters at a rate of ten gallons per minute, per square foot of filter area. 
(c)  Spa and hot tub equipment shall be sized to turn over the entire spa water capacity at least once every hour and shall be capable of returning the spa water to a turbidity of one-half nephelometric turbidity units (NTUs) at least once during the four hours following the peak bather load. Equipment shall be designed and fabricated to drain the water from the equipment and exposed face piping by removal of drain plugs and manipulating winter drain valves or other methods. A flow meter shall be provided on the effluent side of the filter system and a pressure gauge with an appropriate range shall be provided on the influent and effluent side of all filters. If located in an area subject to freezing temperatures, the spa or hot tub shell and appurtenances, piping, filter system, pump and motor, and other components shall be protected from damage due to freezing. 
(d)  A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall be installed in all pools on the suction side of the circulation pump to prevent hair, lint and other extraneous matter from reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be designed so that they can be easily dismantled for cleaning and inspection, and shall be located so as to be easily accessible for cleaning. The design features shall be as follows: 
(1)  Water passes through the strainer from the outside; 
(2)  The strainer is made of noncorrosive material; 
(3)  The width or diameter of strainer openings is not more than one-eighth-inch; 
(4)  The area of the strainer openings shall be at least five times the cross sectional area of the inlet pipe to the strainer. 
(e)  The pool piping, fittings and valves shall be sized to permit the rated flow for filtering and cleaning without exceeding the maximum head available from the pump at that flow. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-607. - Overflow systems. 
An overflow system shall be provided for spas and hot tubs. The overflow system shall be designed and constructed so that the water level is maintained at the operating level of the rim or weir device. When surface skimmers are used as the sole overflow system, one surface skimmer shall be provided for each 200 square feet for residential spas and hot tubs, or fraction thereof, of the surface area. When two or more skimmers are used in a spa or hot tub, they shall be located to maintain effective skimming action over the entire surface area of the spa or hot tub. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-608. - Filters. 
(a)  Filters shall be designed to maintain water under anticipated operating conditions. Filters shall be designed so that filtration surfaces can be easily restored to the design capacity. Filters shall be designed so that filtration surfaces can be inspected and serviced. A means shall be provided to permit release of air which enters the filter tank. This may be automatic or manual, or where upflow design is used, air must be expelled from the filter tank. Any filters and/or separation tanks incorporating an automatic internal air release as its principal means of air release shall have a means to provide a slow and safe release of pressure as a part of its design. All separation tanks shall have a cautionary statement warning the user not to start up the filter pump without first opening the air release. The statement must be visible and noticeable within the area of the air release. Piping furnished with the filter shall be suitable material, capable of withstanding three times the working pressure. The suction piping shall not collapse when there is a complete shutoff of flow on the suction side of the pump. Filter components which require servicing shall be accessible and available for inspection and repair when installed according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
(b)  Only cartridge-type filters will be permitted for private residential swimming pools, unless sufficient data is presented to prevent adverse effects to surrounding areas. 
(c)  Cartridge-type filters are those where the cartridge itself is the filter aid. Cartridge filters can be either pressure or vacuum type. Replacement cartridges are divided into two types: depth-type and area-type. General specifications are the same for both types of replacement cartridges. Cartridge filters shall not require the addition of any flocculating agents, such as ammonium alum, aluminum sulfate or potassium alum. All types of cartridges shall have sufficient structural strength to resist rupturing, channeling, collapsing or bursting at a maximum pressure differential of 50 pounds per square inch (psi). Cartridge seals shall be designed so as to prevent any bypassing of unfiltered water. If provision is made for backwashing, the discharge shall be properly connected to an approved disposal method and shall be arranged so as to not permit any backwash water or residue to enter the recirculating system. All filters shall be designed so as to permit easy removal of the cartridges. Cartridge elements shall be divided into the following two types: 
(1)  Depth type cartridges are elements where the porosity varies from the inlet to the discharge surface. They shall have sufficient depth to provide adequate dirt-holding capacity and be designed for a flow of no more than one gallon per minute, per five cubic inches of volume with a pressure drop not to exceed two psi across clean cartridges and not to pass any particulate matter larger than 25 microns. 
(2)  Area type or surface type cartridges are those which rely on the surface area for their dirt-holding capacity and they should follow the following flows per square foot of area: 
a.  Three gallons per minute, per square foot of area for pressure filters; and 
b.  Two and one-fourth gallons per minute, per square foot of filter area for vacuum filters. 
(d)  Sufficient surface area shall be provided in pressure type filters to filter pool contents in 12 hours or less at a maximum rate of five gallons per square foot, per minute. The quality of the filters shall be such that, under normal operating conditions, backwashing for cleaning purposes shall not be necessary more frequently than once every four days. 
(e)  Filters shall be capable of maintaining the clarity of the water to permit the ready identification, through an eight-foot depth of water, of a disc two inches in diameter, which is divided into four quadrants in alternate colors of red and white. 
(f)  All pressure filters shall be equipped with influent and effluent pressure gauges to determine the pressure differential and frequency of cleaning. All other filters shall be equipped with at least one pressure, vacuum or compound gauge, as applicable, which shall be positioned in such a way as to determine the differential across the filter and the need of cleaning. 
(g)  All pressure filter systems shall be equipped with an air release at the high point in the system. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-609. - Skimmers. 
In every pool, at least one skimming device shall be provided for each 800 square feet of surface area, or fraction thereof. Skimming devices shall be built into the pool wall, except that portable-type, aboveground pools shall adequately remove floating oils and waste, and shall meet the following general specifications: 
(1)  Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow-through rate of at least 30 gallons per minute, and a total capacity of all skimmers on any pool shall be at least 50 percent of the required filter flow of the recirculation system. 
(2)  The skimmer shall be automatically adjustable to variations in water level over a range of at least three inches. 
(3)  An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through which all overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap large solids. 
(4)  The skimmer shall be provided with an automatically controlled equalizer pipe to prevent air lock in the suction line. The equalizer pipe shall not be less than two inches in diameter and be located at least one foot below the lowest overflow level of the skimmer. The automatically controlled valve or equivalent device shall remain tightly closed under normal operating conditions of the skimmer, but shall automatically open when the skimmer becomes starved and the water level drops below the lowest overflow level of the skimmer. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-610. - Swimming pool inlets. 
(a)  The recirculation inlets shall be located so as to produce uniform circulation of water throughout the pool. The inlets shall discharge at a minimum depth of ten inches below the pool overflow level. 
(b)  Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding makeup water, as needed. There shall be no physical connection between the water supply line and the pool system. If the makeup water is added directly to the pool, the outlet shall be at least six inches above the upper rim of the pool, and if there is a discharge to a surge or balancing tank, the outlet shall be at least six inches above the rim of the tank. If a hose connection from a sillcock or other plumbing fixture is to be used for supplying makeup water, then an approved vacuum breaker shall be installed at the sillcock or fixture. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-611. - Swimming pool outlets. 
A main outlet, except for aboveground type pools, shall be provided at the deepest point in every pool for recirculating and emptying the pool. All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings, having an area of openings not less than four times the cross sectional area of the outlet pipe. The gratings shall be installed so they cannot be readily removed by bathers. There shall be no direct connection between the main drain or pool piping and the sewer. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-612. - Spa and hot tub inlets and outlets. 
(a)  A spa or hot tub over-the-rim fill spout shall have an air gap and be properly shielded so as not to create a hazard. The open end shall have no sharp edges and shall not protrude more than two inches beyond the edge of the spa or hot tub. Spa and hot tub inlets and outlets shall be provided and arranged to maintain a uniform circulation of water and disinfectant residual. A means shall be provided to drain the spa or hot tub which may include bottom drains, circulatory systems, etc. The total velocity through suction outlets shall not exceed two inches per second. The open area in the suction outlets shall be of such design as to prevent the physical entrapment of fingers, toes, etc. Outlets, except skimmers, on pump suction shall be covered with suitable protective grates or antivortex covers that cannot be removed, except with tools. The piping shall be sized to permit the rated flows for filtering and cleaning without exceeding the total head developed by the pump at the rated flow. The water velocity in the spa piping shall not exceed ten feet per second for discharge piping, except for copper pipe where the velocity for piping shall not exceed eight feet per second. Water velocity in asbestos cement pipe shall not exceed six feet per second. Piping subject to damage by freezing around the spa shall be provided with adequate drainage and support at sufficiently close intervals so that sagging between supports will not trap water. Provisions shall be made for expansion and contraction of pipes. 
(b)  Outlets shall be designed so that each pumping system in the spa (filter system, if so equipped) provides one of the following alternatives so as to prevent the physical entrapment of fingers, toes, etc.: 
(1)  Two outlets, the pipe diameter sizes of which are equal (this may be two outlet drains or an outlet drain and a skimmer). The system shall be designed so that neither one of the two outlets shall be cut out of the suction line by a valve or other means. 
(2)  One antivortex suction outlet which shall not cause a tripping or stubbing hazard to the feet. 
(3)  A 12-inch by 12-inch or larger square grate. 
(4)  Other approved means that guards against outlet entrapment. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-613. - Pumps and strainers. 
A pump and motor shall be provided for circulation of the pool water. Performance of all pumps shall meet the conditions of the flow required for filtering and cleaning (if applicable) the filters against the total dynamic head developed by the complete system. With all pressure filter systems, a suitable means shall be provided before all circulation pumps to remove solids, debris, hair, lint, etc. Pumps shall be designed to perform the functions for which they are intended. Units must be accessible for inspection and service. Replacement parts must fit with existing parts in the pump without the need for redrilling mounting holes or otherwise altering replacement parts of the pump. The design and construction of the pump and component parts shall provide safe operation. Where a mechanical seal is provided, components of the seal must be corrosion-resistant and capable of operating under conditions normally encountered in spa operation. Proper direction of rotation for the pump shall be clearly indicated on the pump. All motors shall have, as a minimum, an open, drip-proof enclosure (as defined by the National Electrical Manufacturer's Association standards) and constructed electrically and mechanically so they will perform satisfactorily and safely under the conditions of load and environment normally encountered in spa installations. Motors shall be capable of operating the pump under full load, with a voltage variation of at least ten percent from the nameplate rating. If the maximum service factor of the motor is exceeded, at full voltage, the manufacturer shall indicate this on the pump curve. All motors shall have thermal overload protection, or equivalent, either built-in or in the line starter, to provide locked rotor and running protection. The motor frame shall contain adequate provisions for proper grounding. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-614. - Valves. 
When the pump is below the water level of the pool, valves shall be installed on suction and discharge lines and located in an accessible place. All valves shall be located where they will be readily and easily accessible for maintenance and removal. Multiport valves shall comply with the joint National Swimming Pool Institute-National Sanitation Foundation standard covering multiport valves. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-615. - Air induction systems. 
An air induction system, when provided, shall totally prevent water backup that could cause electrical shock hazards. Air intake sources shall be positioned so as to minimize contaminants, such as deck water, dirt, etc., in the pool. Integral air passages shall be pressure tested at the time of manufacture to provide structural integrity for a value of 1.5 times the intended working pressure. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-616. - Steps, recessed steps, ladders and recessed treads. 
(a)  Swimming pools. Two or more means of egress, in the form of steps or ladders, shall be provided for all private residential swimming pools. At least one such means of egress shall be located on a side of the pool at both the deep and shallow ends. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material and shall be at least three inches wide for their full length. Steps and ladders shall have a handrail on both sides, except on semicircular stairs, where one handrail located through the center of the stairs will be permitted. 
(b)  Spas and hot tubs. 
(1)  Steps, ladders or recessed treads shall be provided where water depths are greater than 24 inches and contrasting color bands or lines shall be used to indicate breaks in the floor level of the hot tub or spa. A spa or hot tub shall be equipped with at least one handrail, or ladder equivalent, for each 50 feet of perimeter, or portion thereof, to designate points of entry and exit, or with a deck designed to facilitate safe entry or exit. A residential spa or hot tub shall be provided with a means to designate the point of entry and exit. 
(2)  The design and construction of steps and recessed steps, when required, shall conform to the following: 
a.  Uniform step treads shall have a minimum unobstructed horizontal tread depth of ten inches for a minimum continuous width of 12 inches. 
b.  Riser heights shall not be less than seven inches, nor greater than 12 inches. When the bottom tread serves as a bench or seat, the bottom riser may be a maximum of 14 inches. 
c.  The first and last risers need not be uniform in height with other risers, but shall comply with riser height requirements as set forth in subsection (b)(2)b. of this section. The first (top) riser is measured from the finished deck or tub rim. 
d.  Intermediate risers (those between the first and last risers) shall be uniform in height. 
e.  Step treads shall have slip-resistant surfaces. 
f.  Each set of steps shall be provided with at least one handrail serving all treads. 
g.  Handrails shall be installed so that they can be removed only with tools. 
h.  The leading edge of handrails facilitating exit shall be located within 18 inches plus three inches, measured horizontally, of the bottom riser. 
i.  Where steps or seat benches are used in hot tubs, riser heights shall not be less than seven inches, nor greater than 12 inches. When the bottom tread in a hot tub serves as a bench or seat, the bottom riser shall be a maximum of 13 inches above the tub floor. 
(3)  The design and construction of ladders, when required, shall conform to the following: 
a.  Ladders shall be made entirely of corrosion-resistant materials. 
b.  Ladder treads shall have slip-resistant surfaces. 
c.  Ladder designs shall provide two handholds or handrails which fully serve all treads. 
d.  The maximum outside diameter of handrails shall be 1.9 inches and the minimum shall be one inch. 
e.  There shall be a clearance of not more than six inches, nor less than three inches between any ladder and the wall of the hot tub or spa. 
(4)  The design and construction of recessed treads, when provided, shall conform to the following: 
a.  Stepholes at the centerline should have a uniform vertical spacing of 12 inches maximum and seven inches minimum. 
b.  Maximum vertical distance between the coping edge and the uppermost recessed tread shall be 12 inches. 
c.  Stepholes shall have a minimum tread depth of five inches and a minimum width of 12 inches. 
d.  Stephole treads shall drain into the spa or hot tub to prevent the accumulation of dirt. 
e.  Each set of recessed treads shall be provided with two handrails which fully serve all treads. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-617. - Diving boards. 
Diving boards shall not be used in conjunction with pools that do not have a water diving area of at least eight feet in depth. The overhead clearance above the diving board to any obstruction must be such that a diver cannot strike such obstruction at any point of a dive. Diving boards for aboveground swimming pools are hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-618. - Handholds. 
(a)  Handholds shall be provided for inground swimming pools and consist of a bull-nosed coping not over two and one-half inches thick for the outer two inches or an equivalent approved handhold, which handhold must be no more than nine inches above the normal water line. 
(b)  Spas and hot tubs shall be provided with a suitable handhold around the perimeter in areas where water depths exceed three feet, six inches. Perimeter rims may serve as a suitable handhold. Handholds shall be provided no further apart than four feet and may consist of any one or a combination of the following: 
(1)  Coping, ledges, flanges or decks along the immediate top edge of the spa shall provide a suitable slip-resistant handhold when located not over 12 inches above the water line. 
(2)  Ladders, steps or seat ledges. 
(3)  A rope or railing placed at or not over 12 inches above the water line and fastened to the wall. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-619. - Walkways and drainage. 
Unobstructed walk areas not less than 36 inches wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool. The walks shall be sloped away from the pool at a pitch of at least one-quarter-inch per foot. Aboveground or portable pools shall not be required to construct such a walkway if the top of the side wall of the pool is four inches or more above the natural ground surface and if there is no possibility of back-drainage into the pool. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-620. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-621. - Swimming pool rescue equipment. 
A responsible swimmer shall be present at all times that a pool is in use. Every pool having a wall depth of four feet or more shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not more than 15 inches in diameter, with an attached three-sixteenths-inch manila line which shall be not less than the longest dimension of the pool, and at least one or more light, strong poles, with blunted ends, not less than 12 feet in length, or two-thirds of the diameter for circular pools, for making a reach assist or rescue. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-622. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-623. - Operation and maintenance. 
(a)  Acidity and alkalinity pH. The water shall show a neutral or alkaline reaction as indicated by a pH of 7.2—7.6 at all times while the pool is in use. 
(b)  Test kit. A test kit with permanent color standards shall be provided at all pools and be used at frequent intervals to check on the adequacy of disinfectant, alkalinity, cyan uric acid, water hardness and to determine the pH of the water. 
(c)  Equipment maintenance. All equipment used in connection with the operation of a pool shall be maintained in a satisfactory operating condition during the periods the pool is in use. 
(d)  Sanitation of premises. All pool facilities, including buildings and grounds, shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition and maintained free from garbage, trash and other refuse. 
(e)  Wastewater. The disposal or discharge of pool wastewater must be accomplished in such a way that nuisance or damage to other property is avoided. When discharged into storm or sanitary sewers, the rate of discharge shall be controlled to prevent overtaxing the capacity of such sewers. 
(f)  Health hazard or nuisance prohibited. No pool shall be used, kept, maintained or operated if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall constitute or be the occasion of any nuisance of any kind, or shall be dangerous to life or limb, or detrimental to health in any way. 
(g)  Cover. A suitable, substantial protective cover shall be provided and installed over all private residential pool surfaces during the nonswimming season. 
(h)  Indoor pools. The construction around an indoor pool shall incorporate a vapor barrier to isolate the pool area from the rest of the building. The enclosure shall be well ventilated to reduce condensation on walls, windows and the ceiling, with sufficient space heating to keep the temperature of the air at least ten degrees Fahrenheit above that of the pool water. 
(i)  Indoor spas and hot tubs. Indoor spas and hot tubs shall have a suitable, insulated vapor barrier protective cover provided and installed when such spas or hot tubs are not being used by a bather. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Secs. 18-624—18-626. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-627. - Disinfectant and chemical feeders. 
(a)  A means of disinfecting the water shall be employed which provides a disinfecting residual in the water. Chlorine or chlorine compounds are most frequently used for such purpose, but other bactericidal agents shall be acceptable if registered by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Adequate and appropriate procedures for introducing a disinfectant into the recirculation system shall be used. The means of introducing approved disinfecting agents shall be sufficient to maintain the appropriate disinfectant residual. The DPD (diethyl-p-phenylenediamine) test or other suitable disinfectant test is suggested as a means of testing for the free chlorine residual. 
(b)  Feeding equipment shall be capable of maintaining the required residual of disinfecting agent into the water. The disinfecting material used shall be subject to field testing procedures which are simple and accurate. Chemical feeding equipment shall conform to the joint National Swimming Pool Institute-National Sanitation Foundation standard no. 50 for the circulation system components for swimming pools. Such guidelines set forth the operational parameters for the proper chemical treatment and maintenance of swimming pool spa and hot tub waters. Except where specifically noted, such guidelines apply to indoor and outdoor pools, inground, on-ground and aboveground pools, and spas and hot tubs. Some aboveground pools and spas may require somewhat higher chlorine concentrations, more frequent superchlorination and more brushing or manual activity to maintain the proper pool water quality because of unusual contamination or other adverse conditions. 
(c)  Chemical treatments alone will not produce sanitary spa water. A filtration system, in proper operational condition, is also required to attain sparkling clear, polished sanitary spa water. The spa water shall be maintained in accordance with the following: 
		Minimum 	Ideal 	Maximum 
Disinfectant 
levels 				
	Free chlorine, ppm 	1.0 	1.0—1.5 	3.0 
	Combined chlorine, ppm 	None 	None 	0.2 
	Bromine, ppm 	0.8 	1.5 	3.0 
	Iodine, ppm 	1.0 	1.5 	5.0 
Chemical 
values 				
	pH 	7.2 	7.5 	7.6 
	Total alkalinity, ppm as CaCO3 	60 	100 	200 
	Dissolved solids, ppm 	300 	— 	1,500 
	Hardness, ppm as CaCO3 	50 	125 	500 
	Heavy metals 	None 	None 	None 
Biological 
values 				
	Algae 	None 	No visible algae 	None 
	Bacteria 	None 	None 	Refer to state health code 
Stabilizer 				
	Cyanuric acid, ppm 	30 	— 	150 
	*Not required for indoor pools 			
Algaecides 				
	Quaternary algaecides, ppm 	1.0 	3.0 	5.0 
	Copper based algaecides (nonchelated), ppm 	0.1 	0.2 	0.3 
	Copper based 	0.1 	1.0 	3.0 
	Silver based 	0.5 	1.5 	3.0 
Remedial practices 				
	Superchlorination 	Monthly frequency 	When combined chlorine is 0.2 or more 	Weekly 
	Required superchlorination chlorine, ppm 	5 	10 	— 
	Required shock treatment chlorine, ppm 	10 	— 	— 
	Floccing frequency 	— 	When needed 	— 
	Water replacement 	— 	— 	— 
Temperature 				
	Temperature, degrees Fahrenheit 	— 	— 	104° F 
(400 Celsius) 
Water clarity 				
	Water turbidity, JTUs 	0 	0.5 or less 	1.0 
 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-628. - Spa and hot tub heater sizing. 
The following table is designed to permit the selection of a heater which will maintain the spa or hot tub at the desired temperature: 
HEAT LOSS FROM SPA SURFACE 
Btus Per Hour 
Surface Area of Spa- 
(square feet) 	Temperature Difference (degrees Fahrenheit) 
Between Average Air and Desired Water Temperature 
	10 Degrees 	20 Degrees 	30 Degrees 	40 Degrees 	50 Degrees 	60 Degrees 
20 	2,100 	4,200 	6,300 	8,400 	10,500 	12,500 
30 	3,150 	6,300 	9,500 	12,600 	15,800 	19,000 
40 	4,200 	8,400 	12,600 	16,800 	21,000 	25,200 
50 	5,250 	10,500 	15,750 	21,000 	26,250 	31,500 
100 	10,500 	21,000 	31,500 	42,000 	52,500 	63,000 
200 	21,000 	42,000 	63,000 	84,000 	105,000 	126,000 
300 	31,500 	63,000 	94,500 	126,000 	157,500 	189,000 
400 	42,000 	84,000 	126,000 	168,000 	210,000 	252,000 
500 	52,500 	105,000 	157,500 	210,000 	263,000 	315,000 
 
Note: These heat losses are based on an assumed wind velocity at the water surface of 3½ miles per hour (mph). For a velocity of five mph, multiply these losses by 1.25, and for ten mph, multiply by 2.0. 
The average wind velocity in miles per hour—For spas under 900 square feet, in built-up areas where the spa is sheltered by nearby fences, buildings or shrubs from the prevailing winds, an average velocity of 3½ mph may be assumed. For more exposed locations or higher wind velocities, see above footnote of the heat loss table. For indoor spas where the indoor temperature is a little lower, if any, than the water temperature, a heat loss factor of 100 Btus per hour, per square foot of spa surface may be used. Experience has indicated that when a spa cover is used, heat loss will be reduced by 50 percent or more. If it is desired to raise the temperature in a given time period, the following formula may be used: 
Heater output (Btu/hour) = Spa volumes (gallons) × temperature difference (degrees Fahrenheit) × 8.3 + ½ surface loss. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-629. - Regulations. 
The director may promulgate regulations for the construction, alteration, operation and maintenance of pools to carry out the provisions and purposes of this article. The regulations may provide from time to time for the use of materials, devices, structures and appurtenant equipment substantially equivalent to that required in this article as long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than the protection provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-630. - Inspection authority. 
The director and their representatives shall have the right and authority, before or after any permit is issued, to enter upon the real property of the applicant or permittee to inspect any pool and check the operation thereof to assure compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. The owner, lessee, occupant and all persons operating and using a pool shall cooperate fully with such inspections and provide pertinent information, as requested. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 18-631. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-632. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a swimming pool in violation of this article, shall be subject to the general penalty provided in section 1-16. 
(Ord. No. 5383, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Secs. 18-633—18-660. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN 
 
Sec. 18-661. - Findings; requirements. 
It is universally recognized that many neighborhoods in urban areas have deteriorated in the past by reason of poor planning and the erection of inferior and unsuitable buildings in such neighborhoods, and such deterioration has invariably been accompanied by a reduction in property values and a deterioration in conditions and health, sanitation and safety in such neighborhoods, and for the purpose of preventing such deterioration and preserving existing property values unto the owners and residents of property within the Village, and for the purpose of preserving and improving the existing standards of health, sanitation and safety within the Village, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  All new buildings shall be of an architectural design suitable for a good suburban community. No permit shall be issued for any new building or for the improvement of an existing building which is of such architectural design that the building is manifestly inferior or so radically different as to impair the marketability of property values of existing buildings in the immediate vicinity. 
(2)  Freestanding buildings and buildings having a frontage on one or more streets shall have the same architecturally harmonious material used for all exterior walls. Buildings partially freestanding shall have the same or architecturally harmonious materials for all exposed exterior walls. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued for the construction or erection of more than two single-family residential buildings of the same exterior design and style on the same side of the street in any one block. Two single-family residential buildings of the same exterior design and style shall not be erected directly adjacent to each other or directly across the street from each other. 
(4)  When, in the opinion of the director of development or his/her designee, the issuance of a permit would be contrary to any of the provisions stated in this section, the permit will be denied and the matter shall, within two weeks, upon receipt of the permit application, be referred to the appearance commission for consideration and recommendation. After public hearing wherein evidence shall be received from the applicant and such other persons as shall desire to appear and be heard, and after consideration of all evidence, the appearance commission shall forward its recommendation to the board of trustees, indicating whether the proposed construction will or will not detrimentally affect the values of adjoining and neighboring properties. 
(5)  Within 30 days, upon receipt of the recommendation of the appearance commission as set forth in subsection (4) of this section, the board of trustees shall take final action thereon. The action of the board of trustees shall be communicated to the director of development or his/her designee, who shall carry out such decision. 
(Code 1959, § 5.5.1)  
Secs. 18-662—18-690. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - OCCUPATION OF STREETS 
 
Sec. 18-691. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or store on the roadway, parkway or sidewalk space of any street or in alleys, building materials or any fuel or other supplies for any building or structure in the course of erection, repair or alteration, unless a street occupancy permit from the director of development or his/her designee is obtained prior to the act, and any person so doing shall be subject to the general penalty as stated in section 1-16 for such violation. 
(Code 1959, § 5.4.1)  
Sec. 18-692. - Street occupancy permit application. 
All applications for street occupancy permits for the purpose of building operations shall be made to the director of development or his/her designee and shall describe the location of the roadway, parkway or sidewalk space of any street or alley proposed to be occupied, the use to be made of such roadway, parkway and sidewalk space, and the length of time of such intended occupation. Should the director of development or his/her designee approve of such application, he shall issue a street occupancy permit to the applicant, provided, the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this chapter as to the payment of fees and all other requisites in connection with such permit. 
(Code 1959, § 5.4.2; Ord. No. 6083, § 11, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 18-693. - Time limitation. 
The permission to occupy roadway, parkway or sidewalk space of any street or in alleys for the purpose of building is intended only for imperative use in connection with the actual erection, repair, alteration, wrecking or removal of buildings, and shall continue only until work can be carried on entirely inside the property. It shall also be unlawful to occupy any of such spaces under the authority of such permit for the storage of articles not intended for immediate use in connection with the operation for which such permit has been issued. Failure to immediately remove building or other material from such occupied space upon notice from the director of development or his/her designee or chief of police shall subject the owner or contractor so notified to the general penalty as provided section 1-16 for such violation. 
(Code 1959, § 5.4.3)  
Sec. 18-694. - Space limitation. 
(a)  The occupation of a street or alley for the storage of building materials, including temporary sidewalks for any one building, shall never be extended out beyond the curbline and where no parkway exists not more than one-third of the way across the street or alley as measured from lot line to lot line. 
(b)  It shall not be lawful to occupy with building material any roadway, parkway or sidewalk space of any street or alleys, other than immediately in front of the lot or land upon which the building is being erected, provided that, if the written consent of the owners, tenants or occupants of properties adjoining the site of any proposed building is first obtained and filed with the director of development or his/her designee, the occupation of the roadway, parkway or sidewalk may be extended in front of the property so consenting upon the same terms and conditions as fixed in this article for the occupation of the street front of the building site. 
(c)  During the progress of building operations, a sidewalk not less than four feet in width (or an equal width of a clean, hard paved roadway, available and made safe for a footway, and protected by a substantial hand railing) shall at all times be kept open, clean and unobstructed for the purpose and uses of a passageway in front of such lot. This subsection is not intended to prohibit the maintenance of a driveway for delivery of material across such sidewalk from the curbline to the building site, but such driveway shall be under the supervision of the director of development or his/her designee. 
(Code 1959, § 5.4.4; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-695. - Fences. 
Fences having a minimum height of six feet shall be provided around the entire perimeter of all excavations. 
(Code 1959, § 5.4.5)  
Sec. 18-696. - Scaffolds. 
An outside scaffold on a building not more than two stories in height, standing on or within five feet of the street line, shall have a floor of two-inch planks and, at the outer edge thereof, a closed fence of not less than three feet in height, when there is no covering over the sidewalk. 
(Code 1959, § 5.4.6)  
Sec. 18-697. - Placement of materials, fences, etc. 
Materials, fences or sheds shall not be placed within two feet of any tree, nor within six feet of the rail of any railway, nor render inaccessible any value chamber, manhole, coal chute, fire hydrant, alarm box or catchbasin. All gutters shall be kept free and clear at all times. Mortar boxes or beds shall be placed and guarded so as to protect the clothing of persons passing, and shall be promptly removed from any street, sidewalk, alley or public way on order of the director of development or his/her designee or the chief of police. 
(Code 1959, § 5.4.7)  
Sec. 18-698. - Protection of trees and shrubbery. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bruise, bend, break, cut, saw or in any way mutilate or otherwise injure or damage any tree or shrubbery, or the roots or branches thereof, planted in and along any street, alley, public highway or place in the Village, without first obtaining the consent of the Village forester. 
(Code 1959, § 5.4.8)  
Sec. 18-699. - Red lights and warning devices. 
(a)  Sufficient red lights and/or other suitable warning devices shall be displayed and maintained during the whole of every night at each excavation, pile of material, fence or any other obstruction on any public highway, sufficient to ensure that each excavation, pile of material, fence or other obstruction shall be in full view of the public. 
(b)  Any person who maliciously or wantonly, and without legal cause, removes, extinguishes, diminishes or disturbs a light or other warning device so placed shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $25.00, nor more than $50.00 and, in addition thereto, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 5.4.9)  
Sec. 18-700. - Restoration of streets, alleys and sidewalks. 
Whenever any street, alley or sidewalk is damaged by the erection or alteration of any building abutting thereon by reason of the construction thereof, the street, alley or sidewalk shall be cleaned and restored by, or at the expense of, the owner of the building involved or his contractor, to a condition as good and serviceable as prior to the beginning of the work. 
(Code 1959, § 5.4.10)  
Sec. 18-701. - Awnings. 
Awnings attached to buildings or structures may extend beyond the street line, but not closer than 18 inches to the curbline, provided that such awnings are not less than six feet, six inches from the bottom of a soft flap or drop, or seven feet from the bottom of the awning frame or hard drop above the sidewalk at all points. 
(Code 1959, § 5.4.11)  
Secs. 18-702—18-730. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WORK IN THE VILLAGE 
 
Sec. 18-731. - Applicability of standards and conditions. 
The standards and conditions of this article shall apply to all work undertaken in the Village in conjunction with a permit issued under this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 30.1)  
Sec. 18-732. - Applicability of requirements. 
The requirements of this article shall apply to all work, whether demolition work or construction work, for which a permit is required under this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 30.2)  
Sec. 18-733. - Conflicts. 
In the event of any inconsistency or conflict in the application or operation of the provisions of this article and other provisions of this Code, the provisions of this article shall apply and control. 
(Code 1959, § 30.3)  
Sec. 18-734. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commencement of construction means the beginning of new work under a permit for the structure being constructed. 
Commencement of demolition means any work done in conjunction with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, other than the installation of the protective fencing required pursuant to other Code provisions and any approved erosion control. 
Completion of demolition means removal of the walls of the first floor above the foundation of the structure being demolished or removal of all foundation material from the excavation in the case of a foundation removal. 
Construction means all of the on-site work done in building or altering structures, from land clearance to completion, including the excavation, erection, and the assembly and installation of components and equipment. 
Demolition means the razing and removal of all or substantially all of a structure or removal of such portions of a principal structure as to make the structure uninhabitable or unsafe for human occupancy. 
(Code 1959, § 30.4) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-735. - Permit time limit. 
No permit or approval made pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of more than one year after the date of issuance. 
(Code 1959, § 30.5)  
Sec. 18-736. - Permit or approval renewal and reissuance fee. 
The fee for any renewal or reissuance of any permit or approval shall be the same as the original cost of such permit or approval. 
(Code 1959, § 30.6)  
Sec. 18-737. - Required plans and specifications. 
Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by the following plans and specifications: 
(1)  Building plans and specifications. 
a.  If the application includes demolition of a principal structure, the application shall include building plans and specifications, prepared in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, for any structure to be built on the subject property except, when, in the opinion of the Village manager or designee, it is in the public interest to allow the demolition of such structure and site restoration prior to submittal of plans and specifications for any structure to be built on the site, in the event that: 
i.  The structure constitutes a clear safety or health hazard, if not demolished. 
ii.  The condition of the existing structure is determined to be in a condition that it is a detriment to the neighboring community. 
ii.  The demolition of said structure will not adversely impact the structural integrity of an adjacent structure. 
Site restoration, as per subsection (2), includes, without limitation, the backfilling of any excavation, grading, seeding, fencing, or storm water management necessary to render the site clean, and safe, until construction of a new structure has commenced. 
A cash escrow shall be posted with the Village, to guarantee that site restoration is completed within 90 days of the demolition of a structure. Such 90-day period may be extended by the Village manager for good cause shown. The escrow shall be in the amount of 110 percent of the cost of final grading and seeding the site. 
b.  If commencement of construction of such structure is not planned or does not occur within 30 days after completion of demolition, the application also shall include a detailed site restoration plan as provided in subsection (2) of this section. 
(2)  Site restoration plans and specifications. If the application includes demolition of a principal structure and commencement of construction of a new structure is not planned or does not occur within 30 days after completion of demolition, the application shall include a detailed site restoration plan depicting all work required to restore the subject property, within 30 days after completion of demolition, to a safe, clean condition until construction of a new structure has commenced, including, without limitation, backfilling of any excavation, grading, seeding, fencing, stormwater management, etc. 
(Code 1959, § 30.7; Ord. No. 4942, § 2, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 18-738. - Stormwater management and soil sedimentation and erosion control plans. 
In addition to all other Village departmental regulations, ordinances, plans and specifications, the permit application shall include detailed plans and specifications for stormwater management, soil erosion control and grading on the subject property. Such plans and specifications shall be on a drawing separate from all other plans and specifications, labeled as "stormwater management plans" and/or "soil sedimentation and erosion control plans." Such plans and specifications shall be prepared by a professional engineer, shall be made in conformance with the requirements of the Village's subdivision and engineering guide and shall include a certification by the applicant, in a form provided by the Village, that all requirements of the Village's codes, ordinances and regulations related to stormwater management, soil erosion control and grading shall be satisfied by the applicant at all times. Among other details, the required stormwater management plans shall include: 
(1)  Drainage plans and soil erosion control during demolition, if any. 
(2)  Stormwater management and soil erosion control during any period of time between completion of demolition and commencement of construction. 
(3)  Stormwater management and soil erosion control, commencing with the preparation for foundation pouring and continuing during the entire new construction process until final grading of the subject property. 
(Code 1959, § 30.8; Ord. No. 4942, § 2, 1-16-2007)  
Sec. 18-739. - Accessibility, parking and loading plans. 
The application shall include separate plans and specifications, showing the location of all work affecting, and all parking and loading activities planned to take place on, public streets, sidewalks and other rights-of-way. Such plans and specifications shall include, but not be limited to the: 
(1)  Location of pavement, sidewalks and trees that may be affected by the proposed work; 
(2)  Impact on such pavement, sidewalks and trees; 
(3)  Proposed location for all parking of contractor and worker vehicles; 
(4)  Proposed location of any loading or unloading activities, including concrete to occur within any right-of-way; 
(5)  Proposed location of the gravel mat required by section 18-744(3); 
(6)  Proposed fencing or other protective measures; and 
(7)  Temporary pavement or other temporary accessibility measures. 
(Code 1959, § 30.9)  
Sec. 18-740. - Materials and spoils storage plans. 
The permit application shall include plans depicting the proposed location for storage of materials and spoil on the subject property that are consistent with Village soil and sedimentation and erosion control requirements. 
(Code 1959, § 30.10)  
Sec. 18-741. - Dust and airborne particle control. 
The permit application shall include provisions for controlling dust and other airborne particles from the subject property, including, without limitation, a source of water and spraying equipment, and any other measures to be taken to control airborne particles. 
(Code 1959, § 30.11)  
Sec. 18-742. - Fencing. 
(a)  If a permit issued by the Village authorizes demolition or construction of a new structure, then the applicant shall erect a six-foot chainlink fence to be installed around the perimeter of the structure under construction, around the perimeter of the entire subdivision or site, or around the perimeter of adjacent structures concurrently under construction, and such installation shall be in a location and manner approved by the development department. The fencing shall be installed not more than seven days, nor less than four days before the commencement of any work on the subject property, including mass grading and the installation of site utilities, pursuant to any permit issued by the Village. Such fencing shall remain in place until a certificate of occupancy is issued for the structure. The location of the perimeter fencing may be changed during the construction period with the approval of the development department. "No Trespassing" signs shall be mounted on the fencing in conspicuous locations around the site. If the size of the construction site is too large for fencing alone to be effective, in the judgment of the development department, the permittee must have the construction area patrolled by a licensed State detective agency during the hours specified in this article for the closing and locking of gates. 
(b)  Any gate in a perimeter fence must be closed at all times, except to allow ingress and egress to and from the site. Such gate must be locked at all times, other than permitted hours of construction as specified in section 18-744(11) and at any other time when no work is being performed on the site, for example on Saturday, Sunday or holidays. 
(c)  Fencing, as provided in this section, shall also be required for any construction project of the Village, school or park district, or any other public agency, whether or not a building permit has been or is required to be issued by the Village, when the project is located within the Village. 
(d)  Fencing, as provided in this section, shall also be required around any activity, whether a building permit is required or not, where construction or landscaping materials are stored or stockpiled. 
(e)  In addition to perimeter fencing as required in this section, the permit applicant shall cause safety fencing to be installed around every tree in the parkway abutting the subject property. Such tree fencing shall be located, as far as feasible, at the dripline of the tree, whether on public or private property; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed or applied to authorize placement of tree fencing on private property not owned by the applicant, unless proper permission for such tree fencing has been secured from the property owner by the applicant. If placement of tree fencing is not feasible at the dripline of the tree, then such fencing shall be installed in a location approved by the forestry division of the public works department. 
(f)  When a violation of this section is observed, the permittee, general contractor or property owner shall be notified promptly and shall correct the violation within two hours of receiving notice thereof. If the violation is not corrected, the Village shall have the right, but not the obligation, to correct the violation. The costs and fees associated with such corrective action shall be charged to the permittee or property owner, and the Village may place a lien on the property to collect such costs. The Village shall also have the right to issue an immediate stop work order applicable to the site until compliance is achieved and/or the costs, fees or fines are paid. 
(Code 1959, § 30.12)  
Sec. 18-743. - Posted notice of commencement of demolition or construction. 
The permit applicant shall cause notice of demolition or construction to be given by posting the subject property, in a prominent place, with a sign announcing such commencement. The size, shape, color and message of such sign shall be as required by the development department. Such sign shall include notice that the rules and regulations applicable to demolition and construction work are available at the development department. Such sign shall be posted not less than 14 days in advance of such commencement, and shall be maintained on the subject property until all work on the subject property has been completed and approved, or until removal of the sign is approved by the director of development or his/her designee. 
(Code 1959, § 30.13; Ord. No. 5431, § 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-744. - Site management standards. 
The following site management standards shall apply to all work: 
(1)  Accessibility, parking and loading. No pavement or sidewalk within any public right-of-way shall be unavailable for public use at any time, except when such pavement or sidewalk is removed and replaced. No such pavement or sidewalk that is removed and replaced shall be out of service for more than three days without the prior approval of the engineering department. No parking, loading or storage of demolition debris, spoil or construction materials shall be permitted within any right-of-way, on any public property or within ten feet of any right-of-way adjacent to public or private property, unless specifically approved by the Village and shown on approved accessibility plans as required by section 18-739. The Village may prohibit parking in any particular location on a public right-of-way if the Village determines that such parking has an adverse impact on neighboring property or traffic control. All uses of vehicles shall comply with applicable codes related to parking and time of operation of vehicles. 
(2)  Particulate control. Airborne particles shall be controlled at the subject property at all times during work by means of a water truck and spraying equipment or other water source capable of spraying and thoroughly saturating all portions of the structure and surrounding property affected by the work. Such spraying shall be undertaken at all times as necessary to thoroughly control the creation and migration of airborne particles, including, without limitation, dust, from the subject property. 
(3)  Gravel mat. When determined by the Village engineer to be appropriate and practicable, the applicant shall cause a gravel mat to be installed on the subject property, of a size and in a location sufficient to wash down all vehicles used on the subject property and to cause dirt and mud to be removed from the tires of such vehicles. The gravel mat shall be located so as not to interfere with any use by the public of public rights-of-way and not to cause any nuisance or inconvenience to adjacent public or private property. 
(4)  Sanitation facilities. A portable toilet shall be provided at every site of construction of a new principal structure, or addition thereto, prior to the commencement of construction, unless an existing facility is available on the construction site. The proposed location of any portable toilet shall be depicted on plans submitted at the time of application for the review and approval of the development department, so that the location shall have the least possible impact on adjacent properties. 
(5)  Litter and debris control and cleanup. Litter and debris at the subject property shall be controlled at all times. The applicant shall designate a person regularly present at the subject property as having responsibility to assure that no litter or debris leaves the subject property and that all litter and debris is removed from the subject property before the end of every day, including weekends, and regardless of whether work was conducted that day on the subject property. The permit shall specify the location of the dumpster, as approved by the development department. 
(6)  Street and sidewalk cleaning. The applicant shall cause all dirt, mud, gravel, crushed stone, wood, blocks, bottles, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, and other debris from the subject property or related to any work conducted on the subject property, to be cleaned regularly from all sidewalks and streets adjoining and in the area of the subject property on every day that construction occurs on such property. 
(7)  Entry authorization. No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall authorize or be construed to authorize any entry onto property adjoining the subject property or any work for which entry onto property adjoining the subject property is or may be necessary, unless a proper right of entry has been secured from the owner of such property. 
(8)  Stormwater management. Stormwater shall be managed during all phases of demolition and new construction so as not to impact adjacent properties and/or public rights-of-way in accordance with the requirements of the subdivision and engineering guide. 
(9)  Wastewater discharge. No person shall undertake any work pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter, from which the discharge of any wastewater will be caused or associated, without prior approval of the director of public works. It shall be the duty of the person undertaking any such work to direct all wastewater flow to the particular location designated by the public works department. No person undertaking such work shall cause or allow any cement truck wash to be discharged onto any public property or into any catchbasin or other Village sewer facility. 
(10)  Limitations of noise. All work undertaken pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 98, article VIII, related to limitations on noise. Further, no person shall operate or cause to be operated any radio, phonograph, telecommunications device or other such object at such a volume or in any other manner that would cause a nuisance or disturbance to any person. Every contractor and permittee shall be responsible for all actions of their employees, agents and subcontractors under this subsection, and shall be liable for all violations of the provisions of this subsection committed by such employees, agents or subcontractors. 
(11)  Permissible hours of construction. All work undertaken pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter may occur only between the following hours: 
a.  7:00 a.m.—7:00 p.m. on weekdays. 
b.  9:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m. on Saturdays. 
c.  9:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(Code 1959, § 30.14; Ord. No. 4921, § 2, 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 5431 § 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-745. - Commencement of construction or site restoration. 
Either construction of an approved new structure shall have commenced, or the subject property shall have been fully restored in conformance with the approved site restoration plan, if any, or with such other plans as may be approved by the Village, within 30 days after the completion of demolition. Such 30-day period may be extended by one day for every business day that weather conditions prevent construction or restoration work on the subject property, as determined by the director of development or his/her designee. 
(Code 1959, § 30.15)  
Sec. 18-746. - Coal tar sealants prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Coal tar is a byproduct of the process used to refine coal. Coal tar contains high levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). 
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are a group of organic chemicals that are present in coal tar and are an environmental concern to human health and watershed life. 
Pavement sealing means the application of sealant or sealcoat product to maintain any surface, including but not limited to, a driveway, driveway approach, on- or off-street parking area, playground, sidewalk, bike trail, patio, sports facility, loading area or facility, street, highway, or roadway. 
(b)  Prohibition on pavement sealing using coal tar products. On public and private property, no coal tar products of any kind, including coal tar derivatives, coal tar mixtures, or any other product containing equivalent levels of PAHs, shall be applied or used for pavement sealing within the Village. Any person engaging in pavement sealing must have a Material Safety Data Sheet available on premises for the product being used for pavement sealing. 
(c)  Prohibition on sale of coal tar products. No person may sell, offer to sell, or display for sale any product used for pavement sealing within the Village that is labeled as containing coal tar products." 
(Ord. No. 6157, § 3, 5-1-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6157, § 2, adopted May 1, 2018, renumbered § 18-746 as § 18-747; and § 3 enacted a new § 18-746 to read as set out herein.  
Sec. 18-747. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than $500.00, nor more than $1,000.00. Each day such violation or failure to comply is permitted to exist after notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any construction undertaken in conjunction with the provisions of this article until such time that all penalties and fines have been resolved to the satisfaction of the director of development or his/her designee. 
(Code 1959, § 30.16; Ord. No. 6157, § 2, 5-1-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6157, § 2, adopted May 1, 2018, renumbered § 18-746 as § 18-747. See editors note at § 18-746 for more information.  
Secs. 18-748—18-770. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
 
Sec. 18-771. - Findings of fact; purpose. 
(a)  The president and board of trustees find that: 
(1)  Excessive quantities of soil are eroding from areas that are undergoing development for certain nonagricultural uses, including, but not limited to, the construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings and industrial plants, the building of roads and highways, and the creation of recreational facilities; 
(2)  The washing, blowing and falling of eroded soil across and upon roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing vision and reducing traction of road vehicles; 
(3)  Such soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gullies, washed-out fills and embankments; 
(4)  The sediment from such soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches, and pollutes and silts rivers, streams, lakes and reservoirs; 
(5)  Such sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial purposes, destroying fish and other aquatic life, and that is costly and difficult to remove; and 
(6)  Such sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways, resulting in greatly increased chances of flooding at grave danger to public health and safety. 
(b)  It is the purpose of this article to provide minimum standards to safeguard persons, protect property and prevent the despoliation of the environment, and promote the public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials and use and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12C.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 18-772. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Architect means a registered architect of the State. 
Building permit means a written authorization issued by the Village for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building. 
Excavation means any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
Fill means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material suitable for its intended use is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
Grading means the use of excavation or fill to bring the ground surface in conformity with the site development plan. 
Land surveyor means a registered surveyor of the State. 
Parcel means all contiguous land in one ownership. 
Permittee means any person to whom a site development permit is issued. 
Person means any person, firm or corporation, public or private, the State and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee thereof. 
Professional engineer means a registered professional engineer of the State. 
Site means a lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where the site development is performed. 
Site development means altering the terrain on a site and/or providing construction on a site and/or providing landscaping on a site. 
Site development permit means a permit issued by the Village for site development. 
Site development plan means a drawing or other written description, sealed by an architect or professional engineer, which illustrates and/or describes the site development. 
Vacant means land on which there are no structures or only structures which are secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12C.2; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-773. - General criteria and standards. 
The following general principles shall apply to any movement of earth and any sedimentation and erosion control plan, and the granting of a permit for the execution of such plan as provided in this article: 
(1)  The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time during development. 
(2)  Such minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of time as practical. 
(3)  Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other nonviable cover shall be used to protect areas exposed during development. 
(4)  Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development. 
(5)  Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. 
(6)  Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed as soon as possible. 
(7)  The development plan shall relate to the topography and soils of the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created. 
(8)  Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected as far as is consistent with developing the site. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12C.3; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 18-774. - Site development permit. 
(a)  Required; exemptions. 
(1)  Before site development commences by any person within the Village, a site development permit shall be obtained from the director of development or his/her designee, where development comes under any one or more of the following provisions, unless such development is exempted therefrom by subsection (a)(2) of this section: 
a.  Excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, will exceed 100 cubic yards. 
b.  Fill will exceed three feet in vertical height at its highest point, measured from the natural ground surface. 
c.  Excavation will exceed four feet in vertical depth at its deepest point. 
d.  Excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, will exceed an area of 5,000 square feet. 
e.  Plant cover is to be removed from an area exceeding 5,000 square feet on any vacant parcel or any parcel in excess of ten acres. 
(2)  A site development permit shall not be required in the following cases: 
a.  Excavations below finished grade for septic tanks and drainfields, tanks, vaults, tunnels, basements, swimming pools, cellars or footings of buildings or structures for which a building permit shall have been issued by the Village. 
b.  Excavation or removal of vegetation in public utility easements by public utility companies for the purpose of installing underground utilities. 
c.  Tilling of the soil for fire protection purposes. 
d.  Engaging in the following, only if in connection with a farming or other agricultural or conservation enterprise and upon property zoned solely for farming or agricultural purposes and uses: 
1.  Construction of grassed waterways; 
2.  Construction of terraces; 
3.  Construction of surface water diversions; 
4.  Construction of grade stabilization structures; or 
5.  Tilling of the soil. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  No site development permit or building permit shall be issued until the developer submits a site development plan, together with other submissions required by this chapter, and certifies that any site development shall be in accordance with such plan and submissions. 
(2)  Each application for a site development permit shall be made by the owner of the property or his authorized agent to the director of development or his/her designee on a form furnished for that purpose. When site development is proposed as a part of a building permit application, it may be combined, and one plot plan, in the number of copies required by the director of development or his/her designee, may be submitted, showing building plans and site development plans. In all instances, a registered land surveyor shall certify as to the accuracy of the existing contour lines. Each application shall be accompanied by the following, unless the director of development or his/her designee finds any item unnecessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article; provided, however, that no exemption from subsection (b)(2)a. of this section shall be granted to any applicant who intends to move in excess of 500 cubic yards of dirt: 
a.  With respect to site development, a site development plan showing the acreage of the site, boundary line survey, zoning, type of proposed sewer and water facilities, location of existing utilities, buildings and drains on and within 100 feet of the site, together with a legend and scale. There shall be included on or with the site development plan: 
1.  A soil map of the subject property, showing the predominant soil types on the site. 
2.  Enough information on the areas abutting or adjacent to the site to show existing drainage patterns and the drainage course that may affect, or be affected by, the development of the site. 
3.  Name and address of the developer or owner. 
4.  Name and address of any architectural or consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm. 
5.  Limits of natural floodplains, if any. 
6.  Areas to be sodded, seeded, mulched or paved. 
7.  Acreage of area to be vegetatively stabilized, if any. 
8.  Areas to be left undisturbed. 
b.  With respect to site grading, existing topography of the site and a 100-foot adjacent peripheral strip, proposed contours and final grades, and street profiles, and indicating what measures will be employed to protect cut and fill slopes from surface runoff. 
c.  Storm drainage, by means of a plan based upon a competent storm drainage study, including a drainage area map and computations, and indicating what conditions now prevail at proposed and natural outlets, such as: 
1.  Whether the drainage course is bare earth or vegetated. 
2.  Whether the constructed outlet will be in open sun, open shade or dense shade. 
3.  Whether the natural or proposed outlet is subject to longterm or continuous flow. 
4.  Whether the existing outlet is actively eroding. 
5.  Whether there is evidence of a high water table, permanent or seasonal. 
6.  Whether the area is subject to seepage or spring flow. 
7.  Elevation of normal water level in all proposed and natural outlets. 
8.  A profile below the outlet for a sufficient distance to indicate the natural gradient of the accepting natural outlet and/or stream channel. 
9.  A cross section and profile of existing stream channels, where applicable. 
10.  A ditch and computations for all seeded, sodded or bare earth outlets, ditches and similar water conduction facilities. 
d.  An estimate schedule and phasing of development of the site, as follows: 
1.  Phase I, stripping and/or clearing. 
2.  Phase II, rough grading and construction. 
3.  Phase III, final grading and vegetative establishment. 
4.  Phase IV, maintenance. 
e.  All the erosion and sediment control measures needed to provide protection throughout all phases of construction as set forth in subsection (b)(2)d. of this section. Such plans shall also include any off-site borrow and spoil areas, sewer lines, utility lines, and haul and access roads, and shall further indicate: 
1.  Start of clearing date. 
2.  Duration of exposure of disturbed areas. 
3.  Installation of temporary sediment control measures, vegetative and structural, by phase and date. 
4.  Installation of storm drainage, by phase and date. 
5.  Paving of streets and parking areas, if any, by phase and date. 
6.  Establishment of permanent vegetative cover (plans will show what will be done to shorten the duration of exposure of disturbed areas as soon after grading as possible), including seeding mixes and rates, type of sod, seedbed preparation, seeding dates, lime and fertilizer application, temporary seedings, if needed, mulching or similar stabilization procedures. 
7.  Details of all structural sediment control measures. 
8.  Computations for sediment basins, if any. 
f.  The standards and specifications for soil erosion and sediment control, August 1973 edition, as compiled by the North Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District, and approved by the president and board of trustees of the Village, are hereby incorporated into this section and made a part of this article by reference, for the purpose of exemplifying the considerations and factors which should enter into the preparation of a site development plan. 
(c)  Bonds. A cash bond, approved by the Village manager, shall be posted which is sufficient to cover all the costs of improvements, landscaping and maintenance of landscaping for such period to be specified as a condition of the issuance of a site development permit. 
(d)  Review. To further the specific purposes of this article, the following review procedures are established: 
(1)  Grading work under 500 cubic yards. Where the aggregate volume of grading on any site or contiguous group of sites is in excess of 100 cubic yards, but not over 500 cubic yards, the director of development or his/her designee shall review the application for the proposed site development permit. If the director of development or his/her designee finds the application for the proposed grading plan in conformance with the provisions of this article, he may issue a permit, with such reasonable conditions as he may deem necessary to substantially secure the objectives of this article, or he may, in the alternative, refer the application to the North Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District in the manner provided in subsection (d)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Grading work in excess of 500 cubic yards and/or removal of vegetation. 
a.  Where the aggregate volume of grading on any site or contiguous group of sites is in excess of 500 cubic yards or the proposed cuts and fills exceed five feet at their maximum point, or where approval to remove plant cover is required by this article, the director of development or his/her designee shall refer the application to the North Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District for review and recommendation. Such recommendations shall be submitted to the director of development or his/her designee within 30 days. 
b.  Upon receipt of the recommendations of the North Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District, and after consideration thereof, the director of development or his/her designee shall approve the application with such reasonable conditions as he may deem necessary to substantially secure the objectives of this article, or disapprove the application for the site development. 
c.  Failure of the director of development or his/her designee to make a determination upon the approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the application for a site development permit within 60 days after receipt of all necessary information for such action will constitute an approval of the application unless such time is extended with the consent of the applicant. 
(3)  Earth removal. No site development permit shall be issued for an intended building site unless: 
a.  Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit issued by the Village; or 
b.  The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall plan previously approved by the Village for the area in which the site is situated. 
(e)  Appeals. The applicant, as well as any person who has received notice of the filing of the application for a site development permit, or the North Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District may appeal the decision of the director of development or his/her designee, including any approval resulting from lack of action by the director of development or his/her designee as provided in subsection (d)(2)c. of this section, to the zoning board of appeals. Upon receipt of an appeal, the zoning board of appeals shall schedule and hold a public hearing, after giving 15 days' notice thereof. The zoning board of appeals shall render a decision within 30 days of the hearing. Factors to be considered on review shall include, but not be limited to, possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; runoff surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainageways; nature and type of soil or rock that, when disturbed by the proposed grading, may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be landscaped; and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through grading or removal of vegetation. 
(f)  Responsibility. Failure of Village officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions or to recommend denial of the site development permit, or of the zoning board of appeals to deny such permit shall not relieve the permittee from responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom and shall not result in the Village, its officers or agent being responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom. 
(g)  Retention of plans, specifications and reports. Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be retained in original form or on microfilm by the director of development or his/her designee. 
(h)  Inspections. The director of development or his/her designee shall make inspections as required in this article and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the site development plan. Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not substantially as stated or shown in the plan, the director of development or his/her designee may stop further work until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the existing conditions. Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of approval of the director of development or his/her designee, shall be maintained at the site during progress of the grading. Until the final inspection is made, a sign issued by the Village indicating permission to grade has been granted by the Village shall be prominently displayed on the front property line of the property involved so as to be visible from the street on which the property fronts. In order to obtain inspections in accordance with the following schedule, the permittee shall notify the director of development or his/her designee at least two full working days before the inspection is to be made: 
(1)  Rough grading. The rough grading inspection shall be performed when all rough grading has been completed. 
(2)  Final inspection. The final inspection shall be performed when all work indicated on the site development plan has been completed. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12C.4; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 18-775. - Operation standards and requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. All earth moving grading and grading operations not specifically exempted by the provisions of this article shall comply with the applicable standards and requirements set forth in this section in addition to the other requirements of this article. 
(b)  Adoption by reference. The Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, August 1973 edition, as compiled by the North Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District and approved by the president and board of trustees of the Village, are hereby incorporated into this section and made a part of this article by reference, for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation under development plans approved in section 18-774. In the event of conflict between provisions of the Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control and other provisions of this article, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(c)  Special precautions. 
(1)  If, at any stage of the grading, the director of development or his/her designee determines by inspection that the nature of the formation is such that further work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the director of development or his/her designee may require, as a condition to allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable safety precautions be taken as he considers advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. Special precautions may include, but shall not be limited to, specifying a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control and reports of a professional engineer specializing in soils and/or engineering geology, who certifies as to his specialty, whose recommendations may be made requirements for further work. 
(2)  Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install temporary planting to control erosion, install temporary structures or take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large operations or where unusual site conditions prevail, the director of development or his/her designee may specify the time of starting grading and the time of completion or may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains. 
(d)  Permit expiration. Every site development permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within 180 days, or is not completed within one year from the date of issue of such permit, except that the director of development or his/her designee may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time, if written application is made before the expiration date of the permit. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12C.5; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 18-776. - Exceptions; permit revocation or suspension; charges and fees; nuisances; violations and penalties. 
(a)  Exceptions. The zoning board of appeals may authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this article. 
(1)  Application. Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of the applicant, stating fully the grounds of the application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. Such petition shall be filed with the site development permit application. In order for the land referred to in the petition to come within the provisions of this section, it shall be necessary that the zoning board of appeals find all of the following facts with respect thereto: 
a.  The land is of such shape or size or is affected by such physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations or record that it is impossible or impractical for the subdivider to comply with all of the regulations of this article. 
b.  The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner. 
c.  The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject property. 
(2)  Referral of proposed exception. Each proposed exception shall be referred to the officers or agencies involved and such officers or agencies shall transmit their recommendations to the zoning board of appeals, which recommendations shall be reviewed prior to the granting of any exception. 
(3)  Decision of zoning board of appeals. After a public hearing thereon, the zoning board of appeals, by resolution, may approve the site development permit application with the exceptions and conditions it deems necessary or disapprove such site development permit application and exception application or take such other action as is appropriate. 
(b)  Permit revocation or suspension. 
(1)  Authority. If any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this article violates the terms of the permit, or conducts or carries on such site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the permittee, or conducts or carries on such site development so that it is materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the director of development or his/her designee shall revoke or suspend the site development permit. 
(2)  Procedure. 
a.  No site development permit shall be permanently revoked or suspended until a hearing is held by the zoning board of appeals. Written notice of such hearing shall be served upon the permittee, either personally or by registered mail, and shall state the: 
1.  Grounds for complaint or reasons for the revocation or suspension, in clear and concise language. 
2.  Time when and the place where such hearing is to be held. 
b.  Such notice shall be served by registered mail or personal service on the permittee at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. At any such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and he may call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. Upon conclusion of such hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall determine whether or not the permit shall be suspended or revoked. 
c.  The zoning board of appeals shall hold the hearing to consider recommendations for revocation or suspension of permits which have been temporarily suspended at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the zoning board of appeals, at which all conditions of subsection (b)(2)b. of this section can be fulfilled. 
(c)  Charges and fees. 
(1)  Charges for services shall be computed on the basis of two percent of the estimated cost of site development, including the cost of grading, temporary or permanent soil conservation devices and final landscaping, to cover plan review and site inspection costs. If a contract for site development exists, 100 percent of the contract cost for site development and ten percent for contingencies shall be used in computing the service charge. 
(2)  Filing fees for appeals or exceptions to any of the provisions of this article shall be as specified in the rules of procedure of the Village zoning board of appeals. 
(d)  Nuisances. This article shall not be construed as authorizing any person to maintain a private or public nuisance as caused by the implementation of a site development plan upon their property, and compliance with the provisions of this article shall not be a defense in any action to abate such nuisance. 
(e)  Violations and penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause such to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provisions of this article. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted, and, upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12C.6; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Secs. 18-777—18-800. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS IN EDENS EXPRESSWAY NOISE IMPACT AREA 
 
Sec. 18-801. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to further protect existing and future residential properties from the adverse impact of noise generated by the traffic on the Edens Expressway (Interstate Highway 94), which is a limited-access expressway bordering certain residential properties in the Village of Glenview. This section identifies the geographic boundaries of an Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area, wherein noise from the Edens Expressway adversely impacts the quality of life in residential structures near the Edens Expressway, and prescribes construction standards for that portion of the Village of Glenview which is uniquely and adversely impacted by this noise. This section also sets forth the procedures for the implementation and enforcement of sound transmission control construction requirements. 
(Ord. No. 4762, § 2(200.0), 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 18-802. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this section the term "construction" shall mean new construction of principal residential buildings and remodeling and additions to existing principal residential buildings as required by the building codes adopted by incorporation under section 18-191. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area" shall mean those properties legally described below, with common addresses of 905 to 941 Long Road, Glenview, Illinois: 
905 Long Road. Lot 20 in Block 2 in United Realty Company's Glenayre Garden's being a subdivision of part of the west 44 acres of the north half of the southeast quarter also part of the east ten acres of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter and also the vacated east three feet of Long Road all in Section 31, also, a strip of land being a proportionate share of surplus in the north half of the southeast quarter appurtenant to part of the west 44 acres of aforesaid, in Township 42 North, Range 13, east of the Third Principal Meridian, in Cook County, Illinois. 
907 Long Road. Lot 19 in Block 2 in United Realty Company's Glenayre Garden's subdivision in the southeast quarter and the southwest quarter of Section 31, Township 42 North, Range 13, east of the Third Principal Meridian, in Cook County, Illinois also the vacated east three feet of LeClaire Avenue (Long Road) lying west of and adjoining said Lot 19 Block 2 aforesaid, in Cook County, Illinois. 
911 Long Road. Lot 18 in Block 2 in United Realty Company's Glenayre Garden's being a subdivision of part of the west 44 acres of the north half of the southeast quarter also part of the east ten acres of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter and also the vacated east three feet of Long Road, all in Section 31, Township 42 North, Range 13, east of the Third Principal Meridian; also a strip of land being a proportionate share of the surplus in the north half of the southeast quarter appurtenant to part of the west 44 acres aforesaid in Cook County, Illinois. 
915 Long Road. Lot 17 in Block 2 in United Realty Company's Glenayre Garden's being a subdivision of part of the west 44 acres of the north half of the southeast quarter also part of the east ten acres of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter and also the vacated east three feet of Long Road, all in Section 31, Township 42 North, Range 13, east of the Third Principal Meridian, also a strip of land being proportionate share of the surplus in the north half of the southeast quarter appurtenant to part of the west 44 acres aforesaid, in Cook County, Illinois. 
921 Long Road. Lot 1 in Patterson's resubdivision of part of Lot 16 and the vacated three feet of street lying west of and adjoining said Lot 16 in Block 2 in United Realty Company's Glenayre Garden in the southeast quarter and the southwest quarter of Section 31, Township 42 North, Range 13, east of the Third Principal Meridian, in Cook County, Illinois. 
925 Long Road. Lot 15 in Block 2 in United Realty Company's Glenayre Garden's being a subdivision of part of the west 44 acres of the north half of the southeast quarter also part of the east ten acres of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter and also the vacated east three feet of Long Road, all in Section 31, Township 42 North, Range 13, east of the Third Principal Meridian, also a strip of land being proportionate share of the surplus in the north half of the southeast quarter appurtenant to part of the west 44 acres aforesaid, in Cook County, Illinois. 
929 Long Road. Lot 1 in Jerramichaela Resubdivision of part of Lots 13 and 14 and the 3 feet vacated LeClaire Avenue west of and adjoining said Lots in Block 2 in United Realty Company's Glenayre Garden's in the southeast quarter and the southwest quarter of Section 31, Township 42 North, Range 13, East of the Third Principal Meridian, in Cook County, Illinois. 
939 Long Road. That part of Lot 11 lying west of a line drawn from a point in the north line of said Lot 74.5 feet west of the northeast corner to a point in the south line 63.5 feet west of the southeast corner of said lot in Block 2. 
Also 
That part of Lot 12 lying west of a line drawn from a point in the north line of said lot 63.5 feet west of the northeast corner to a point in the south line of south 2.5 feet west of the southeast corner of said Lot in Bock 2; in United Realty Company's Glenayre Gardens subdivision of part of the west 44 acres of the north half of the southeast quarter also part of the east ten acres of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter all in Section 31, Township 42 North, Range 13, east of the Third Principal Meridian, in Cook County, Illinois. 
941 Long Road. 
Parcel 1: Lot 10 (except that part thereof lying easterly of a line drawn from a point in the north line of said lot 7.5 feet west of the northeast corner thereof to a point in the easterly line of said Lot 29 feet south of the northeast corner of said lot, taken for highway) in Block 2 in United Realty Company's Glenayre Garden, a subdivision of part of the west 44 acres of the north half of the southeast quarter, also part of the east ten acres of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 31, Township 42 North, Range 13, east of the Third Principal Meridian, in Cook County, Illinois. 
Parcel 2: The north half of vacated 20 foot alley lying South of and adjoining said Lot 10 aforesaid; 
Parcel 3: The vacated east three feet of LeClaire Avenue lying west of and adjoining said Lot 10 aforesaid, and the west line of said lot extended south ten feet to center of alley all in Cook County, Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 4762, § 2(300.0), 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 18-803. - Applicability, and effective date. 
(a)  The sound transmission control construction requirements set forth in this section shall be applicable to building permits for all residential construction in the Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Construction of new principal residential structures, whether detached dwellings or multi-family dwellings. 
(2)  Construction of additions or modifications to existing principal residential structures, whether detached dwellings or multi-family dwellings, including but not limited to first-floor, second-floor, and dormer additions. 
(b)  The sound transmission control construction requirements referenced in subsection (a) of this section shall become effective and apply to applications for building permits filed with the development department on or after the date 14 days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village of Glenview of a notice by the Village of Glenview Director of Development certifying the construction of a noise abatement barrier, commonly referred to as a "sound wall," along the Edens Expressway, has commenced. 
(Ord. No. 4762, § 2(400.0), 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 18-804. - Exemptions. 
Construction projects that, in the reasonable determination of the director of development or his/her designee, are separate from a principal residential structure or wholly contained within a principal residential structure, shall not be subject to the Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area construction requirements set forth in this section. Such construction projects include, but not limited to, the construction of: 
(1)  Detached garages and car ports. 
(2)  Interior remodeling. 
(3)  Patios. 
(4)  Sidewalks. 
(5)  Driveways. 
(6)  Decks. 
(7)  Fences. 
(8)  Sheds. 
(9)  Porches. 
(10)  Swimming pools and spas. 
(11)  Tennis and outdoor courts. 
(12)  Other "accessory structures" as defined in the Glenview Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 98, Glenview Village Code. 
(Ord. No. 4762, § 2(500.0), 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 18-805. - Noise control construction requirements. 
The director of development or his/her designee shall enforce the following regulations the course of reviewing all building permit applications for construction in the Edens Expressway Noise Impact Area identified in section 18-803, and not exempt under section 18-804. 
(Ord. No. 4762, § 2(600.0), 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 18-806. - Exterior walls. 
(a)  For any new construction, sheathing must be a minimum of one-half inch of plywood, OSB, or a material of similar mass. 
(b)  The interior face of the exterior walls must be a minimum of one-half inch drywall or a material of similar mass. Lightweight paneling and similar low mass surfaces must be backed with drywall. 
(c)  New construction of exterior walls must include batt or blown-in insulation with a rating of R-13 or higher. 
(Ord. No. 4762, § 2(610.0), 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 18-807. - Windows. 
Windows must include double-glazed insulating glass. Blocking and insulation must be installed around windows to provide a tight seal. Caulking must be provided to effect an air tight seal. 
(Ord. No. 4762, § 2(620.0), 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 18-808. - Exterior doors. 
All exterior doors must be solid core or insulated. Blocking and insulation must be installed around doors to provide a tight seal. Caulking must be provided to achieve an airtight seal. Doors must be equipped with gasketing at the head and jamb and equipped with a wipe at the base. 
(Ord. No. 4762, § 2(630.0), 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 18-809. - Wall penetrations. 
Seal or caulk all opening or penetrations through walls, particularly around water and gas pipes, electrical cables, and refrigerant lines. 
(Ord. No. 4762, § 2(640.0), 6-21-2005)  
Sec. 18-810. - Mechanical openings. 
Ductwork for ducted range hoods and bathroom fans must include one 90-degree bend. The opening through the exterior wall must be caulked. The opening around dryer vents must be caulked. All exhaust vents must include a damper. 
(Ord. No. 4762, § 2(650.0), 6-21-2005)  
Secs. 18-811—18-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 18-901. - International Code Council (ICC) International Existing Building Code adopted; amendments. 
The 2012 edition of the ICC International Existing Building Code is hereby adopted with the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1 Title. Amended to read as follows: "These regulations shall be known as the Existing Building Code of the Village of Glenview, Cook County, Illinois (the "Village") herein referred to as 'this code.'" 
(2)  Section 102.4 Referenced codes and standards. Amended to read as follows: "The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extend of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provision of this code shall apply. The following codes and standards are not adopted by reference and thus are not considered a part of this code. 
IPC-2012 International Plumbing Code 
IPSDC-2012 International Private Sewage Disposal Code 
IWUIC-2012 International Wildlife-Urban Interface Code 
IZC-2012 International Zoning Code" 
(Ord. No. 5190, § 14, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5879, § 10, 12-9-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 10, adopted December 9, 2014, amended § 18-901 to read as set out herein. Previously § 18-901 was titled International Existing Building Code; adopted.  
Secs. 18-592—18-1000. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - ICC PERFORMANCE CODE FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 18-1001. - International Code Council (ICC) International Performance Code for Existing Buildings adopted. 
The 2012 edition of the ICC International Performance Code for Existing Buildings is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 5190, § 15, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5879, § 11, 12-9-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 11, adopted December 9, 2014, amended § 18-1001 to read as set out herein. Previously § 18-1001 was titled ICC Performance Code for Existing Buildings and Facilities; adopted.  
Secs. 18-1002—18-1025. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - VACANT PROPERTIES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5215, § 2, adopted May 19, 2009, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as §§ 18-900—18-912. In order to maintain the numbering style of the Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as §§ 18-1026—18-1039 to read as set out herein. 
 
Sec. 18-1026. - Declaration of policy. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by: 
(1)  Establishing a program for identification, registration, and maintenance of buildings which are or become vacant on and after the effective date of this article. 
(2)  Determining the responsibilities of the owners of record of vacant buildings. 
(3)  Providing for administration, enforcement, including the abatement of public nuisances, and imposition of penalties. 
This article shall be construed to effect its purpose. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-900), 5-19-2009)  
Sec. 18-1027. - Other ordinances. 
This article shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations prescribing standards other than are provided herein, and in the event of conflict, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-901), 5-19-2009)  
Sec. 18-1028. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or clearly indicated by context, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section. 
Building: Any structure occupied or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy. 
Boarded building: A building which has had in a manner intended to be temporary or permanent, any or all openings, which openings are windows or doors which were present for the purpose of light, ventilation or egress, some material whether opaque, solid or transparent, affixed to such openings, from the interior or exterior of the building, for the purpose of securing or preventing access or damage to the building or its components. 
Dangerous or unsafe building: All buildings or structures that are found to pose a danger to the life, health, property or safety of the public by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn the public in the event of a fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment, or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty or incomplete construction or unstable, that partial or complete collapse or systems failures are possible. 
Director: The director of development, or his or her designee. 
Owner: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Person: Includes a corporation, a partnership, or other entity, as well as an individual. 
Premises: A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure thereon. 
Unoccupied building: A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises, including buildings ordered vacated by the director pursuant to authority granted by the Village Code. This definition does not include a building that is actively for sale, lease or rent, as evidenced by a contractual agreement between the homeowner of record and a licensed real estate agent or brokerage, and performance of sufficient maintenance that the building or the property on which it sits does not become a nuisance. 
Vacant buildings: Any building that has not been legally occupied for a consecutive period of six months unless one of the following is true: 
(1)  The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner is progressing diligently to complete the repair or rehabilitation. 
(2)  The building meets all codes, is not is a state of disrepair or deterioration, is ready for occupancy, and is actively being offered for sale, lease or rent: or is actively being maintained and monitored by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-902), 5-19-2009)  
Sec. 18-1029. - "Vacant building" determination. 
(a)  Within 60 days after the effective date of this article, the director shall evaluate all buildings in the Village believed to be unoccupied on the effective date of this article and make a determination for each as to whether the building is a "vacant building" within the meaning of section 18-1028. The director may determine that a building which meets any of the criteria set forth in section 18-1028 is not to be regulated under this article for a stated period, if upon consideration of reliable, substantiated and sufficient evidence, the director determines that regulation of the building under this article would not serve the public health, welfare, and safety and makes written findings in support of this decision. The determination shall be in writing and shall state the factual basis for the determination. 
(b)  For buildings the director determines to be "vacant buildings", the director shall, within seven days of making that determination, send notice of this written determination with the factual findings to the last taxpayer of record listed on the most recent Cook County tax roll. Said notice of determination shall be sent first-class United States mail, with proper postage prepaid. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a person from complying with this article. The director may personally serve or cause personal service of the notice of determination. Any person making such service shall execute an affidavit attesting to the facts of service. The director shall maintain an affidavit of such mailing for each notice of determination sent. 
(c)  The notice shall specify a date and time on which the owner may voluntarily allow for a code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building and surrounding yards and property to determine the extent of compliance with Village property, building, health, fire, and plumbing codes. 
(1)  For residential buildings, if a voluntary code compliance inspection is scheduled by the owner and a plan to maintain the structure, yards and property is submitted by the owner to, and approved by, the Village no costs for the code compliance inspection will be assessed by the Village. 
(2)  For all commercial buildings and residential buildings, if a voluntary code compliance inspection is not scheduled by the owner all Village costs and fees associated to all actions to gain entry to the structure, yards and property will be the responsibility of the owner. Unpaid costs and fees shall be recaptured by a lien upon the premises. 
(d)  The notice shall contain a statement of the obligations of the owner of a building determined to be vacant, a copy of the registration form the owner is required to file pursuant to section 18-1031, and a notice of the owner's right to appeal the director's determination. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-903), 5-19-2009)  
Sec. 18-1030. - Appeal of director's determination of "vacant building". 
(a)  An owner of a building determined by the director to be a vacant building as provided for in this article may appeal that determination to the Village manager. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Village manager within 15 days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner's obligation to register his building as required by section 18-1031. The appeal shall contain a complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes the director's determination, shall set forth specific facts in support thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the appeal. The Village manager shall decide the appeal on the basis of facts presented by the owner in his or her written appeal and the director's written determination. 
(b)  The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to persuade the Village manager that had the evidence been known to the director at the time the director made the determination, the director would more likely than not have determined that the subject building was not a "vacant building" within the meaning of this article. 
(c)  The Village manager shall send written notice of a decision to the owner within ten days of his or her receipt of the appeal. The Village manager may, but is not required to, seek additional information from the owner. The Village manager may, upon written notice thereof to the owner, take no more than ten additional days, to decide the appeal if he or she determines that such additional time is required for consideration of the appeal. 
(d)  An owner who wishes to challenge applicability of this article to his/her building without the director's determination having been made, shall set forth specific facts to support non-applicability in a writing to the director. In the event the director determines that the subject building is a "vacant building", the owner shall have the right to appeal the director's determination to the Village manager as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-904), 5-19-2009)  
Sec. 18-1031. - Obligation to register vacant buildings. 
The owner of a building who knows, or from all the facts and circumstances should know, that his or her building is or has become a "vacant building" within the meaning of this article after the effective date of this article, or the owner of a building, which the director determines at any time to be a "vacant building", or the owner of a building whose appeal from the director's determination has been denied by the Village manager shall take the actions provided for in this section within 15 days after either the date of director's notice of determination or occurrence of the facts that would cause a reasonable person to believe that the building was a "vacant building", or denial of the appeal, whichever is applicable. Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances, including this chapter, nor does it preclude any of the actions the Village is authorized to take pursuant to this chapter or elsewhere in the Village Code. 
(1)  a.  Register the building with the director of development or his/her designee, on a form provided by the director and pays the annual non-prorated vacant building registration fee as provided in section 30-1. The form shall include, as a minimum, the name, street address, and telephone number of the owner; the case name and number of any litigation pending concerning or affecting the building, including bankruptcy cases; and the name, street address, and telephone number of all persons with any legal interest in the building or the premises. The form shall require the owner to identify a natural person 21 years of age or older who maintains a permanent address in Cook County, Illinois to accept service on behalf of the owner with respect to any notices the director sends pursuant to this article or service of process in any proceeding commenced to enforce any provision of this article, and file with the director on the registration form, the name, address, telephone number, of said person. A street address is required. A post office box is not an acceptable address; and 
b.  Renew the vacant building registration each year on the anniversary date of the first filing for the time the building remains vacant and pay the annual fee as provided in section 30-1; and 
c.  File an amended registration within 15 days of any change in the information contained in the annual registration. A new registration is required for any change in ownership whatsoever. 
(2)  The form shall require the owner to indicate his or her "Acceptance of Notice by Posting" consenting to service of notices sent or required to be sent, pursuant to this article, by posting on the building if the owner fails to renew the registration, if required, or maintain as current with the director the information required regarding the person designated to accept notice and service of process; 
The owner shall allow for a code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building and shall be subject to Village costs and fees outlined in section 18-1029(c) within 30 days of the inspection. Such inspection will determine the extent of compliance with all applicable Village property, building, electrical, plumbing, fire and similar codes. 
(3)  Obtain liability insurance and maintain such insurance for as long as the building is vacant, and file evidence of such insurance with the director, as follows: $500,000.00 for a vacant residential building of one to three units; $750,000.00 for a vacant residential building of four to 11 units; $1,000,000.00 for a vacant residential building of 12 to 48 units; $2,000,000.00 for a vacant residential building of more than 48 units; and $2,000,000.00 for a vacant manufacturing, industrial, storage, or nonresidential commercial building. 
(4)  Vacant building plan. At the time a building is registered as required herein, the owner shall submit a vacant building plan. The director may prescribe a form for the plan. If the owner fails to submit the plan as provided for by this section, the director may determine the plan. The plan shall contain the following as a minimum: 
a.  A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction or similar type. The proposed repair shall result in openings being secured by conventional methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted for new construction of similar type with board removed. The owner shall maintain the building in an enclosed and secure state until the building is reoccupied or made available for immediate occupancy. If the owner demonstrates that securing of the building will provide adequate protection to the public, the director may waive the requirement of an enclosure. 
b.  For buildings and premises thereof that the director determines as being or containing public nuisances, as defined in section 18-1028, then the vacant building plan shall contain a plan of action to remedy such public nuisance(s). 
c.  A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and nuisance identified by the director. 
d.  When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition. 
e.  A plan of action to maintain the building and premises thereof in conformance with this article. 
f.  A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the date the building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or sale. The time schedule shall include date(s) of commencement and completion of all action required to achieve habitability. No plan which provides for compliance with this article or, which will not, as determined by the director, achieve such compliance, within six months, in the case of a vacant boarded building, and two years, in the case of a vacant, unboarded, and code compliant building will be approved. 
g.  All premises upon which unoccupied or vacant buildings are located and the exteriors shall at all times be maintained in compliance with the Village Code. 
h.  Exterior lighting according to standards established by the director. 
(5)  On written notice of the director, provide bonded, licensed, and insured security guard service at the building between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Such service to remain in place until the director gives written notice that the service is no longer required. Such service shall be required when the director makes a written determination that the vacant building constitutes a fire hazard, is otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, involves illegal or improper use, occupancy, or maintenance, under such conditions that boarding and securing the building are insufficient to prevent the actual or threatened harm. 
(6)  Affixed to any building which is boarded, no smaller than two feet by two feet and compliant with the Village's Sign Ordinance, chapter 98, article VII of the Village Code, and providing the following information: the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, and in addition, for buildings that are the subject of a foreclosure action, the name, address, and telephone number of the plaintiff and the plaintiff's attorney, if any, in the foreclosure action. The sign must be placed so that its message is legible from the public way. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-905), 5-19-2009; Ord. No. 5285, § 2, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 2, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-1032. - Approval of plan. 
(a)  The director shall review the proposed vacant building plan in accordance with the standards below. The director shall send notice to the owner of the vacant building of the director's determination. 
(b)  Standards for plan approval. In considering the appropriateness of a vacant building plan, the director shall include the following in his or her consideration and shall make written findings as to each: 
(1)  The purposes of this article and intent of the Village board to minimize the time a building is boarded or otherwise vacant. 
(2)  The effect of the building and the proposed plan on adjoining property. 
(3)  The length of time the building has been vacant. 
(4)  The presence of any public nuisances on the property. 
(5)  The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will prevent or ameliorate the condition it is designed to address. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-906), 5-19-2009)  
Sec. 18-1033. - Authority to modify plan, right of appeal. 
The director shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner, have the right to modify the vacant building plan by modifying the dates of performance, the proposed methods of action, or by imposing additional requirements consistent with this article that the director deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-907), 5-19-2009)  
Sec. 18-1034. - Failure to comply with plan. 
Failure to have an approved plan within 30 days of filing the registration form or failure to comply with the approved plan shall constitute a violation of this article subjecting the owner of the building to penalties as provided in this article and to any remedies the Village may avail itself of as provided for herein and elsewhere in the Village Code, including but limited to, an action to compel correction of property maintenance violations. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-908), 5-19-2009)  
Sec. 18-1035. - Other enforcement. 
The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the Village to demolish or to take other action against the building pursuant to other provisions of this article, the Village Code, or other applicable legislation. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-909), 5-19-2009)  
Sec. 18-1036. - Certification. 
A certificate of code compliance for vacant buildings issued by the development department, and payment in full of all fines and fees imposed pursuant to this article are required prior to any occupancy of a vacant building. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-910), 5-19-2009; Ord. No. 5431, § 3, 3-1-2011)  
Sec. 18-1037. - Time restrictions—Vacant buildings. 
It is the policy of the Village of Glenview that boarding is a temporary solution to prevent unauthorized entry into a vacant building and that boarded buildings are a public nuisance. A vacant building may not remain boarded longer than six months unless an extension of that time is part of a plan approved by the director. 
A vacant building which is unboarded and code-compliant and for which boarding is determined by the director on the basis of police reports, citizen complaints, and other information of other type considered reliable by reasonable persons, to not require boarding to prevent unauthorized entry may not remain vacant for more than two years without an approved plan for occupancy, sale, demolition, or other disposition of the building. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-911), 5-19-2009)  
Sec. 18-1038. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to have violated any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine as set out in section 1-16 of the Village Code, in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to the Village. Such other remedies include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief, application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition, or condemnation, contracting for the repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosure of any lien the Village may have thereon. Any expenses incurred by the Village as enumerated above shall be assessed against the building, and shall serve as a lien on the property. 
(b)  A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The Village may enforce this article in a system of administrative adjudication or through the Circuit Court of Cook County. 
(d)  Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the Village from immediately condemning, as provided for in the Village Code, a building, or taking other immediate action upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or poses an imminent danger to the occupants of the building, or the public, health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  Unless a bona fide emergency, as determined in the sole discretion of the director, neither the Village nor a contractor engaged on its behalf, shall not enter upon private property to perform maintenance or otherwise alter the property without first obtaining the written permission of the property's owner or an order from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 5215, § 2(18-912), 5-19-2009)  
Secs. 18-1039—18-1049. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - FAIR HOUSING 
 
Sec. 18-1050. - Declaration of policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village, in the exercise of its police power for the protection of the public safety, public health, public morals and public welfare, and for the promotion of equal opportunity to all persons to live in decent facilities, regardless of the actual or perceived status, practice or expression of that person's race, color, religion, age, or national origin, or ancestry, sex, age, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status, or the actual or perceived association with such a person, to prohibit discrimination in housing and real estate transactions. 
(Ord. No. 5693, § 2, 8-6-2013)  
Sec. 18-1051. - Definitions. 
As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions will prevail: 
Age means chronological age of not less than 40 years. 
Housing status means: 
(1)  The type of housing in which an individual resides, whether publicly or privately owned; or, 
(2)  An individual's ownership status with respect to the individual's residence. 
Military discharge status means the fact of having been discharged from the Armed Forces of the United States, their reserve components or any national guard or naval militia other than by a "dishonorable discharge." 
National origin means the place in which an individual or one of his or her ancestors was born. 
Parental status means the status of living with one or more dependent minors or disabled children. 
Person means one or more individuals, partnerships, associations or organizations, corporations, recipients of government funds, legal representatives, trusts, trustees in bankruptcy, or receivers; state governments other than that of the State, or commercial operations or entities controlled by governments other than those of the State, or of the United States, that is also an owner, lessor, sublessor, assignor, managing agent, or other individual, firm, or corporation having the right to sell, rent, lease, or sublease any housing unit within the Village, or any agent, broker, or other individual working on behalf of any such individual, firm, or corporation. 
Real estate means any building, structure or portion thereof in the Village which is used or occupied as a home, residence or dwelling place of one or more persons. 
Religion : means all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief, or the actual identification with or perceived identification with a religion. 
Sexual orientation means the status or expression, whether actual or perceived, of heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality, or gender-related identity, whether or not traditionally associated with the person's designated sex at birth. Sexual orientation does not include a physical or sexual attraction to a minor by an adult. 
Source of income means the lawful manner by which an individual supports himself or herself and his or her dependents. 
Unlawful discrimination discrimination against a person because of the actual or perceived status, practice, or expression of that person's race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status; or the actual or perceived association with such a person. 
(Ord. No. 5693, § 2, 8-6-2013)  
Sec. 18-1052. - Prohibited acts. 
No person shall engage in any discriminatory real estate practice. A discriminatory real estate practice occurs upon the violation of any one or more of the following prohibitions: 
(1)  Terms and conditions. No person shall make any distinction, discrimination, or restriction in the price, terms, conditions, or privileges of any real estate transaction, including the decision to engage in or renew any real estate transaction, on the basis of unlawful discrimination. 
(2)  Discriminatory communications. No person shall publish, circulate, issue, or display, or cause to be published, circulated, issued, or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement, sign or other writing of any kind relating to a real estate transaction which will indicate or express any unlawful limitation or discrimination on the basis of unlawful discrimination. 
(3)  Listings. No person shall deliberately and knowingly refuse examination of any listing of residential real property within the Village to any individual because of unlawful discrimination. 
(4)  Representations. No person shall deliberately and knowingly represent to an individual that residential real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease in the Village when in fact it is available, or fail to bring a residential real estate listing in the Village to an individual's attention, or refuse to permit a person to inspect residential real property in the Village because of unlawful discrimination. 
(5)  Blockbusting. No person shall solicit, for sale, lease, or listing for sale or lease, residential property within the Village on the grounds of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into any neighborhood of any individual or individuals of any particular race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status. 
(6)  Encouragement of blockbusting. No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner of residential real property in the Village to sell or lease his, her or its property because of any prospective change in the race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, discharge status, source of income, or housing status of individuals in the neighborhood. 
(7)  Creating alarm. No person shall intentionally create alarm among residents of any community within the Village by transmitting communications in any manner, including a telephone call whether or not conversation thereby ensues, with a design to induce any person within the Village to sell or lease his or her residential real property within the Village because of the present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property of any individual or individuals of any particular race, color, sex, age, religion, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source of income, or housing status. 
(Ord. No. 5693, § 2, 8-6-2013)  
Sec. 18-1053. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Age. Restricting rental or sale of housing accommodation to an individual of a certain age group: 
(1)  When such housing accommodation is authorized, approved, financed, or subsidized in whole or in part for the benefit of that age group by a unit of state, local or federal government; or 
(2)  When the duly recorded initial declaration of a condominium or community association limits such housing accommodations to individuals 50 years of age or older, provided that an individual or members of the household of an individual owning or renting a unit in such housing accommodation prior to the recording of the initial declaration shall not be deemed to be in violation of the age restriction as long as the individual or household member continues to own or reside in the housing accommodation. 
(b)  Religion. Limitation, by a religious organization, association, or society, or any not-for-profit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, of the sale, rental, or occupancy of a dwelling that it owns or operations for other than a commercial purpose to individuals of the same religion, or from giving preference to such individuals. 
(c)  Single sex. Restricting the rental of rooms in a housing accommodation to individuals of one sex. 
(d)  Private rooms. Rental of a room or rooms in a private home by an owner if he or she or a member of his or her family resides therein, or, while absent for a period of not more than 12 months, if he or she or a member of his or her family intends to return to reside therein. 
(e)  Public offering. Nothing in this article shall require an owner to offer property to the public at large before selling or renting it, nor shall this article be deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective tenant or buyers for any reason other than unlawful discrimination. 
(f)  Owner-occupied dwellings. Nothing in this article shall apply to the listing of rooms to roomers in a dwelling unit occupied by the owner or lessee of the entire premises as a family household having not more than two roomers exclusive of domestic servants, or to owner occupied dwellings involving less than six units. 
(g)  [ Good faith. ] Nothing in this article shall require a person to offer property for sale or lease or rental to any person if the owner has any reason to believe that such a person is not negotiating for the purchase, lease, or rental thereof in good faith. 
(Ord. No. 5693, § 2, 8-6-2013; Ord. No. 5894, § 2, 3-3-2015)  
Sec. 18-1054. - Procedures for enforcement. 
(a)  Complaint. Any person who claims to have been injured by an unfair real estate practice or believes that he will be irrevocably injured by an unfair real estate practice that is about to occur (hereafter called "person aggrieved") may file a complaint within 30 days of the alleged violation, with the Village's department of inspectional services. The complaint shall be in writing, under oath, and shall contain such information and be in such form as the department of inspectional services requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the department of inspectional services shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons who allegedly committed or are about to commit the alleged unfair real estate practice. 
(b)  Conciliation. The department of inspectional services shall proceed to investigate said complaint, try to eliminate or correct the alleged unfair real estate practice by voluntary and informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this article without the written consent of the persons concerned. 
(c)  Administrative adjudication complaints. 
(1)  Village complaint. If, within 30 days after the initial complaint is filed, the department of inspectional services has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this article, the department of inspectional services may file the said complaint with the Village's department of administrative adjudication in the manner of filing of ordinance violation complaints in the name of the Village. If, during the course of the proceeding, compliance with this section is obtained or the person aggrieved desires to withdraw his complaint, the department of inspectional services may non-suit or otherwise dismiss the complaint. 
(2)  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation upon conviction of a violation of this article shall be fined in accordance with section 1-16. 
(Ord. No. 5693, § 2, 8-6-2013)  
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 50; taxation, ch. 70; hotel and motel tax, § 70-61 et seq.; occupation taxes, § 70-181 et seq.; simplified municipal telecommunications tax, § 70-311 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 94; B-1 limited business district regulations, § 98-131; B-2 general business district regulations, § 98-132; B-3 general service district regulations, § 98-133; H-1 hospital and medical district regulations, § 98-134; D-1 downtown business district regulations, § 98-135; MURC mixed use retail center district, § 98-136; S/L/E general sports/leisure/entertainment district regulations, § 98-137; I-1 limited commercial district regulations, § 98-161; I-2 light industrial district regulations, § 98-162; home occupations, § 98-216. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5246, § 1, adopted Aug. 18, 2009, deleted Art. I in its entirety and supplied provisions for a new Art. I to read as set out herein. Former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and dervied from Code 1959, §§ 10.1—10.3, 10.6—10.13; Ord. No. 4393, §§ 2—5, adopted Apr. 16, 2002; and Ord. No. 5113, § 7, adopted June 17, 2008. 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Licenses generally—Definitions; license required. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business, trade and occupation mean and include any occupation requiring the sale of any commodity, whether at wholesale or at retail, from a fixed location or from a wagon, van or pack, or the application of skilled labor to the property of any other person by the person conducting such trade or business, or the provision of any service, whether professional or technical, or any other occupation involving the maintenance of an office or other facilities within the corporate limits of the Village, except home occupations (as defined elsewhere herein), and businesses, trades or occupations which have been preempted from municipal licensing and regulation by State and/or federal law. 
Licensee means and includes any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity licensed or subject to license. 
Registrant means and includes any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity licensed or subject to registration. 
(b)  License required. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall be permitted to engage in any of the lines or kinds of businesses, trades or occupations provided for by this chapter or other ordinances of the Village, including those conducted in or from a residential location permitted under chapter 98, until application has been made and a license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the Village, in such case made and provided. All applications shall be upon forms provided by the Village manager or his designee. 
(c)  State-licensed businesses; registration. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in subsection (b) herein, any business, trade or occupation licensed by the State of Illinois is not required to obtain a business license as set forth herein. Such businesses, trades or occupations shall be required to register with the Village in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the Village, in such case made and provided. All registrations shall be upon forms provided by the Village manager or his designee. 
(d)  Multiple locations for a business, trade or occupation. No license for the operation of a licensed establishment in the Village shall be construed by any person to permit the operation of a licensed establishment in more than one location in the Village. A separate license shall be required for each location. For the purposes of this chapter, the determination of one location shall be construed that all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses shall be connected or on the same lot or parcel, be operated and managed by the same person or owner, and be an establishment with the same classification; provided, however, that two or more buildings separated by one or more dedicated public rights-of-way or by one or more buildings or vacant lots or parcels shall not be considered as one location. 
(e)  Multiple businesses, trades or occupations. Unless otherwise provided herein, any person who conducts, engages in, maintains, operates or carries on more than one business, trade or occupation for which a license or permit is required, provided they are operated out of the same building or premises, shall be required only to apply for and obtain a single license or permit for same. 
(Ord. No. 5246, § 1, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-2. - Licenses—Application; investigation; report; renewal. 
(a)  All applications for licenses shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the Village manager or his designee. Such application shall set forth the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, together with the applicant's partners or directors, officers and shareholders, where applicable; 
(2)  License desired; 
(3)  Location to be used; 
(4)  Nature, conditions and method of operation of the business sought to be licensed; 
(5)  Equipment and facilities to be used; 
(6)  Proposed starting or opening date; 
(7)  All information necessary to determine the license fee to be paid; and 
(8)  Such other information as may be requested by the Village manager or his designeeor the corporate authorities of the Village. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the application, the Village manager or his designee shall cause an investigation to be made by officers and employees of the Village to determine whether the proposed business shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The persons charged with the duty of making the investigation shall make a written report of their findings to the Village manager or his designee. The Village manager or his designee may require from the applicant, his partners, or directors, officers and shareholders, where applicable, information about qualifications, experience, past conduct of business, and business and moral character and reputation. The Village manager or his designee may cause an investigation to be made into such information and seek and procure such other information as he deems necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  The Village manager or his designee shall review all applications and may grant such licenses, unless the applicant's character, business responsibility or other matters concerning the application are found to be unsatisfactory. The Village manager or his designee shall promptly notify an applicant if his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(d)  In any case where it appears that an application is for the renewal of a license which is about to or has just expired, the Village manager or his designee shall mark the application, "Renewal," and after presentation of the receipt for the payment of the license, he may issue the license. If the Village manager or his designee refuses to issue or renew the license, he shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for such disapproval, and forward the application and report, if any, to the president and board of trustees for administrative review thereof, in accordance with the requirements set forth in subsection 22-8(c). In determining whether to issue or renew a license, the Village manager or his designee shall consider the factors set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5246, § 1, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-3. - Registration—Application; investigation; report; renewal. 
(a)  All registrations shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the Village manager or his designee. Such registration shall set forth the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the registrant; 
(2)  Proof of State licensing; 
(3)  Location to be used; 
(4)  Nature, conditions and method of operation of the business sought to be registered; 
(5)  All information necessary to determine the registration fee to be paid; and 
(6)  Such other information as may be requested by the Village manager or his designee or corporate authorities of the Village. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the registration, application, the Village manager or his designee shall cause an investigation to be made by officers and employees of the Village to determine whether the proposed business is duly licensed by the State of Illinois. The persons charged with the duty of making the investigation shall make a written report of their findings to the Village manager or his designee. In the event the registrant is duly licensed by the State of Illinois, the Village manager or his designee may approve the registration and shall issue a registration pursuant to section 22-5. In the event the registrant is not so duly licensed, the Village manager or his designee may require the registrant to submit an application for business license as set forth herein, or take other such steps as he deems necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  In any case where it appears that a business, trade or occupation seeks to renew a registration that is about to or has just expired, the Village manager or his designee shall mark the registration "Renewal," and after presentation of the receipt for the payment of the registration fee, he may approve the registration. If the registrant seeking to renew the registration is no longer duly licensed by the State of Illinois, the Village manager or his designee may require the registrant to submit an application for business license as set forth herein, or take other such steps as he deems necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 5246, § 1, 8-18-2009; Ord. No. 5385, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 22-4. - Licenses—Bond. 
If otherwise required by statute or ordinance, the Village manager or his designee is hereby authorized to approve the security in all cases where this chapter or other ordinances require a bond to be given to the Village before such licenses shall issue, except in cases whereby this chapter, or other ordinances or resolutions such authority shall be delegated to some other Village official. Such bond, when so approved, shall be filed in the office of the Village manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 5246, § 1, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-5. - Same—Issuance; contents. 
If the investigation by the Village manager or his designee, as provided in section 22-2 or 22-3 shall show proper compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and fails to disclose that the issuance of the applicable license or registration is contrary to the public health, safety and welfare, then the Village manager or his designee shall issue a license or registration upon the proper approval of a bond, where required, and the payment of the fee as provided in section 30-1 therefore each license or registration so issued shall set forth the name of the licensee or registrant, the business, trade, or occupation licensed or registered thereunder, the place at which such business, trade, or occupation will be carried on, except in the case of peddlers, and the time for which such license is granted. No license or registration shall be issued to any person or entity (including, but not limited to, its corporate officers) not in compliance with all Village ordinances and/or regulations, as determined by the Village, or in default of any monetary obligation to the Village, or if the person or entity (including, but not limited to, its corporate officers) is in violation of any federal, State or local law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 5246, § 1, 8-18-2009; Ord. No. 5385, § 3, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 22-6. - Reserved.  
Sec. 22-7. - Same—Failure to pay fees, etc. 
(a)  Any person holding any license or permit of any kind granted by the Village who fails to pay the amount due thereon, for any other kind of penalty, license, fine, debt or liability whatsoever, or is not in compliance with all Village ordinances, or is in default of any monetary obligation to the Village, the Village manger or treasurer, as the case may be, shall be subject to revocation of such license or permit. 
(b)  Any registrant who fails to pay the amount due for such registration shall be subject to the general penalty as stated in section 1-16 for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 5246, § 1, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-8. - Licenses—Duties of licensees. 
(a)  Compliance required. All licensees shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village, and no business, occupation or activity, whether licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance. The Village manager or his designee shall cause periodic inspections to be made of licensees to maintain proper compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, and to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the public. Whenever inspections of the premises used for the operation of a licensed business, occupation or activity are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance or to detect violations thereof, or to protect the general welfare of the public, it shall be the duty of the licensee or person in charge of the premises to admit and assist any officer or employee of the Village who is authorized or directed to investigate the premises. 
(b)  License suspension. The Village manager or his designee may suspend or revoke any license or permit issued under this chapter if: 
(1)  The licensee fails to meet or maintain the qualifications required of an applicant for the license; 
(2)  The licensee violates any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Village applicable to the premises of the licensee or his business, profession or activity; 
(3)  The licensee obtained the license by fraud, misrepresentation or omission of a material fact; 
(4)  The licensee's activities create a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; 
(5)  The licensee violates a condition of the license; 
(6)  The licensee violates a statute, regulation or other law of the State, the United States of America or other governmental body or agency with jurisdiction over the licensee or his premises, business, profession or activity; 
(7)  The licensee fails to obtain or maintain a license, permit or certification required by the Village or other governmental body or agency having jurisdiction over the licensee or his premises, business, profession or activity; 
(8)  One or more of the licensee's activities constitute a public nuisance; 
(9)  The licensee employs a person (a "revoked licensee") who has had his license, or the license of a corporation, partnership or similar entity in which he has an ownership interest, suspended, revoked or not renewed under this article; or 
(10)  The licensee, in the case where the licensee is a corporation, partnership or similar entity, becomes owned, in whole or in part, by a revoked licensee or an owner or principal of a revoked licensee. 
(c)  License suspension notice; hearing. 
(1)  If the Village manager or his designee finds one of the grounds set forth in subsection (b) of this section exists, he shall give written notice to the licensee or person in control of the business, profession or activity within the Village, by personal service or certified mail, that the license is suspended, pending a hearing before the Village board for the purpose of determining whether the license should be revoked. The notice shall state the time and place at which the hearing is to be held, which shall be at a regular or special Village board meeting within 45 days from the date of service of the notice. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for the suspension and proposed revocation. 
(2)  At the license revocation hearing, the licensee may appear and submit evidence in defense or mitigation of the violation specified in the notice. At such hearing, all parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony and evidence, and to cross-examine witnesses. The Village board shall determine and rule upon all issues of evidence and procedure at the hearing, and shall, by a majority vote of members present, render a written decision based upon findings of fact and applicable law. The written decision shall be served upon all parties. 
(d)  Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions. 
(1)  If persuaded that the licensee has violated or failed to comply with one or more of the standards or requirements set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the Village board shall determine whether to revoke the license or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors: 
a.  Whether the misconduct was egregious; 
b.  Whether substantial harm resulted; 
c.  Whether the violation was intentional; 
d.  Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements; 
e.  Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed or admitted; 
f.  Whether the violation was expeditiously cured; 
g.  Whether the licensee has paid all fines assessed; and 
h.  Whether it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation. 
(2)  Lesser sanctions which may be imposed by the Village board shall include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Suspension of the license for a period of time; 
b.  Imposition of a fine in addition to any other fine for which the licensee may be liable under other sections of this chapter; and 
c.  Imposition of conditions and/or limitations upon the license. 
(3)  If a fine is imposed, the Village board may include an assessment of the reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Village in enforcing this section and conducting the license revocation hearing. 
(4)  No person who has had a license suspended, revoked or not renewed under this article shall be granted any other license under this chapter during the period of suspension, revocation or nonrenewal either in the licensee's own name, as a principal in another business or entity, or in the name of a corporation, limited liability company or other entity which has ownership or another interest in common with the revoked licensee. For the purposes of this section, the term "another interest in common with the revoked licensee" shall include situations where the revoked licensee or one of its owners or principals is employed by the prospective licensee. No person whose license is revoked is entitled to a refund of any part of the license fee paid for the revoked or suspended license. 
(e)  Revocation not exclusive remedy. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the Village manager or his designee or applicable Village inspector from imposing other penalties authorized by this chapter or other Village ordinance, including the imposition of a fine or filing a complaint in the circuit court of the County for a violation of this chapter or other Village ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 5246, § 1, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-9. - Same—Assignability and transferability. 
No license granted under this chapter shall be assignable or transferable without permission of the president and board of trustees, nor shall any such license authorize any person or entity to do any business or act under it, except the person or entity named therein. 
(Ord. No. 5246, § 1, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-10. - Same—Expiration; term; pro ration of fee. 
(a)  Every license granted by the Village shall expire on December 31 following the date of its issuance, except where otherwise specifically provided. No license shall be granted for a period of time longer than one year, except where otherwise specifically provided. The fee for each license issued shall be collected in full at the time of the issuance thereof. 
(b)  When specific provision is made anywhere in this article or other ordinance for the issuance of a license of less than the full annual license fee, or for the issuance of a license for a part or portion of the license year, upon the payment of an appropriate amount of the annual license fee, the amount to be paid for such license shall be computed from the first day of the term for which such license is issued, provided that no person shall be entitled to the benefit of the provisions of this subsection who is engaged without a license to do so in the business for which he applies for the license at the time of such application, and no license or permit shall be issued to any person unless such person discharges and pays to the Village all indebtedness then due from such person. 
(Ord. No. 5246, § 1, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-11. - Same—Change of location. 
If any person licensed to carry on, engage in or conduct any business or occupation required to be licensed by this chapter or other ordinance of the Village, and having designated in his license the particular place in which such licensed business is to be carried on, engaged in or conducted, shall, before the expiration of such license, change the location of such place of business, he shall forthwith notify the Village manager or his designee of such change of location and no business shall be carried on, engaged in or conducted under the authority of such license at such new location until notice of such change has been given as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 5246, § 1, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-12. - Same—Posting. 
Every license granted for the purpose of conducting any business, occupation or place of amusement or recreation, required by this chapter or other ordinance to be licensed, and having designated therein the particular room, store, office or place in which such business so licensed is to be conducted, shall be posted and, during the period for which such license was issued, shall remain posted at all times in a conspicuous place so that the license may be easily seen upon the wall of the principal room or office of the store or place in which such business or occupation is carried on, and when such license shall have expired, it shall be removed from such place in which it has been posted. No license which is not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted upon the wall or upon any part of any room, store, office or place of business after the period of such license has expired. 
(Ord. No. 5246, § 1, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-13. - Exemptions from annual renewal requirements. 
All business licensees and/or registrants shall be exempt from the annual renewal application requirements for business registrations and business licenses provided for by this chapter or other ordinances of the Village except for the following: 
(1)  Day care homes; 
(2)  Day care centers; 
(3)  Massage establishments; 
(4)  Mobile food vendors; 
(5)  Chauffeur's licenses; 
(6)  Taxicab operator's or livery; 
(7)  Manufactured home parks. 
Nothing herein shall exempt any business licensee and/or registrant from the requirements of this code that it maintains a valid license and/or registration at all times. 
The preceding exemptions shall apply only to the underlying business license and/or registration, and not to any other type of license (including; without limitation, liquor licenses) held by the licensee in furtherance of its business operations. 
(Ord. No. 6024, § 2, 11-15-2016)  
Sec. 22-14. - Minimum hourly wages. 
(a)  Businesses and/or employers located within the Village shall comply with all applicable federal, State, and/or County laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time with regard to payment of minimum hourly wages. 
(b)  With respect to employees of businesses and/or employers located in the Village, any such employee's eligibility for minimum hourly wages shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, State, and/or County laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 6085, § 2, 6-8-2017; Ord. No. 6238, § 2, 2-7-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6238, § 2, adopted Feb. 7, 2019 amended the title of § 22-14 to read as herein set out. The former § 22-14 pertained to minimum hourly wages and paid sick leave.  
Sec. 22-15. - Paid sick leave. 
(a)  Businesses and/or employers located within the Village shall comply with all applicable federal, State, and/or County laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time with regard to paid sick leave. 
(b)  With respect to employees of businesses and/or employers located in the Village, any such employee's eligibility for paid sick leave shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, State, and/or County laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 6239, § 2, 2-7-2019)  
Secs. 22-16—22-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 22-41—22-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5113, § 7, adopted on June 17, 2008 repealed Art. III, §§ 22-71—22-77 in their entirety. The former article pertained to automobile sales rooms. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 22-71—22-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5113, § 7, adopted on June 17, 2008 repealed Art. IV, §§ 22-111—22-116 in their entirety. The former article pertained to automobile repair shops. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 22-111—22-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5113, § 7, adopted on June 17, 2008 repealed Art. V, § 22-151 and moved §§ 22-152—22-157 in their entirety. The former article pertained to cigarettes, cigars and tobacco. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 22-151—22-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTERS AND DISPENSING ORGANIZATIONS 
 
Sec. 22-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases in italic typeface, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cannabis [shall have] the meaning given this term in Section 3 of the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/3, as same may be amended from time to time. 
Cultivation center means a facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Department of Agriculture to perform necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations with usable medical cannabis. 
Medical cannabis dispensing organization means a facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients. 
(Ord. No. 5751, § 2, 12-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-192. - Registration. 
Every cultivation center and medical cannabis dispensing organization must register with the Village in accordance with section 22-3. 
(Ord. No. 5751, § 2, 12-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-193. - Locations of medical cannabis cultivation centers or dispensing organizations. 
(a)  Cultivation centers. 
(1)  A registered cultivation center may not be located within 2,500 feet of the property line of a pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or day care center, day care home, group day care home, part day child care facility, or an area zoned for residential use. 
(2)  Cultivation centers shall be located only in areas zoned I-2 (light industrial district as defined in section 98-81) as a conditional use. 
(b)  Medical cannabis dispensing organizations. 
(1)  A registered medical cannabis dispensing organization may not be located within 1,000 feet of the property line of a pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or day care center, day care home, group day care home, or part day child care facility. A medical cannabis dispensing organization may not be located in a house, apartment, condominium, or an area zoned for residential use. 
(2)  Medical cannabis dispensing organizations shall be located only in areas zoned I-2 (light industrial district as defined in section 98-81) as a conditional use. 
(Ord. No. 5751, § 2, 12-10-2013)  
Secs. 22-194—22-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5748, § 6, adopted December 10, 2013, repealed art. VII, §§ 22-221—22-260, in its entirety, provided however, that all other standards and regulations set forth in this Code relating to Continuing Care Retirement Communities shall remain in full force and effect. Former art. VII, pertained to continuing care retirement communities and was derived from Code 1959, §§ 10.97—10.103. 
 
Secs. 22-221—22-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DAY CARE HOMES 
 
Sec. 22-261. - License required. 
No person shall conduct or operate a day care home as defined in section 98-4, without having first obtained a license. Licenses shall be valid for a period of one year. 
(Code 1959, § 10.90; Ord. No. 4554, § 4(10.90), 8-5-2003; Ord. No. 4959, § 3, 3-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-262. - License application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to conduct or operate a day care home shall make application for a license to the Village manager. The application shall be in writing, and shall set forth the full name and address of the applicant and the place where the day care home is to be operated, and shall be accompanied by a copy of a valid license issued by the office of child development of the State department of children and family services. 
(b)  The applicant shall certify on the application that the: 
(1)  Applicant has established and will maintain at all times the standards provided for in the Illinois Child Care Act of 1969, 225 ILCS 10/1 et seq.; 
(2)  Village may inspect the child day care home at any reasonable time; 
(3)  Applicant will install smoke detectors within the home at all locations which the Village fire department shall have designated; and 
(4)  Operation of the day care home shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m.—7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(5)  Shall submit documentation proving residency at the home where the day care home will be operated. 
(c)  Applicant and any other assistants shall submit for a background check through the police department. 
(Code 1959, § 10.91; Ord. No. 4554, § 4(10.91), 8-5-2003; Ord. No. 4959, §§ 4, 5, 3-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-263. - License fee. 
The annual license fee for each day care home shall be as provided in chapter 30-1. 
(Code 1959, § 10.92; Ord. No. 4554, § 4(10.92), 8-5-2003; Ord. No. 5113, § 7, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 22-264. - Notice of application receipt; objections; hearings; appeals. 
Upon receipt of an application for license for a day care home, the Village manager shall cause to be mailed via certified mail to the owners of all adjacent properties two lots deep in all directions a written notice of receipt of an application for a day care home license. Such written notice shall specify the name and address of the applicant and advise the abutting owners that the license will be issued 15 days after the date of the notice if no written objection is received by that date. If a written objection is received, the Village manager will conduct an administrative hearing, with written notice of the time and place of such hearing, no less than ten days, nor more than 30 days after receipt of the written objection. Such notice of the administrative hearing is to be sent by certified mail to the applicant and all abutting owners. At such hearing, the applicant shall show cause why the proposed operation of a day care center will not constitute a nuisance and why the license should be issued. All parties to whom notice of the hearing was mailed will be afforded an opportunity to be heard. A written record of the hearing will be made and the decision of the Village manager shall be forwarded with the written record to the board of trustees and all the parties within ten days after the hearing. Any party to whom notice of the hearing was made may appeal the decision of the Village manager to the board of trustees within 30 days of the date of that decision, otherwise, the decision of the Village manager will be final. All decisions by the board of trustees on appeals will be final. 
(Code 1959, § 10.93; Ord. No. 4554, § 4(10.93), 8-5-2003; Ord. No. 4959, § 6, 3-6-2007)  
Sec. 22-265. - License revocation. 
If, at any time after the granting of the license required by this article, the licensee shall not comply with any of the provisions of this article, or a complaint is received that the conduct of the day care home constitutes a nuisance, a public hearing shall be scheduled, after written notice as provided in section 22-264, at which hearing the licensee shall show cause why the license should not be revoked. A written notice and record of such hearing and the appeal procedure shall be the same as provided for in section 22-264. 
(Code 1959, § 10.94; Ord. No. 4554, § 4(10.94), 8-5-2003)  
Secs. 22-266—22-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5113, § 7, adopted on June 17, 2008 repealed article IX, §§ 22-301—22-307 in their entirety. The former article pertained to dog kennels, catteries and pet shops. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 22-301—22-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 22-341. - Reserved.  
Sec. 22-342. - Self-service laundries or dry cleaners. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Self-service laundry or dry cleaner includes any person, firm or corporation that establishes, keeps, maintains or operates a commercial establishment, open to the general public, which is equipped with any machinery or equipment for the purpose of dry cleaning any material or for the purpose of cleaning, washing or drying laundry and other materials, or both, and which machinery and equipment is self-operated by the general public upon payment of a charge to an attendant or a coin collection mechanism. Such term does not include any establishment wherein the laundry services are performed only by employees of the operator of the establishment, nor self-service facilities which are provided for or established in apartment or multiple rental units, as long as such self-service facilities are not open to the general public and are restricted in their availability to the tenants or inhabitants of such apartment or multiple rental units. 
(b)  License required. No person shall install, maintain, operate or conduct a self-service laundry or dry cleaner in the Village without first having obtained a license as provided in this section for each self-service laundry or dry cleaner proposed to be conducted by such person. A separate license shall be required for each self-service laundry or dry cleaning establishment carried on or conducted by any applicant located any place within the Village. 
(c)  License application. Every person seeking a self-service laundry or dry cleaner license shall file a written application, under oath, with the Village manager. The application shall set forth: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, together with the applicant's partners or directors, officers and shareholders, where applicable; 
(2)  The location where the proposed machines are to be used; 
(3)  The nature, conditions and method of operation of such establishment; 
(4)  The equipment and facilities to be used, including the number of self-service dry cleaning and self-service laundry machines; and 
(5)  Such other information as may be requested by the Village manager or corporate authorities. 
(d)  Investigations. 
(1)  The Village manager shall cause an investigation to be made by the director of building and zoning, the fire marshal and other officers and employees to determine whether the proposed business is safe and free from fire and other hazards to the public, and complies with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(2)  If the investigation as set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section shall show proper safety conditions and compliance, the Village manager shall issue a license for such self-service laundry or dry cleaner establishment upon payment of the license fee as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(3)  Upon issuance of the license, the Village manager shall cause periodic inspections to be made, as provided in subsection (d)(1) of this section, to maintain safety conditions and proper compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(e)  License fee. The annual license fee for each self-service dry cleaning or laundry machine shall be as provided in section 30-3. 
(Code 1959, §§ 6.89—6.92)  
Sec. 22-343. - Self-service dry cleaners. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Attendant means any person of adult age, who is either the operator of a self-service laundry or dry cleaner or an authorized employee of such operator. 
Self-service dry cleaner means any dry cleaning establishment which provides dry cleaning facilities which are open and available to the general public. The term does not include any establishment wherein the dry cleaning services are performed by the employees of the operator. 
(b)  Installation, maintenance and operation. 
(1)  All self-service laundries and dry cleaners shall be installed, maintained, operated and conducted in compliance with all ordinances of the Village and all laws, rules or regulations of the State relating thereto, and the operators thereof, in addition thereto, shall: 
a.  Maintain an attendant, while the establishment is open for business, who shall be present on the immediate premises established for the self-service laundry or dry cleaner during all hours of operation of the self-service dry cleaners, and, with respect to the operation of the self-service laundry, between the hours of 9:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m., and such attendant is to be well versed in the operation and maintenance of all units and be qualified in emergency procedures relative to safe operation of all equipment; 
b.  Keep such establishment free from loiterers or any persons having no legitimate or valid purpose for entering or remaining on such premises; 
c.  Keep such establishment clean and free from any accumulation of combustible materials, and remove all accumulations of lint and any other combustible materials from such machinery and equipment, and from the vicinity thereof, and such removal of lint and combustible materials is to be performed at least once every eight hours that the establishment is open for business; 
d.  Install and keep available fire extinguishers, recommended and approved by the fire marshal of the Village, in the premises provided for self-service laundries and dry cleaners. 
(2)  All self-service dry cleaning units shall be housed so that only the front panels will be available to the general public, and units shall be sheathed from floor to ceiling by suitable walls confining the rear panels of such machines in an enclosure for servicing. The rear service area shall be inaccessible to the public and persons other than authorized personnel. 
(3)  All such units shall be equipped with suitable "fail-safe" devices, including interlocking devices, to prevent doors from being opened until after a purge cycle has removed cleaning fluid and vapor concentrations from the unit. 
(4)  Each unit shall be vented to a stack conducting vapors to a point two feet above the nearest position of any roof within 15 feet horizontal to such stack, and be spaced ten feet from any window opening. In addition to vents for units, the room housing the rear panels of the machines shall be ventilated by a suction fan drawing air from a point not more than one foot above the floor and excluding air above the roof. The suction fan used shall be capable of maintaining a negative pressure area within the housed equipment area so as to cause a continuous air movement from the customer area into and out of the equipment area. Such fan shall be in operation at all times that any such unit is in operation. Fluids used in dry cleaning procedures shall be of nonflammable and nonexplosive types or mixtures, and the units shall be designed so that the user of the equipment may not come in contact with the raw cleaning fluid. 
(c)  Inspection. It shall be the duty of the Village manager to inspect or cause to be inspected each and every self-service laundry and dry cleaner at least once every three months for the purpose of determining whether or not the owner or operator thereof is observing and abiding by the rules and regulations of this section. 
(Code 1959, §§ 6.93—6.96)  
Sec. 22-344. - Violations; penalties. 
Any violation of this article or failure to comply with any provision of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 6.97)  
Secs. 22-345—22-370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5113, § 7, adopted on June 17, 2008 repealed article XI, §§ 22-371—22-374 in their entirety. The former article pertained to factories and workshops. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 22-371—22-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5113, § 7, adopted on June 17, 2008 repealed article XII, §§ 22-401—22-404 in their entirety. The former article pertained to garages. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 22-401—22-430. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - RESERVED[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5113, § 7, adopted on June 17, 2008 repealed article XIII, §§ 22-431—22-435 in their entirety. The former article pertained to gasoline service stations. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 22-431—22-470. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - RESERVED[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5113, § 7, adopted on June 17, 2008 repealed article XIV, §§ 22-471—22-476 in their entirety. The former article pertained to heating, air conditioning or refrigeration contractors. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 22-471—22-510. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5113, § 7, adopted on June 17, 2008 repealed article XV, §§ 22-511—22-514 in their entirety. The former article pertained to laundries. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 22-511—22-540. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5113, § 7, adopted on June 17, 2008 repealed article XVI, §§ 22-541—22-544 in their entirety. The former article pertained to laundries. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 22-541—22-570. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - JUNK AND SECONDHAND SHOPS AND JUNK DEALERS 
 
Sec. 22-571. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junk means and includes old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead or other similar basic materials, and rope, bags, rags, waste paper, paper clippings, scraps of woolens and other textiles, rubber, glass and empty bottles, and all articles discarded or no longer used and consisting of any one or more of the materials mentioned in this definition or similar thereto. 
Junk dealer means and includes every person, firm or corporation having an established place of business in the Village, defined in this section as a junkyard or junk store, and engaged in the business of buying, selling, bartering or exchanging any of the things defined in this section as junk, whether dealing at wholesale or at retail. 
Junk peddler means every person who uses a junk wagon as defined in this section and travels from place to place within the Village for the purpose of purchasing junk or makes a business of purchasing junk from any person who desires to sell it and carries it away upon purchasing it. 
Junk store means any store, shop, warehouse or building where junk is bought, sold, bartered or exchanged. 
Junk wagon means every truck, wagon, motor vehicle, pushcart or other vehicle used by a junk dealer or peddler in the collection, disposition or transportation of junk from one place to another within the Village. 
Junkyard means any yard, place or enclosure where junk is bought, sold or exchanged. 
Secondhand dealer and antique dealer mean any person who carries on the business of dealing in the purchase, barter, exchange or sale of secondhand furniture, jewelry, clothing and miscellaneous articles of personal property not defined in this section as junk, whether advertised or offered for sale, barter or exchange as secondhand or antique. 
(Code 1959, § 6.3) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-572. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a junkyard or junk store, or conduct the business of a junk dealer or junk peddler, or operate junk wagons as defined in section 22-571, and it shall be unlawful for all secondhand dealers or antique dealers as defined in section 22-571 to engage in business within the Village, without first having obtained a license for that purpose, as provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6.2)  
Sec. 22-573. - License fees. 
(a)  The annual license fee to conduct the business of a junk dealer, junk store, junkyard, junk peddler, secondhand or antique dealer, or to operate a junk wagon shall be as provided in chapter 30-1. 
(b)  A junk peddler or junk wagon license shall not authorize a junk peddler or a person licensed to operate a junk wagon to operate as a junk dealer, provided that a junk dealer may employ such number of junk peddlers as he may obtain junk vehicle licenses for, but in such case, it shall be necessary for the junk peddler to have a license as such junk peddler in addition to the license for the vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 6.5; Ord. No. 5113, § 7, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 22-574. - Bond. 
Every person licensed under this article shall, at the time of receiving such license, give a bond to the Village, with sufficient sureties to be approved by the Village clerk and approved as to form by the Village attorney, in the penal sum of $1,000.00, conditioned for the due observance of all laws and ordinances of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 6.5.1)  
Secs. 22-575—22-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE THERAPISTS[14] 
Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4734, § 2, adopted Jan. 4, 2005, deleted Art. XVIII in its entirety. Former Art. XVIII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1959, §§ 10.24—10-30, 10.104—10.126. 
 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-601. - Definitions. 
For the purpose this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Compensation means the payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, or gift of money or anything of value. 
Employee means any person who provides any service in connection with the operation of a massage establishment for compensation received from the owner or operator of the massage establishment or from the customers or invitees thereof. 
Health officer means the Village health administrator. 
Licensee means the owner or operator of a massage establishment. 
Massage means a system of structured palpation or movement of the soft tissue of the body. The system may include, but is not limited to, techniques such as effleurage or stroking and gliding, petrissage or kneading, tapotement or percussion, friction, vibration, compression, and stretching activities as they pertain to massage therapy. These techniques may be administered by a licensed massage therapist with or without the aid of lubricants, salt or herbal preparations, hydromassage, thermal massage, or a massage device that mimics or enhances the actions possible by human hands. The purpose of the practice of massage, as licensed under this article, is to enhance the general health and well being of the mind and body of the recipient. Massage does not include the diagnosis of a specific pathology. Massage does not include those acts of physical therapy or therapeutic or corrective measures that are outside the scope of massage therapy practice as defined hereunder. 
Massage establishment means any establishment having a fixed place of business within the Village where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on the art or practice of massage. 
Massage therapist means a person who is licensed by the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation and administers massage for compensation. 
Out-call massage service means a business, the function of which is to engage in or provides massages at a location designated by the customer or client rather than a massage establishment. 
Person means an individual, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
Sexual or genital area means external organs of reproduction, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.104), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-602. - License required for massage establishments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, in or upon any premises within the Village, the operation of a massage establishment as herein defined, without first having obtained a general business license as may be otherwise provided in the Village Municipal Code, and a license for a massage establishment from the Village as provided under this article. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.105), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-603. - License and filing fee for massage establishments. 
(a)  Every applicant seeking a license to maintain, operate, or conduct a massage establishment shall file an application in duplicate with the Village clerk or his designee and shall pay to the Village finance department a non-refundable application fee, plus an annual license fee for a massage establishment, plus the actual cost of processing fingerprints and photographs as outlined in chapter 30-1. 
(b)  Within two days from the filing of an application, the Village clerk or his designee shall refer copies of such application to the building and zoning department, fire department, health department, planning department and police department. These departments shall, within ten days after receipt of the application, inspect the premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment, make an investigation of the applicant as may be appropriate and make written recommendations to the Village clerk or his designee concerning compliance with Village codes and federal or State law, as may be applicable. 
(c)  Within five days of receipt of the recommendation from the aforesaid departments, the Village clerk or his designee shall notify the applicant in writing that the application is granted, denied, or held for further review. The period of such review shall not exceed an additional 15 days unless otherwise agreed by the applicant. Upon the conclusion of such additional review, the Village clerk or his designee shall notify the applicant in writing whether the application is granted or denied. 
(d)  Whenever an application is denied or held for further review, the Village clerk or his designee shall advise the applicant of the reasons for such action. An application shall be denied by the Village clerk or his designee if it is found: 
(1)  That the applicant does not have a business premise from which to operate the massage establishment; or 
(2)  That the operation of the massage establishment, as proposed by the applicant, would not comply with applicable federal, State or local ordinances, rules or regulations, including but not limited to, the building, fire, health or zoning codes of the Village; or 
(3)  That the applicant and/or any other person who will be directly or indirectly engaged in the management and operation of the massage establishment has been convicted of: 
a.  Any offense involving sexual misconduct including, but not limited to, prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, pimping, keeping a place of prostitution, or other offenses involving moral turpitude; or 
b.  A felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation based upon conduct or involvement in the massage establishment business or similar or related business activity within the Village or other city, village or town, within ten years immediately preceding submission of the application or had a massage establishment license denied, revoked or suspended by the Village, or any other jurisdiction within ten years prior to the date of the application. 
(4)  That the applicant has made any material misstatement in the application for a license. 
(5)  That applicant has failed or refused to provide within three days after request any information relevant to the review of the application, or the applicant refuses or fails to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application, or the applicant refuses to submit to or cooperate with any inspection required by this article. 
(e)  The failure or refusal to cooperate with the review process described in subsection (d)(5) above constitutes an admission by the applicant that the applicant is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.106), 1-4-2005; Ord. No. 5113, § 7, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 22-604. - Review by Village manager. 
The denial by the Village clerk or his designee with regard to the issuance of any license under this article shall be reviewable by the Village manager upon the written request of the applicant filed with the village manager within ten days of such denial. the village manager shall conduct a hearing within ten days after receipt of a request for same by the applicant appealing the decision of the village clerk or his designee. At the hearing, the applicant may present any evidence relevant to the denial. The decision of the Village manager shall be provided in writing to the applicant not more than 15 days after conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the Village manager upon such hearing shall be a final decision subject to review under the provisions of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.107), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-605. - Administrative procedure act. 
The Illinois Administrative Procedure Act is hereby expressly adopted and incorporated herein as if all of the provisions of that Act were included in this article, except that the provision of subsection (d) of Section 10-65 of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act that provides that at hearings the licensee has the right to show compliance with all lawful requirements for retention, continuation, or renewal of the license is specifically excluded. For the purposes of this article the notice required under Section 10-25 of the Administrative Procedure Act is deemed sufficient when mailed to the last known address of any party to the administrative review proceedings, including, the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.108), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-606. - Massage establishment license application. 
(a)  The application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered, the place of business and facilities therefor, the proposed number of employees, hours of operation, the business name, address and telephone number of the establishment, and other relevant matters to the operation of business as may be required on the application. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing, all applicants for a license, including any individual person, any partner of a partnership applicant, or any officer or director of a corporate applicant and any stockholder holding more than seven percent of the shares of stock of a corporate applicant or limited liability company, shall furnish, under oath as may be applicable, the following information: 
(1)  Name, current residence address, and current telephone number. 
(2)  Written proof that the person making application, and all other persons involved, directly or indirectly, in the massage establishment business, with the exception of massage therapist(s) licensed by the department of professional regulation, are at least 21 years of age. 
(3)  All residential addresses for the past three years. 
(4)  Date of birth, height, weight, color of eyes and hair. 
(5)  Social Security number. 
(6)  Driver's license number. 
(7)  The business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(8)  The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another Village, city or State under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  All criminal or ordinance violation convictions in any circuit court or by administrative proceedings, forfeitures of bond, and pleadings of nolo contendere on all charges, except minor traffic violations. 
(10)  The fingerprints and photograph of the applicant. However, if the applicant is a corporation or a limited liability company, then the fingerprints and photographs of any officer or director of the corporate applicant and of any shareholders holding more than seven percent of the shares of stock of the corporate applicant, or if the applicant is a limited liability company, then the fingerprints and photographs of the managers and directors of the limited liability company, and fingerprints and photographs of the manager of the massage establishment. 
(11)  If the applicant is a corporation, or limited liability company, a certified copy of its articles of incorporation and/or authorization to do business in the State of Illinois, certified not less than 30 days prior to the date of application, shall be attached to the application. 
(12)  The applicant's tax identification number. 
(13)  The current address and current telephone number of the corporation, limited liability company or partnership. 
(14)  A statement as to whether the funding source for opening the massage establishment is the applicant, or a State or federally regulated financial institution or some other person or entity. If the funding source is other than the applicant or a State or federally regulated financial institution, the name, current address, and current telephone number of the funding source shall be supplied. 
(15)  The current name, current address, and current telephone number of the landlord or property owner of the property from which the massage establishment business will be conducted. 
(16)  A copy of a lease for the premises from which the massage establishment will be operated shall be provided, along with the application. If the application is approved and a license is authorized to be issued, the applicant shall provide the Village clerk with a copy of a fully executed lease for the massage establishment at the time the license is issued. 
(c)  The application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall state the current name(s), current address(es), and current telephone number(s) of the individual(s) who will be the establishment's licensed massage therapist(s). Said application shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the massage therapist(s) license(s). No massage establishment license will be issued until all requirements of this section have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.109), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-607. - Issuance of massage establishment license. 
(a)  A massage establishment license shall be issued to any applicant who is in compliance with all provisions required under this article. 
(b)  Every massage establishment license issued pursuant to this article shall be issued for the balance of the calendar year and shall expire on December 31 of the same year, unless sooner suspended or revoked. No proration of fees shall be made. 
(c)  The license holder of the massage establishment shall not allow independent contractors to use or work on the premises as massage therapists. Only employees of the license holder shall work on the premises and only licensed massage therapists employed by the license holder shall be authorized to provide massages within the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.110), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-608. - Revocation or suspension of massage establishment license. 
(a)  Any license issued for a massage establishment may be suspended for not more than ten days, or revoked by the Village clerk or his designee upon written notice to the license holder, which notice shall state a basis for the suspension or revocation. The license holder may request a hearing in writing within ten days of receipt of the notice from the Village manager or his designee. Within ten days from receipt of a demand for hearing, the Village manager or his designee shall conduct the hearing in any case where any of the provisions of this article are violated, or any employee of the licensee, including a licensed massage therapist, is engaged in any conduct at licensee's place of business which violates any of the provisions of this article or any State law, or any Village ordinance or regulation, or where any applicant has made a misstatement on an application for a license under this article or in any case where the licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized police officer or inspector of the Village to inspect the premises or the operations therein. Such license may also be suspended or revoked by the Village manager, upon the recommendations of the Village health administrator that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard for the public health or health of patrons or customers or without due regard to proper sanitation or hygiene. The licensee shall be permitted to present any relevant evidence bearing on the notice. The decision of the Village manager shall be in writing and shall be final subject to review under the applicable provisions of the Illinois Administrative Procedure Act. The decision shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the license holder as appears on the application for massage establishment license within 15 days after the hearing. 
(b)  Any violation of this article by any employee of the licensee, including a licensed massage therapist, shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.111), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-609. - Requirement of employing licensed massage therapist. 
It shall be unlawful to engage in, conduct, operate, carry on or permit to be engaged in, conducted, operated or carried on, in or upon any premises in the Village, the business of a massage establishment without having at least one licensed massage therapist employed by the license holder of the massage establishment. The licensed massage therapist may also be the holder of the massage establishment license. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.112), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-610. - Massage therapist license. 
Any person, including an applicant for a massage establishment license, who engages in the practice of massage as herein defined, shall be licensed by the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.113), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-611. - Establishment location. 
Any location, structure, building or premises, of any kind or nature, situated within the municipal boundaries of the Village that is utilized for the operation of a massage establishment, from which a massage establishment license or massage therapist's license is revoked (the "revoked establishment") for violation of any regulation as set forth in this article, shall not thereafter be permitted to be utilized for the operation of a massage establishment by the licensee of the revoked establishment, or any massage therapist employed by the licensee of the revoked establishment, or by any other massage establishment or massage therapist who had an affiliation, either as a partner, limited partner, shareholder, employee, agent, or any other financial interest, or any other indicia of ownership in the revoked establishment. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.114), 1-4-2005)  
Secs. 22-612—22-630. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FACILITIES AND OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 22-631. - Necessary massage establishment facilities. 
(a)  No massage establishment shall be issued a license or be operated, established or maintained in the Village unless an inspection by the Village health administrator and/or other Village inspectors indicates that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof materials and shall be installed in accordance with the codes of the Village, Cook County and/or State of Illinois, as may be applicable. 
(2)  All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas and floor shall have surfaces, which may be readily disinfected and cleaned. They shall be covered with single-service towels when in use. 
(3)  Adequate bathing, dressing and locker facilities shall be provided for the patrons to be served at any given time. In the event male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing, locker and massage room facilities shall be provided. 
(4)  The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use by each patron. 
(5)  Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled linens, towels materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage area. Soiled linens and towels shall not be reused until they have been washed and sanitized. 
(6)  Toilet facilities specifically designated for massage establishment use only shall be provided in convenient locations within or immediately adjacent to the premises within the same structure in which the premises are located. When employees and patrons of different genders are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each gender. A single water closet for each gender shall be provided for each 20 or more employees or patrons of that gender on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated as to the gender accommodated therein. 
(7)  Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in the toilet room(s). At least one lavatory shall be provided outside of the toilet facilities and conveniently located for the employees to wash their hands prior to treating a client. Lavatories or washbasins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and a dispenser with sanitary towels. 
(8)  The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial services. 
(9)  A stationary or portable professional massage table with appropriate headrest. 
(10)  A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual lockers for each employee and client. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing. 
(11)  The licensee, as a condition of issuance of the massage establishment license, consents to walk-through inspections by authorized Village employees, without notice, at any time during business hours. 
(b)  The health administrator shall certify that the proposed massage establishment complies with all the requirements of this article and shall send such certificate of compliance to the Village manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.115), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-632. - Operating requirements for persons licensed by the Village to operate massage establishments. 
(a)  Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  The sexual or genital areas of all customers shall be covered at all times when in the presence of an employee. No employee shall touch or fondle in any manner or massage the sexual or genital area of any massage therapist or customer. Any person, employee or customer violating these rules shall be subject to prosecution for the violations. 
(c)  All employees, including licensed massage therapists, shall be clean and fully covered in clean clothing from a point not to exceed four inches above the center of the kneecap to the base of the neck by opaque material, excluding the arms and hands. 
(d)  All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(e)  The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by sheets, cloths or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or licensed massage therapist. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment, to place his or her hand upon, or to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area of any other person. 
(g)  No licensed massage therapist, employee or operator shall perform, offer, or agree to perform any act which would require the touching of a patron's sexual or genital area. 
(h)  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartment, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned after each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry. 
(i)  Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets and shall be dispensed in unit doses so that said bulk containers are not contaminated between clients. 
(j)  Eating and/or drinking in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals, except for "service animals" as defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), shall not be permitted in the massage work areas. 
(k)  No licensed massage therapist shall administer a massage to a patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption unless a physician duly licensed by the State certifies in writing that such person may be safely massaged, prescribing the conditions thereof. 
(l)  Each licensed massage therapist shall wash his or her hands in hot running water, using a proper soap disinfectant before administering a massage to each patron. 
(m)  Massage may be practiced only by a licensed massage therapist licensed in conformance with the provisions of the Illinois Massage Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1, et seq. ) and only for the purpose of physical fitness, relaxation, or medical therapy. The practice of massage for any other purpose is prohibited. 
(n)  The hours of operation for massage establishments shall be limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(o)  The doors to the individual massage rooms shall not be equipped with any locking device and shall not be blocked or obstructed from either side. 
(p)  Every massage establishment shall have a manager on duty on the premises, during all hours of operation, who shall be familiar with and responsible for compliance with all of the provisions of this article. 
(q)  Each massage establishment shall have at least one person who has a valid massage therapist license on the premises at all times that the establishment is open for massage therapy activities. 
(r)  A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage therapy establishment. The sign must comply with all applicable Village regulations. 
(s)  Records of treatment: All massage establishments and out-call massage services shall maintain a client registration file, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  First, middle and last name of the client; 
(2)  Signature of the client; 
(3)  Complete address of the client; 
(4)  Date and time of the treatment; 
(5)  First, middle and last name of the massage therapist who administered the massage therapy; and 
(6)  If massage administered as an out-call service, the address of the location where the service was administered. 
These records shall be used only to ensure and enforce compliance with this article and other applicable laws and shall be otherwise confidential. Said records shall be open to inspection by Village of Glenview officials charged with the enforcement of these provisions. These records shall be kept for a period of two years. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.116), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-633. - Out-call massage service and registration. 
A licensed massage therapist may provide any of the services listed in this article only at a permanent residence or place of business, except a place of business that is in the business of providing temporary residence, such as a hotel or motel. No "out-call massage service" may be operated other than by a licensed massage therapist. All massages performed by an "out-call massage service" must be performed in the manner prescribed in this article, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.117), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-634. - Inspection of massage establishments. 
The Village manager or his designee, shall from time to time, and at least twice a year, make an inspection of each massage establishment granted a license under the provision of this article for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this article are complied with. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.118), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-635. - Employment age restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of any massage establishment to employ any person in the massage establishment who is not at least 21 years of age, with the exception of any licensed massage therapist whose age is regulated by the Illinois Massage Licensing Act. Proof of age shall be established by one or more of the following: (i) a current motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth; (ii) a valid identification card issued by the State of Illinois which bears the applicant's photograph and date of birth; (iii) a current passport. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.119), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-636. - Display and transfer of license. 
Every licensee shall display a valid license for the establishment and for any massage therapist employed by the massage establishment in a conspicuous place within the massage establishment so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. No license for the operation of a massage establishment issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be transferable from one person or entity to another person or entity. Upon the sale or transfer of an interest greater than 50 percent in a massage business, a license shall become null and void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to operate or maintain the establishment and shall include a release of interest statement from the previous licensee and a signed lease or rental agreement for the establishment. 
Upon the death or physical incapacity of the licensee, the massage establishment may continue in business for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days, to allow for an orderly transfer of the license. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.120), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-637. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to other units of government, hospitals, nursing homes, sanitaria, or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the State or persons working under the direction of any such persons or in any such establishments; nor shall this article apply to barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the State; nor shall this article apply to "out-call massage" of fully clothed clientele. Massage therapists who are exempt shall register with the Village manager's office within 60 days after passage of this article and thereafter annually on or before December 31. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.121), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-638. - Public nuisance. 
Any building used as a massage establishment in violation of this article with the intentional knowing, reckless or negligent permission of the owner thereof, or the agent of the owner managing the building, together with all fixtures and other property used in violation of this article are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.122), 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 22-639. - Penalty. 
Every person, except those who are specifically exempted by this article, whether acting as an individual, operator, owner, employee of the owner, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, employee, or operator, or acting as a participant or working in any way, who gives massages without first having obtained a license from the State of Illinois for massage therapist or operates a massage establishment without first obtaining a business license and paying a massage establishment license fee, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense, and every day that such violation is permitted to continue, shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4734, § 2(10.123), 1-4-2005)  
Secs. 22-640—22-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - PAWNBROKERS 
 
Sec. 22-701. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pawnbroker means every individual or business entity which lends money on the deposit or pledge of physically delivered personal property, other than property, the ownership of which is subject to a legal dispute, securities, printed evidence of indebtedness or printed evidence of ownership of the personal property, or who deals in the purchase of such property on the condition of selling the property back again at a stipulated price. The business of a pawnbroker does not include the lending of money on deposit or pledge of title to property. 
(Code 1959, § 10.24) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 210 ILCS 510/1.  
Sec. 22-702. - License required; transferability; investigation; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of pawnbroker without having first secured a license therefor. Such license shall not be transferable. 
(b)  Application for a pawnbroker's license and the issuance thereof shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  An investigation shall be made with respect to the application. No license shall be issued to an applicant if the applicant, or partners, shareholders or directors of the applicant, have been convicted of receiving stolen goods, burglary, robbery, larceny or other similar crime or misdemeanor. 
(d)  The annual fee to be paid for a pawnbroker's license shall be as provided chapter 30-1. 
(Code 1959, § 10.25; Ord. No. 5113, § 7, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 22-703. - Bond; lost and stolen goods. 
(a)  Every person licensed under this article shall, at the time of receiving such license, give a bond as a pawnbroker, with two sufficient sureties to be approved by the Village manager, in the penal sum of $1,000.00, conditioned for the due observance of all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police department any article pledged with him, or which it is sought to pledge with him, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost. 
(Code 1959, § 10.26)  
Sec. 22-704. - Record of transaction. 
Every pawnbroker shall keep a permanent record book in which shall be recorded and preserved an accurate account and description of the goods, articles or things sold, pawned or pledged, the amount of money loaned thereon, the time of pledging the goods, articles or things, the rate of interest to be paid on such loan and the name and residence of the person selling, pawning or pledging the goods, articles or things. No entry made in such book shall be changed, erased, obliterated or defaced. 
(Code 1959, § 10.27)  
Sec. 22-705. - Memorandum of transaction. 
Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of each loan, deliver to the person pawning or pledging any goods, articles or things, a memorandum signed by him, containing the substance of the entry required by section 22-704 to be made in his book, and no charge shall be made or received by any pawnbroker for any such memorandum. 
(Code 1959, § 10.28)  
Sec. 22-706. - Books and pledges open to inspection. 
The record book referred to in section 22-704, as well as every article or other thing of value pawned or pledged, shall at all reasonable times be available to inspection by any Village official. 
(Code 1959, § 10.29)  
Secs. 22-707—22-740. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - VIDEO GAMING[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5247, § 2, adopted Aug. 18, 2009, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as §§ 22-721—22-725. In order to maintain the numbering system of this Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been designated as §§ 22-741—22-745. 
 
Sec. 22-741. - Statement of purpose. 
The State of Illinois enacted the Video Gaming Act, Public Act 096-0034 (the "Act"), which permits certain establishments to install and operate video gaming terminals (as defined herein). The Act also provides that a municipality may pass an ordinance prohibiting video gaming within its corporate limits. The Village's corporate authorities have determined that it is in the best interests of the Village's citizens to prohibit video gaming within the Village's corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 5247, § 2, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-742. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Distributor means an individual, partnership, or corporation licensed under the Act to buy, sell, lease, or distribute video gaming terminals or major components or parts of video gaming terminals to or from terminal operators. 
Licensed establishment means any licensed retail establishment where alcoholic liquor is drawn, poured, mixed, or otherwise served for consumption on the premises. 
Licensed fraternal establishment means the location where a qualified fraternal organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal organization regularly meets. 
Licensed truck stop establishment means a facility that is at least a three-acre facility with a convenience store and with separate diesel islands for fueling commercial motor vehicles and parking spaces for commercial motor vehicles as defined in Section 18b-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
Licensed veterans establishment means the location where a qualified veterans organization that derives its charter from a national veterans organization regularly meets. 
Manufacturer means an individual, partnership, or corporation that is licensed under the Act and that manufactures or assembles video gaming terminals. 
Supplier means an individual, partnership, or corporation that is licensed under the Act to supply major components or parts to video gaming terminals to licensed terminal operators. 
Terminal operator means an individual, partnership or corporation that is licensed under the Act and that owns, services, and maintains video gaming terminals for placement in licensed establishments, licensed fraternal establishments, or licensed veterans establishments. 
Video gaming terminal means any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 5247, § 2, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-743. - Activities prohibited. 
Video gaming is hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the Village. The operation or installation of video gaming terminals by any licensed establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, licensed veterans establishment and/or any truck stop establishment, or by any other entity, located within the corporate limits of the Village is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 5247, § 2, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-744. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in subsection (b), as well as the general penalty provided in section 1-16. 
(b)  In addition to the general penalty set forth above, the liquor commissioner may suspend or revoke any liquor licensee's license for any violation of any provision of this article, or for any violation of the Act or other any State law pertaining to video gaming. 
(Ord. No. 5247, § 2, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-745. - Activities not prohibited. 
Nothing in this article is intended to prohibit distributors, manufacturers or suppliers from distributing, manufacturing or supplying video gaming terminals for use and/or operation outside of the corporate limits of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5247, § 2, 8-18-2009)  
Sec. 22-746. - Electronic sweepstakes machines prohibited. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Electronic machine or device means a mechanically, electrically or electronically operated machine or device, that is owned, leased or otherwise possessed by a sweepstakes sponsor or promoter, or any of the sweepstakes sponsor's or promoter's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes entrant, that uses energy, and that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. 
Enter or entry means the act or process by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes. 
Entertaining display means visual information capable of being seen by a sweepstakes entrant that takes the form of actual game play or simulated game play of games, including, but not limited to, a poker game or any other kind of playing card game; a bingo game; a craps game; a keno game; a lotto game; an eight-liner game; a pot-of-gold game; a game based on or involving the random or chance matching of different pictures, words, numbers or symbols no dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player; a casino or gambling game; and any other video game the outcome of which is not in whole or in part dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player that is played in the course of revealing a prize as a result of an entry into a sweepstakes. 
Prize means any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, or anything else of value, which may be transferred to a person, whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize. 
Sweepstakes means any game, advertising scheme or plan, or other promotion, which, with or without payment of any consideration, a person may enter to win or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon an element of chance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or place into operation, an electronic machine or device for the following purposes: 
(1)  To conduct a sweepstakes through the use of an entertainment display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize; or 
(2)  To promote a sweepstakes that is conducted through the use of an entertainment display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize. 
(Ord. No. 6251, § 2, 4-16-2019)  
Secs. 22-747—22-770. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI. - RAFFLES 
 
Sec. 22-771. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Business means a voluntary organization composted of individuals and businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic interests of a community. 
Charitable organization means an organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. 
Educational organization means an organization or institution organized and operated to provide systemic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning. In addition, recognized and duly constituted clubs and service organizations that operate within a school or institution of learning, as intended by this definition, shall also be considered as part of the "educational organization." 
Fraternal organization means an organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of the members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the government. 
Labor organization means an organization comprised of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations. 
Net proceeds means the gross receipts from the conduct of a raffle, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees, fidelity bond premiums and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle. 
Nonprofit organization means an organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the operation. 
Raffle means a form of lottery, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-2(b), conducted by an organization licensed under this article in which: 
(1)  The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance; or 
(2)  The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connecting with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest. 
Religious organization means any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship. 
Veterans' organization means an organization or association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. 
(Ord. No. 6252, § 2, 4-16-19)  
Sec. 22-772. - Raffle license—Required—Regulations. 
(a)  License Required. No person, firm or corporation, shall conduct a raffle in a permanent location or facility within the corporate boundaries of the Village without first having obtained a license pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Applications. An application for a raffle license shall be made in writing, on a form furnished by the Village, through the Village Clerk's office at least 30 days prior to the first day intended for sale of raffle chances. The license and application for license must specify the area or areas within the Village in which the raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which raffles or chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will be determined. 
(c)  Sworn statement. The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and the secretary of the organization. 
(d)  Validity of license. Each such license shall be valid for only one raffle or for a specific number of raffles to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed one year; further such license may be suspended or revoked by the Village Board in the event of violation of the terms of this article or of any applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 6252, § 2, 4-16-19)  
Sec. 22-773. - Persons eligible. 
(a)  Raffle licenses shall be issued only to bona-fide nonprofit religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations which have been in active existence continuously in the state for a period of five consecutive years immediately before making application for a license and which had during that entire five-year period a bona-fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives. The Village Board may, in its sole discretion, waive the five-year requirement for a nonprofit fundraising organization that the Village determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of a specific illness, disability, accident or disaster. 
(b)  Eligibility. The following are ineligible for any license under this article: 
(1)  Any person who has been convicted of a felony; 
(2)  Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter; 
(3)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in this subsection has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed, whether compensated or not; or 
(5)  Any organization in which a person defined in this subsection is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 6252, § 2, 4-16-19)  
Sec. 22-774. - Approval and issuance. 
The Village shall, within 30 days, evaluate and either approve or disapprove of the application. Upon satisfaction of all requirements of this article, the Village Manager, acting on behalf of the Village Board, shall issue a raffle license to the applicant organization. 
(Ord. No. 6252, § 2, 4-16-19)  
Sec. 22-775. - General conduct of raffles. 
All raffles licensed under this paragraph shall be conducted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(a)  The aggregate retail value of all prizes in any raffle shall not exceed $1,000,000.00. 
(b)  The maximum retail value of any one prize in any raffle shall not exceed $500,000.00. 
(c)  The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold shall not exceed $200.00. 
(d)  No chances may be sold, or tickets delivered, for any raffle more than 180 days prior to the date set for the determination of the winning chance. 
(e)  Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license. 
(f)  The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization licensed to conduct such raffle. 
(g)  No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(h)  No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle. 
(i)  No person under the age of 18 may participate in the conduct of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where the winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 6252, § 2, 4-16-19)  
Sec. 22-776. - Records. 
Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep such records and shall handle the receipts from the operations of such raffles as required in accordance with applicable state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 6252, § 2, 4-16-19)  
Sec. 22-777. - Raffles manager—Bond. 
All operations of and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization. The manager or operator of the raffle must be a bona fide member of the organization holding the license for such a raffle and may not receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle. The manager shall obtain a fidelity bond in the sum of the total value of the prizes to be awarded. The terms of the bond shall provide that notice be given in writing to the Village 30 days prior to its cancellation. The Village may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the license issued to an organization pursuant to this article; provided, that a license containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the members of the licensed organization. 
(Ord. No. 6252, § 2, 4-16-19)  
Sec. 22-778. - Revocation and suspension. 
(a)  The Village may deny, suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this article if it determines that: 
(1)  The proposed or actual operation of the raffle will, or is such as to, constitute a public nuisance, or to endanger public peace, health, safety or welfare; 
(2)  The raffle application contains any false, fraudulent, or misleading statement; or 
(3)  The applicant, licensee, or any officer or director of the applicant or licensee has violated this article, or any other ordinance in the Village. 
(b)  If any license issued pursuant to this article is revoked, the licensee shall immediately refund all monies collected to the persons who purchased tickets or chances in the raffle authorized by the revoked license. 
(Ord. No. 6252, § 2, 4-16-19)  
Sec. 22-779. - Violations. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16 for each offense, and the license provided for in this article may be revoked by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 6252, § 2, 4-16-19)  
Sec. 22-800. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXII. - CONTRACTORS 
 
Sec. 22-801. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Demolition contractor means an individual or firm, responsible for the site preparation, demolition, and hauling of any structure, and all related equipment and debris. 
Electrical contractor means an individual or firm, responsible for the design, installation, maintenance, or repair of electrical service, or distribution systems, and all related fixtures and equipment within a building, or on the premises serving a building. 
General contractor means an individual or firm, responsible for conducting or supervising any and all construction-related activities on any project which requires the use of two or more building trades. 
Landscape contractor means an individual or firm responsible for the design, installation, maintenance, repair, transportation, or collection of residential or commercial landscape, and all related lawn or tree care services. All persons engaged in business as a landscape contractor, shall possess a fully executed, certified copy of the Illinois Department of Agriculture's Emerald Ash Borer Quarantine Zone Compliance Agreement. 
Mechanical contractor means an individual or firm, responsible for the design, installation, maintenance, or repair of heating, ventilation, and cooling systems, and all related equipment or fixtures within a building, or on the premises serving a building. 
Subcontractor means any contractor not specifically defined [above] that is responsible for an individual trade or type of construction, and may or may not be supervised by a general contractor. 
(Ord. No. 4549, § 3(A), 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 4985, § 2, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 5430, § 2, 3-1-2011) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-802. - License required. 
No person shall engage in the business as a general contractor or demolition contractor as referenced in section 22-801 unless such person holds a valid contractor's license as a qualified contractor issued by the Village development department. 
(Ord. No. 4549, § 3(B), 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 4985, § 3, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 5430, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 6083, § 12, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 22-803. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any contractor as defined by this section, operating within the Village, to do or fail to do any one or more of the following: 
(1)  To contract to do any work outside the scope of operations as defined under the particular classification of contractor for which the contractor is licensed. 
(2)  To depart from or disregard, in any material respect, the plan or specifications of a construction job without prior approval of the director of development or his/her designee. 
(3)  To aid or abet any person in evading the provisions of this section or allow one's license to be used by any person or act as an agent, partner, or associate of any person with the intent to evade the provisions of this section. 
(4)  To abandon without legal excuse construction projects or operations engaged in or under contract as a contractor. 
(5)  To operate a landscape business without having in his/her possession a fully executed, certified copy of the Illinois Department of Agriculture's Emerald Ash Borer Quarantine Zone Compliance Agreement. 
(b)  Any contractor who shall fail to correct any defect in his work, owes money to the village, has an outstanding violation, or shall fail to complete a job, after having been duly notified by the director of development or his/her designee, shall not receive any further permits until such job has been completed or such defect has been corrected. In any case in which any contractor shall violate this article more than three times in any one calendar year in regard to permit matters or the orders of the director of development or his/her designee, the license of such person or firm may be suspended or revoked in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4549, § 3(C), 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 4985, § 4, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 5430, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 6083, § 13, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 22-804. - License fee. 
A contractor's license fee shall be assessed as outlined in section 30-1 for general contractors and demolition contractors . 
(Ord. No. 5113, § 7, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 5430, § 2, 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 6083, § 14, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 22-805. - Certificates of insurance and surety bonds. 
(a)  Insurance. With every application for permit, each general contractor and demolition contractor shall file a certificate of insurance with the clerk of the Village, with good and sufficient coverage to indemnify the contractor, the property owner, and the Village for damages sustained on account of the failure of such applicant to perform the work contracted for in accordance with the provisions and requirements of the Village, damage to property, accidental injury, or other such damages. The filing of the certificate shall be required prior to the issuance of the permit. On behalf of the property owner, the general contractor shall be responsible for confirming and retaining proof of insurance coverages (including both liability and workman's compensation, as applicable) associated with all other contractors and subcontractors performing work upon a given property or in association with permits related to a given property. 
(b)  Bonding. With every application for permit, each general contractor and demolition contractor shall file an indemnity bond with the clerk of the Village, with good and sufficient surety in the final sum of $25,000.00. Such bond shall be payable to the Village for the use of any person with whom such applicant shall thereinafter contract to do work, to indemnify any such person for damages sustained on account of the failure of such applicant to perform the work contracted for in accordance with the provisions and requirements of the Village. The filing of the bond shall be required prior to the issuance of the permit. The property owner shall be responsible for confirming indemnity bonds associated with all other contractors and subcontractors performing work upon their property or in association with permits related to their property. 
(Ord. No. 6083, § 1, 6-8-2017)  
Secs. 22-806—22-823. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXIII. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 22-824. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article XXIII to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the Village, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the Village. The provisions of this article XXIII have neither the purpose nor intent of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the purpose nor intent of this article XXIII to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of permissible sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the purpose nor intent of this article XXIII to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene or illegal material. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-825. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases in italic typeface, when used in this article XXIII, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section 22-825, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words, terms and phrases in this section 22-825 within quotation marks are defined in this section. 
Adult arcade means any place to which a "patron" is permitted or invited where one or more video booths and/or live viewing booths are available to "patrons" where the images shown and/or live entertainment presented are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in areas of the establishment open to "patrons" in a "state of nudity" or "state of semi-nudity" so as to expose to view "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Any live entertainment, exhibition, performance or dance by persons whose entertainment, exhibition, performance or dance is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  "Adult media." 
Adult media means magazines, books, photographic reproductions, videotapes, movies, slides, compact discs in any format (e.g., cd-rom, cd-r, cd-rw), digital video discs in any format (e.g., dvd), other devices used to reproduce or record computer images, or other print, video, film, electronic, computer-based, analog or digital media characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult media store means an establishment that rents and/or sells "adult media" and that meets any of the following tests: 
(1)  More than ten percent of the "gross public floor area" is devoted to "adult media"; or 
(2)  More than ten percent of the "stock in trade" consists of "adult media"; or 
(3)  A media store which advertises or holds itself out in any way as a "sexually oriented business" by use of such terms as "X-rated," "XXX," "adult," "sex," "nude" or otherwise advertises or holds itself out as a "sexually oriented business." 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment occupying a building or portion of a building (including any portion of a building which contains more than 150 square feet) where, for the payment of money or the provision of any other form of consideration paid, directly or indirectly, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVDs, slides or similar photographic reproductions, or other projected images are regularly shown, if such establishment as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, regardless of whether the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or if, as a prevailing practice, the films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVDs, slides or similar photographic reproductions, or other projected images presently are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult novelty store means a business offering goods for sale or rent and that meets any of the following tests: 
(1)  More than ten percent of the "stock in trade" of the business consists of "sexually oriented novelties or toys" and more than ten percent of the "gross public floor area" of the business is devoted to the display of "sexually oriented novelties or toys"; or 
(2)  It offers for sale items from any two of the following categories: (i) "adult media," (ii) "sexually oriented novelties or toys," or (iii) other items marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices, and the combination of such items constitutes more than ten percent of the "stock in trade" of the business and occupies more than ten percent of the "gross public floor area" of the business; or 
(3)  Advertises or holds itself out in any way as a "sexually oriented business" by use of such terms as "sex toys," "X-rated," "XXX," "adult," "sex," "nude" or otherwise advertises or holds itself out as a "sexually oriented business." 
An "adult novelty store" shall not include any establishment which, as a substantial portion of its business, offers for sale or rental to persons employed in the medical, legal or education professions anatomical models, including representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or other models, displays and exhibits produced and marketed primarily for use in the practice of medicine or law or for use by an educational institution. 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment that as a substantial or significant portion of its business regularly features persons who appear in a "state of nudity" or "semi-nudity," live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities," or live entertainment of an erotic nature that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities." 
Employee means any person receiving compensation, directly or indirectly, or other consideration, in any form, for working at, volunteering for, or otherwise assisting a licensee of a "sexually oriented business" in the operation and maintenance of such business. 
Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  A "sexually oriented business"; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a "sexually oriented business," to any "sexually oriented business"; 
(3)  The addition of a "sexually oriented business" to an existing business, whether or not a "sexually oriented business"; or 
(4)  The relocation of any "sexually oriented business." 
Gross public floor area means the total area of the building accessible or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion picture theaters, motion picture arcades, service areas, behind-computer areas, storage areas visible from such other areas, restrooms (whether or not labeled "public"), areas used for cabarets or similar shows (including stage areas), plus aisles, hallways and entryways serving such areas. 
Licensee means any individual at least 18 years of age who is the holder of a "sexually oriented business license." 
Minor means a person under the age of 18 years. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears "semi-nude" or who displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay and/or provide, directly or indirectly, money or any other form of consideration. "Nude model studio" shall not include: 
(1)  A proprietary school licensed by the State of Illinois, or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; 
(2)  A private college or university that offers educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  An establishment (i) holding classes in a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a "semi-nude" person is available for viewing, (ii) where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class, and (iii) where no more than one "semi-nude" model is on the premises at any one time. 
Nudity or state of nudity or nude means exposing to view, with less than a fully opaque covering, the genitals, pubic area, vulva, perineum, anus, anal cleft, cleavage or pubic hair; exposing to view, with less than a fully opaque covering, any portion of the areola of the female breast; exposing to view male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque covering; or exposing to view any device, consume or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates any of these anatomical areas. 
Patron is any individual aged 18 years or older present in or at any sexually oriented business who is not a "licensee" or "employee" of such sexually oriented business. This definition shall not include individuals delivering goods, materials (other than "adult media"), food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs, to the "establishment." 
Semi-nudity or semi-nude condition or semi-nude means exposing to view, with less than a fully opaque covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or any portion of the perineum, anus, anal cleft or pubic hair. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other clothing, provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Sexual encounter center means a commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is "semi-nude." 
"Sexual encounter center" shall not include: 
(1)  Any establishment or professional practice operated or conducted by a medical practitioner, physical therapist or rehabilitation therapist, if such person is licensed by and/or registered with the State of Illinois, while practicing within the scope of such license and/or registration and according to the standards and ethics of such profession, or any person acting under the supervision of a duly licensed and/or registered medical practitioner, physical therapist or rehabilitation therapist; or 
(2)  Any establishment or professional practice operated or conducted by a health care professional licensed in the State of Illinois while practicing within the scope of such license and according to the standards and ethics of such professional, or of any person acting under the supervision of a duly licensed health care professional. 
Sexually oriented business means an "adult arcade," an "adult cabaret," an "adult media store," an "adult motion picture theater," an "adult novelty store," an "adult theater," a "nude model studio" or a "sexual encounter center." 
Sexually oriented business license means a license issued by the Village for a "sexually oriented business" pursuant to the provisions of this article XXIII. 
Sexually oriented novelties or toys means instruments, devices or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or designed and marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs or for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(2)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, perineum, anus, anal cleft or pubic hair, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses: 
(1)  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; 
(2)  Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; 
(3)  Sexual performance by a child; 
(4)  Possession or distribution of child pornography; 
(5)  Public lewdness; 
(6)  Indecent exposure; 
(7)  Indecency with a child; 
(8)  Engaging in organized criminal activity; 
(9)  Sexual assault; 
(10)  Molestation of a child; 
(11)  Gambling; 
(12)  Distribution of a controlled substance; or 
(13)  Any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries, for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
Specified sexual activities mean any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; or 
(2)  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including, but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(3)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in "specified anatomical areas" definition, subsections (1) and (2) above. 
Stock in trade means any individual item displayed in areas open to the public and offered for viewing, sale or rental in an "establishment." 
Straddle dance means the use by any person, including specifically, but without limitation, an "employee" of a "sexually oriented business," of any part of his or her body to touch the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of any patron or other "employee" of a "sexually oriented business," or the touching of the genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of any person in a "sexually oriented business" by a patron or other "employee" of a "sexually oriented business." Conduct shall be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether the touch or touching occurs while the person is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical areas. Conduct shall be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether the touch or touching is direct or through a medium. Conduct commonly referred to by the slang terms "lap dance," "table dance" and "face dance" shall be included within this definition of "straddle dance." 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than five percent, as the floor area exists on the date this article takes effect. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-826. - Classification. 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult cabarets; 
(3)  Adult media stores; 
(4)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(5)  Adult novelty stores; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Nude model studios; and 
(8)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-827. - Findings. 
The Village Board has received and reviewed substantial evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses on the community presented at a hearing and in reports made available to the Village Board, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and North Avenue Novelties, Incorporated v. City of Chicago, 88 F3d 441 (7thh Cir.), and on studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona, Minneapolis, Minnesota, Houston, Texas, Indianapolis, Indiana, Amarillo, Texas, Garden Grove, California, Los Angeles, California, Whittier, California, Austin, Texas, Seattle, Washington, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, Cleveland, Ohio, and Beaumont, Texas, and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota). Based on such information, the Village Board finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities, such as prostitution and muggings (study conducted in Beaumont, Texas), that are typically uncontrolled by the licensees of the establishments. Further, there is presently no mechanism in the Village to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(3)  The final report of the U.S. Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1985) (at pages 1473-1476) found that sexual acts occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos or live sex shows. 
(4)  Offering and providing private or semi-private booths or cubicles at sexually oriented businesses encourages sexual activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. (Report by Community Defense Counsel, Protecting Communities from Sexually Oriented Businesses, November 2002). 
(6)  At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non-A, Non-B amebiasis, salmonella infections, and shigella infections. 
(7)  Since 1981 there have been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States and in Illinois. (U.S. Centers for Disease Control HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report: HIV Infection and AIDS in the United States, 2003, IDPH HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report, April 2005.) 
(8)  According to the Illinois Department of Public Health, as of April 2005, there have been 31, 789 reported cases of AIDS in the State of Illinois since 1981. As of April 2005, there have been 13,305 newly reported cases of HIV in Illinois. 
(9)  According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control, the number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level, with over one-third of a million cases being reported in 2003. 
(10)  The Surgeon General of the United States, in a report of October 22, 1986, advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(11)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. According to the Surgeon General's Call to Action to Promote Sexual Health and Responsible Sexual Behavior, dated July 9, 2001, nearly two-thirds of the 774,467 AIDS cases reported since 1987 were sexually transmitted. 
(12)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the licensees of the establishments to self-regulate those activities and maintain the facilities within their establishments. 
(13)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view "adult" oriented films. 
(14)  Studies have shown that arrests for sexual crimes and locations of adult businesses are directly related (Phoenix, Arizona Planning Committee, 1979), and that significantly higher crime rates were associated with an area containing multiple adult businesses (Minneapolis, Minnesota, 1980, and Austin, Texas Special Program Division Report on Adult Oriented Businesses in Austin, 1986). 
(15)  Studies have shown that adult entertainment businesses located in residential areas tend to experience increased crime frequency compared to adult entertainment businesses in commercial areas (study by the Indianapolis Division of Planning, Adult Entertainment Businesses in Indianapolis: An Analysis (1984)). 
(16)  The findings noted in subsections (1) through (15) above raise substantial governmental concerns for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens who live and work in, and visit, the Village. 
(17)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(18)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the holders of sexually oriented business licenses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the holders of sexually oriented business licenses to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the Village. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and the activities occurring therein. 
(19)  Removal of doors on video or live-viewing booths and requiring lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate the video or live-viewing booth to not less than ten foot candles as measured at the floor level, advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters. 
(20)  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(21)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(22)  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this article XXIII is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(23)  The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this article XXIII. 
(24)  The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of the Village will be promoted by the enactment of this article XXIII. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-828. - Specified prohibited acts at sexually oriented business establishments. 
(a)  No person at any sexually oriented business shall appear, be present, or perform while nude or semi-nude. No sexually oriented business patron shall appear, be present, or perform while nude or semi-nude. 
(b)  No employee of a sexually oriented business or any other person at any sexually oriented business shall perform or conduct any specified sexual activities with or for any patron of a sexually oriented business or any other employee of a sexually oriented business or any other person. No patron of a sexually oriented business or any other person at any sexually oriented business shall perform or conduct any specified sexual activities with or for any employee or any other patron of a sexually oriented business or any other person. No employee of a sexually oriented business or any other person at any sexually oriented business shall perform or conduct any role-playing interaction in any way related to any specified sexual activities with or for any patron of a sexually oriented business or any other employee of a sexually oriented business or any other person. 
(c)  Straddle dances shall be prohibited at all sexually oriented businesses. 
(d)  No massage, as defined in section 22-601, shall be provided at any sexually oriented business. 
(e)  No alcoholic liquor shall be delivered, received, sold, purchased, provided or consumed by any person at any sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-829. - Exterior display prohibited; sign limitations; exterior lighting limitations. 
(a)  No sexually oriented business shall be maintained or operated in any manner that causes, creates or allows public viewing of any explicit sexual material, or any entertainment depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, from any area outside of the licensed premises of the sexually oriented business, or from any sidewalk, public or private right-of-way, or any property adjacent to any sexually oriented business. 
(b)  All signs for sexually oriented businesses shall comply with section 98-331, et seq. 
(c)  All exterior lighting shall comply with applicable Village codes and ordinances. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions in this article XXIII or the Municipal Code, Village of Glenview, Illinois to the contrary, other than a numerical address sign, a sexually oriented business is prohibited from (i) placing, installing, erecting or otherwise constructing any sign on the exterior facade of a sexually oriented business, or (ii) displaying any window sign, or (iii) a display of any kind on the facade of, or in a window of, a sexually oriented business, which is (1) visible from a pedestrian route via sidewalks located in a public or private right-of-way or ingress/egress easement, whichever shall be applicable, or (2) visible from a vehicle route via streets located in a public or private right-of-way or ingress/egress easement, whichever shall be applicable, or (3) adjacent to a residential district or a public lands district, as defined in Glenview's Zoning Code. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-830. - Noise amplification outdoors. 
No loudspeakers or sound equipment audible beyond the licensed premises shall be used at any time. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-831. - Gambling and related devices prohibited. 
No sexually oriented business shall contain any internet access, video pinball, slot, bagatelle, pigeonhole, pool or any other games, machines or implements of chance. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-832. - Lighting. 
Unless otherwise required under this ordinance, all areas of a sexually oriented business shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at a minimum illumination level of not less than 50 foot candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee, the licensee's employees and agents to insure that the minimum illumination level required by this section 22-832 is maintained at all times the sexually oriented business is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-833. - Manager's station. 
Each sexually oriented business shall have one or more manager's stations. The interior of each sexually oriented business shall be configured in such a manner that there is either a direct or unobstructed view from at least one manager's station to every part of the entire premises (except restrooms) of such establishment to which any patron of a sexually oriented business is permitted access for any purpose. Where the manager's station will not have a clear view of the entire premises, the use of wide-angle mirrors or video systems shall be required to provide continuous monitoring of blind spots or remote parts of the premises (except restrooms). 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-834. - License required. 
(a)  It is unlawful: 
(1)  For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the Village pursuant to this article; or 
(2)  For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the Village pursuant to this article; or 
(3)  For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this article. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the Village. 
(c)  All applicants who seek to either operate or work in a sexually oriented business must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as necessary to enable the Village to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this article. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a seven percent or greater interest in the sexually oriented business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified as set forth below and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the information and shall be accompanied by the documents set forth in subsections (e)(1) through (e)(12). For individual applicants, the information and documents shall relate to the individual. For applicants other than individuals, the information and documents shall relate to each individual controlling a seven percent or greater interest in the sexually oriented business. 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual—The individual shall (i) state his/her legal name (including any stage name) and any aliases; (ii) submit proof (two forms of identification (e.g., driver's license, passport, etc.) reasonably satisfactory to the Village that he/she is at least 18 years of age; and (iii) the current address (post office boxes are not acceptable), current land line telephone number, and current cell phone number. 
b.  A partnership (general or limited)—The partnership, through its duly authorized representative, shall (i) state its complete name, and the names of all partners; (ii) indicate whether the partnership is general or limited; (iii) submit a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; and (iv) provide the names, current addresses (post office boxes are not acceptable), current land line and cell phone numbers of all partners (general or limited). 
c.  A corporation, limited liability company or other entity—The corporation, limited liability company or other entity, through its duly authorized representative, shall (i) state its complete name, (ii) provide the date of its incorporation or organization, as applicable, (iii) provide certified copies of evidence from the state organizing authority that the corporation, limited liability company or other entity is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation or organization, as applicable, (iv) if a foreign corporation, foreign limited liability company, or other foreign entity, provide certified copies from the Secretary of State of Illinois that the foreign corporation, foreign limited liability company, or other foreign entity has authority to transact business and is in good standing in the State of Illinois, and (v) provide the names, current addresses (post office boxes are not acceptable), current land line and cell phone numbers, and capacity of all officers, directors, principal stockholders, and members, and the name and current address (post office boxes are not acceptable) of the registered agent and the current address (post office boxes are not acceptable) and telephone numbers of the registered office for service of process. 
d.  A land trust—Include (i) the land trust's complete name; (ii) the legal name and the business address (post office boxes are not acceptable) of the trustee of the land trust; (iii) the legal name, birth date and business address (post office boxes are not acceptable) of each holder of a power of direction or each beneficiary of the land trust and the specific interest of each such holder of a power of direction or beneficiary in the land trust; and (iv) the interest, if any, that the land trust holds in the licensed premises, as required by Chapter 765 ILCS 405 (Illinois Compiled Statutes). All such applications shall be verified by the applicant in his/her capacity as trustee, or by the beneficiary as a beneficial owner of interest in such land trust. 
(2)  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he, she or it must (i) state the sexually oriented business's fictitious name and (ii) submit the required registration documents for such name. 
(3)  Whether the applicant, the applicant's officers or employees or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another governmental entity and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses. 
(4)  Whether the applicant, the applicant's officers or employees or a person residing with the applicant has had a previous license under this article or other similar adult or sexually oriented business ordinances from another governmental entity denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the adult or sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension, or revocation, and whether the applicant, the applicant's officers or employees or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director, or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this article whose license has previously been denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended, or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(5)  Intentionally omitted. 
(6)  The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing. 
(7)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, common street address, and: 
a.  If the property within which the sexually oriented business is to be located is owned by the applicant, then a copy of the ownership documents shall be provided with the application; or 
b.  If the property within which the sexually oriented business is to be located is to be leased, then a copy of the lease agreement, and the name, address and land line telephone number of the landlord. 
(8)  The applicant's current mailing address and residential address (post office boxes are not acceptable). 
(9)  Two color photographs of the applicant, measuring two inches by two inches, clearly showing the applicant's face, in addition to the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Glenview Police Department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
(10)  The applicant's driver's license number, Social Security number, and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number. 
(11)  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of gross public floor area occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(12)  A drawing, prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor within 30 days prior to the date the application, depicting: 
a.  Property lines and structures thereon for the location of the proposed sexually oriented business. 
b.  Unless otherwise provided herein, all of the following uses, existing or established, within 500 feet (as measured on a pedestrian route via sidewalks which shall be located in a public or private right-of-way or ingress/egress easement, whichever shall be applicable or on a vehicle route via streets which shall be located in a public or private right-of-way or ingress/egress easement, whichever shall be applicable) from the main public entrance of the proposed sexually oriented business to the property line of the following protected uses and/or zoning districts: (i) a church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities, (ii) a public or private educational facility including, but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school, (iii) a boundary of a residential district as defined in this article, (iv) a public library, a public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian/bicycle path, wilderness area, or other similar public land within the Village which is under the control, operation or management of the Village or other governmental entity, (v) an entertainment, youth activity, or sports-related business that is oriented primarily towards minors or family entertainment, (vi) premises licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the State of Illinois or the Village, or (vii) other sexually oriented businesses within 1,000 feet measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. For the purposes of this subsection (e)(12)b, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted. 
(f)  Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit, on a form to be provided by the Village, the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name or any other name (including any stage name) or aliases used by the individual; 
(2)  Age, date and place of birth; 
(3)  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(4)  Current residence address (post office boxes are not acceptable), land line telephone number and cell phone number; 
(5)  Present business address (post office boxes are not acceptable), land line telephone number and cell phone number; 
(6)  Date, issuing state and number of driver's license or other identification card information; 
(7)  Social Security number; and 
(8)  Proof (two forms of identification, e.g., valid driver's license, passport, etc.) reasonably satisfactory to the Village that he/she is at least 18 years of age. 
(g)  Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee license, as provided above, shall be the following: 
(1)  Two color photographs of the applicant, measuring two inches by two inches, clearly showing the applicant's face, in addition to the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Glenview Police Department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
(2)  A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five-year period immediately preceding the date of filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application. 
(3)  A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-835. - Issuance of license—Sexually oriented business and sexually oriented business employee. 
(a)  Sexually oriented business license. 
(1)  For a sexually oriented business licensee, within 30 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business application, the Village shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant. The Village shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following is true (i) with respect to the individual applicant or (ii) if the applicant is an entity other than an individual, with respect to any person controlling a seven percent or greater interest in the applicant entity: 
a.  An applicant is under 18 years of age; 
b.  An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in payment to the Village of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to any business; 
c.  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
d.  An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license by the Village to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months; 
e.  An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of specified criminal activity; 
f.  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the Village Health Department, the Glenview Fire Department and the Village Development Department as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances; 
g.  The license fee required by section 22-836 has not been paid; or 
h.  An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this article or with any other licensing provisions or regulations of the Village as contained in the Municipal Code, Village of Glenview, Illinois. 
(2)  A sexually oriented business license granted pursuant to this section shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the common street address of the sexually oriented business, and the classification for which the license is issued pursuant to section 22-826. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time. 
(3)  The Village Health Department, the Glenview Fire Department, and the Village Development Department shall complete their certification that the premises are in compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the application by the Village. 
(4)  A sexually oriented business license shall not be issued to an applicant for more than one classification as found in section 22-826. 
(b)  Sexually oriented business employee license. For a sexually oriented business employee license, upon the filing of an application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the Village shall issue a temporary license to the applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate Village departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained in the application. The application process shall be completed within 30 days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the Village shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under the age of 18 years; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of specified criminal activity; 
(4)  The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this ordinance; or 
(5)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license or sexually oriented business license revoked by the Village within two years of the date of the current application. If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to appeal as set forth in section 22-841 below. 
(c)  Renewal of sexually oriented business license and sexually oriented business employee license. A license granted pursuant to this section 22-836 shall be subject to annual renewal on December 31 each year. Renewal shall be conditioned upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the Village that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity or committed any act during the term of the previous license which would have been grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in section 22-836. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-836. - Fees. 
(a)  Every application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application, investigation and license issuance fee as outlined in Chapter 30-1 under general business, and will be assessed an additional fee as determined by the police department for background check processing. 
(b)  The license fee shall be paid at the time of issuance of a new license and not less than 30 days prior to expiration of a current license in the case of an application for a renewal license. 
(c)  All fees shall be submitted to the Village Finance Department. The completed application, including a receipt showing payment of the required fee, shall be submitted to the Village Clerk. Processing of any application hereunder, whether for a new application or the renewal of an existing license, shall not commence until all fees are paid. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005; Ord. No. 5113, § 7, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 22-837. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Glenview Police Department, the Village Health Department, the Glenview Fire Department, the Village Development Department, or other Village departments or agencies, as applicable, to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time it is occupied or open for business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his/her agent or employee commits a petty offense and is in violation of the provisions of this article if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-838. - Expiration of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire on December 31 of each year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 22-834. Application for renewal shall be made not less than 30 days before the expiration date of the license. If an application for renewal is made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration date of the license will not be effected and the applicant shall not operate under the terms of the license or continue to work as an employee at a sexually oriented business during any period of time between the expiration of the license and the issuance of a renewal license. 
(b)  In the event the Village denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the Village finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-839. - Suspension. 
The Village shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; or 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by section 22-837. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-840. - Revocation. 
(a)  The Village shall revoke a license if a cause for suspension in section 22-839 occurs during the 12-month period after the same license has been suspended. 
(b)  The Village shall revoke a license if it determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(4)  A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business or worked as an employee at a sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended or expired; 
(5)  A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(6)  A licensee is delinquent in payment of any taxes or fees owned to the Village, county or state. 
(c)  In the event the Village revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for not less than three years from the effective date of the revocation, and the Village shall not accept an application from a license whose license has been revoked for three years from the date the revocation became effective. However, if subsequent to revocation pursuant to subsection (b)(6), the Village finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-841. - Due process hearing regarding denial of an application for a sexually oriented business license, suspension of license, or revocation of license—Licensee or employee. 
(a)  Any license issued for a sexually oriented business or a sexually oriented business employee may be suspended for not more than 30 days or revoked by the Village Manager or his designee upon written notice to the licensee, which notice shall state a basis for the suspension or revocation. The licensee may request in writing a hearing within ten days of receipt of the notice from the Village Manager or his designee. Within ten days from receipt of a demand for hearing, the Village Manager or his designee shall conduct the hearing in any case where any provision of this article XXIII or any state law, or any Village ordinance or regulation is violated, or any employee of the licensee is engaged in any conduct at licensee's place of business which violates any provision of this article XXIII or any state law, or any Village ordinance or regulation. Such license may also be suspended or revoked by the Village Manager, upon the recommendation of the Village Health Administrator that such business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard for the public health or health of patrons or without due regard to proper sanitation or hygiene. The burden is on the licensee to show cause why the suspension or revocation, as the case may be, should not remain in effect. The licensee shall be permitted to present any relevant evidence bearing on the violation. The decision of the Village Manager shall be in writing and shall be final subject to review pursuant to a writ of certiorari. The decision of the Village Manager shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the licensee as it appears on the application for a license within 15 days after the date of the final hearing. 
(b)  Any violation of this article XXIII by any employee of the licensee shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the sexually oriented business license. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-842. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer a license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the common street address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-843. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  A person is in violation of this article and commits a petty offense if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than the I-2 Light Industrial District, as defined and described in the section 98-162. 
(b)  A person is in violation of this article and commits a petty offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 500 feet (as measured pursuant to subsection 22-834(e)(12)b. of: 
(1)  A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
(2)  A public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district; 
(4)  A public library, a public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian/bicycle path, wilderness area, or other similar public land within the Village which is under the control, operation or management of the Village or other governmental entity; 
(5)  An entertainment, youth activity or sports-related business that is oriented primarily towards minors or family entertainment; or 
(6)  Premises licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the State of Illinois or the Village. 
(c)  A person is in violation of this article and commits a petty offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business (measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located). 
(d)  A person is in violation of this article and commits a petty offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business, unless otherwise provided in this article. 
(e)  A person is in violation of this article and commits a petty offense if that person places, installs, erects or otherwise constructs a sign in violation of subsection 22-829(d). 
(f)  For the purposes of this section, except measurement consistent with subsection (c) above, measurement on a pedestrian route via sidewalks shall be located in a public or private right-of-way or ingress/egress easement, whichever shall be applicable or measurement on a vehicle route via streets shall be located in a public or private right-of-way or ingress/egress easement, whichever shall be applicable, from the main public entrance of the proposed sexually oriented business to the property line of the uses listed in section 22-834(e)(12)b, unless otherwise provided therein. Presence of a village, city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of section 22-843(c) or this subsection. 
(g)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this article XXIII that is in violation of subsections (a) through (f) above shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use. The legal nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such legal nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except the use may be changed to a conforming use in the event all conditions of this article, after application being made, are satisfied. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another (measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located) and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually legally operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is/are nonconforming and subject to subsection (c) above. 
(h)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in subsection (b) above. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-844. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, DVD, video cassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Village may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the Village. 
(4)  It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection (a)(5) must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) above remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this article XXIII. 
(7)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
(8)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than ten foot candles as measured at the floor level. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(10)  No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
(11)  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
(12)  The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
(13)  The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. And, 
(14)  The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board, or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(14) above commits a violation of this article if he/she fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-845. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. The license holder of a nude model studio commits a violation of this article if the nude model studio employs a person under 18 years of age. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits a violation of this article if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any other person. 
(c)  A person commits a violation of this article if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises; except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-846. - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person who, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or depicts specified sexual activities. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person who, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least ten feet from any patron and on a stage at least two feet from the floor. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article for an employee, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron, or for any patron to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while such employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this article for an employee, while semi-nude, to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-847. - Prohibition against minors in a sexually oriented business. 
A person commits a violation of this article if the person allows a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-848. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business may remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. (noon) on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-849. - Exemptions. 
It is a defense to prosecution under section 22-845 above that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Illinois, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is (i) appearing semi-nude, (ii) in a state of nudity, or (iii) displaying specified anatomical areas on the premises at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Sec. 22-850. - Injunction and penalties. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license in violation of this article XXIII is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for violation of this article. 
(b)  Each day a sexually oriented business operates in violation of this article XXIII is a separate violation for which a fine may be assessed by a court of competent jurisdiction in the sum of $1,000 per day for each day the violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 4818, § 2, 12-6-2005)  
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34, law enforcement, ch. 42. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5020, § 2, adopted Aug. 21, 2007, deleted Art. II in its entirety and supplied provisions for a new Art. II to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, §§ 26-31—26-43, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1959, §§ 27.1—27.13; and Ord. No. 4587, adopted Nov. 4, 2003. 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Establishment. 
(a)  Pursuant to the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act (20 ILCS 3305/1, et seq.) (the "IEMA Act") there is hereby created a local emergency management agency (the "EMA") to coordinate the emergency management program within the Village and with private organizations, other political subdivisions, and the State and federal governments. 
(b)  The Village president shall be the executive in charge of the EMA. 
(c)  The Village president shall appoint, subject to the advice and consent of the Village Board, a coordinator, who shall be the assistant to the Village president with the duty of coordinating the emergency management program for the Village consistent with the applicable provisions of the IEMA Act. 
(d)  All other members of the EMA shall be appointed or designated by the coordinator, and shall serve at the pleasure of the coordinator. 
(e)  The term of the coordinator shall be one year, from August 1 to July 31, or until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 5020, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 26-32. - Service as a mobile support team. 
(a)  Members of the EMA may be designated by the governor or the director of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (the "IEMA") as members of a mobile support team to aid and to reinforce the IEMA and emergency services and disaster agencies in areas stricken by disaster. 
(b)  Any member of a mobile support team who is a municipal employee or officer while on duty pursuant to a call to duty or while engaged in a regularly scheduled training exercise shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the Village, while so serving, may receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 5020, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 26-33. - Agreements with other political subdivisions. 
The coordinator may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other municipal corporations or political subdivisions of the State for reciprocal aid and assistance, pursuant to law, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Village Board. 
(Ord. No. 5020, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 26-34. - Emergency action. 
If the governor declares that an emergency exists in the event of a disaster, as defined in the IEMA Act, then it shall be the duty of the EMA to cooperate fully with the IEMA in the provision of emergency services as provided in the IEMA Act. 
(Ord. No. 5020, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 26-35. - Compensation. 
(a)  Neither the Village president, the coordinator, nor members of the EMA shall receive compensation from the Village for their services in the EMA, but this provision shall not affect their compensation authorized by the Village for other services to the Village or their compensation for activities related to the EMA as otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  If members of the EMA who are paid employees or officers of the Village are called for training by the director of the IEMA, then they shall receive for time spent in such training the same rate of pay as they may receive from the Village while performing their regular duties and obligations for the Village. 
(c)  Members of the EMA who are neither employees nor officers of the Village shall receive for such training time only such compensation as may be provided by law. 
(d)  Members of the EMA who are also members of a Village mobile support team, and who, while engaged in a disaster or disaster training exercise, suffer disease, injury or death, shall be deemed to be employees of the State for the purposes of benefits under the Worker's Compensation Act or Worker's Occupational Diseases Act only, if (1) the claimant is a duly qualified and enrolled (sworn in) volunteer of the EMA, and (2) the claimant was participating in an actual disaster as defined in the IEMA Act or engaged in a regularly scheduled training or exercise pursuant to a call for duty by the IEMA. 
(Ord. No. 5020, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 26-36. - Powers and duties of the organization. 
(a)  The Village president shall be the chairperson of the EMA. The EMA shall meet at the call of the Village president who shall be advised on all matters pertaining to emergency services. 
(b)  The EMA shall, from time to time, recommend to the Village Board action or procedures necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Village as it may deem necessary or advisable in order to carry out the purposes of this ordinance and of the IEMA Act, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The creation of separate departments for the performance of the several functions of the EMA. 
(2)  The specification of the duties and functions of each department, particularly with respect to preparation for any emergency which may require the active interposition of the EMA in order to protect the community, and with respect to action to be taken upon occurrence of any such emergency. 
(3)  The formulation of a plan of action, to be coordinated with the Illinois Emergency Preparedness Plan and program, and to serve particularly the residents of the Village and of any surrounding area. 
(c)  Any regulations of the EMA shall not become effective until approved by the Village Board. 
(Ord. No. 5020, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 26-37. - Reimbursement by State. 
The Village treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any reimbursement received from the state for expenses incident to training members of the EMA as prescribed by the director of the IEMA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside the Village in response to a call by the governor or the director of the IEMA, and any other reimbursement made by the State incident to the EMA's activities as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 5020, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 26-38. - Purchases and expenditures. 
(a)  The Village Board may, on recommendation of the coordinator, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village in a position to combat effectively any disaster in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the Village and its residents. 
(b)  In the event of any disaster, the coordinator is authorized, on behalf of the Village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for emergency purposes, in light of the exigencies of the disaster and, excepting mandatory constitutional requirements, without regard to the procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies and materials, and the appropriation, expenditure, and disposition of public funds and property as authorized by the IEMA Act, until the Village Board is able to act effectively, whereupon the coordinator shall then act in accordance with the direction of the Village president, pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 5020, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 26-39. - Oath. 
Every member of the EMA, and every person who is appointed to serve in any capacity in connection therewith, shall take the following oath in writing before the coordinator or other person authorized to administer oaths in this state: 
"I, _______________ do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the constitution of the United States and the constitution of the state of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear ( or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Village of Glenview, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence." 
(Ord. No. 5020, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 26-40. - Office. 
The Village manager is authorized to designate space in the Village hall for the office of the EMA, or such other location as may be provided by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5020, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Sec. 26-41. - Village president—Emergency powers. 
(a)  Emergency powers. Pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Police Protection and Public Order provisions contained in the Illinois Municipal Code under 65 ILCS 5/11-1-6, during a state of emergency, the Village president shall have the extraordinary power and authority to exercise, by executive order, such of the powers of the corporate authorities as may be reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Civil disturbance means a riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute by three or more persons acting in concert without authority of law. 
(2)  Natural disaster or manmade calamity includes flood, railroad or vehicle wrecks, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, explosion, drought, aircraft crashes, or any other occurrence of such magnitude, within the corporate limits of the Village, that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(3)  Curfew means a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any sidewalk, alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the Village, excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to such civil emergency. 
(c)  Emergency powers—Duration. Whenever any civil disturbance, natural disaster or manmade calamity shall occur within the corporate limits which are sufficiently extensive and reach such proportions that law and order cannot be maintained by available methods, the Village president, by this section and as may be otherwise provided in 65 ILCS 5/11-1-6, is empowered to: 
(1)  Suspend the sale and/or provision of liquor and alcoholic beverages by establishments licensed under the ordinances of the Village; 
(2)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products; 
(3)  Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever; 
(4)  Set curfew hours for all persons within the corporate limits of the Village — this curfew to be during such hours of the day or night as deemed necessary; 
(5)  Order the evacuation of all residences, businesses and other buildings as may be deemed necessary; 
(6)  Call on the National Guard through the Office of the Governor in accordance with the Illinois Internal Security Plan as outlined by the Adjutant General of the State of Illinois when the local law enforcement authorities are unable to cope with a dangerous or disastrous situation; and 
(7)  Issue any other order as is imminently necessary for the protection of life, property, health, safety, and the public welfare. 
The orders authorized in this subsection may be issued singly or together. 
(d)  Justification. Whenever the Village president shall deem it necessary to invoke the emergency powers set forth in this section, the Village president shall, as soon as practical, but in no case longer than 12 hours from the time of the invocation of the powers, notify the Village clerk and the board of trustees, in writing, under oath, of his reasons for invoking such emergency powers and giving his justification for his actions. 
(e)  Time limit. The emergency powers given to the Village president by this article shall not, without Village Board approval, extend beyond any seven-day period (Sundays and holidays included) for any one occurrence of a civil disturbance, natural disaster or manmade calamity, nor later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the board of trustees after the State of emergency is declared. 
(f)  Public notification. Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Village clerk shall notify one of the news media publications whose papers are of general circulation in the Village and shall cause two copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the following places within the Village: the Village hall and the main Glenview post office. 
(g)  Emergency powers—Order of succession. Should the Village president be unavailable, the emergency powers of the Village president shall be carried according to the following order of succession: Village manager, the coordinator, chief of police. 
(h)  Violations. Any person violating the provisions of this article or executive order issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an offense against the Village, and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to undermine the powers granted to the Glenview Police Department, the Glenview Fire Department, or any other operating department of the Village, but shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5020, § 2, 8-21-2007)  
Secs. 26-42—26-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5985, § 2, adopted May 17, 2016, repealed art. III, §§ 26-60—26-65, in its entirety. Former art. III, pertained to "Emergency Telephone System Board," and was derived from Ord. No. 4803, § 2, adopted October 18, 2005 and Ord. No. 5657, § 2, adopted April 2, 2013. 
 
Secs. 26-60—26-65. - Reserved.  
Chapter 30 - FEES AND CHARGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; planning, ch. 54; zoning, ch. 98. 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Fees and charges. 
Dept. 	Classification 	Fee Description 	Current Fee 
All 	Administrative 	Copied documents 	See below 
All 	Administrative 	FOIA requests <50 pages (black/white, letter or legal) 	No Charge 
All 	Administrative 	FOIA requests >50 pages (black/white, letter or legal) 	$0.15 per page 
All 	Administrative 	8.5" × 11" document (black and white) 	$0.25 per page 
All 	Administrative 	8.5" × 11" document (color) 	$0.50 per page 
All 	Administrative 	Certified document 	$1.00 
All 	Administrative 	Photographs, plats, maps, specifications, other documents greater than 8.5" × 11" (black and white) 	market rate 
All 	Administrative 	Photographs, plats, maps, specifications, other documents greater than 8.5" × 11" (color) 	market rate 
All 	Administrative 	Other 	costs incurred 
All 	Administrative 	Custom Map 	$80.00/hour 
All 	Administrative 	Electronic Files* 	See below 
All 	Administrative 	Orthophotography 	$250.00 per quarter section 
All 	Administrative 	Planimetrics and Utilities 	$80.00/hour + $100.00/acre 
All 	Administrative 	General Penalty 	$100.00—$1,000.00 
All 	Administrative 	Other electronic services 	market rate 
All 	Administrative 	Returned ACH Direct Debit fee 	$25.00 
All 	Administrative 	Returned check fee 	$25.00 
All 	Administrative 	Peddler/Solicitor* 	$60.00 
All 	Administrative 	Public Notary 	No Charge 
All 	Administrative 	Solicitor 	No Charge 
All 	Administrative 	Third-party charges — printing, information and/or services performed by parties outside of Village staff 	Third-Party Rate 
All 	Administrative 	Village Maps — Chamber Edition 	$3.00 
All 	Administrative 	Zoning Ordinance book or Engineering Standards Manual 	$20.00 
All 	Administrative 	FOIA—personnel costs 	$10.00/hour of personnel time for commercial FOIA requests (over 8 hours) 
Administrative Services 	Commuter Parking 	Annual Parking 	See below 
Administrative Services 	Commuter Parking 	Vehicle (Resident) 	$300.00 
Administrative Services 	Commuter Parking 	Vehicle (Non-Resident) 	$400.00 
Administrative Services 	Commuter Parking 	Motorcycle (Resident) 	$100.00 
Administrative Services 	Commuter Parking 	Motorcycle (Non-Resident) 	$135.00 
Administrative Services 	Commuter Parking 	Daily Parking 	See below 
Administrative Services 	Commuter Parking 	Daily Fee Parking 	$2.00 per day 
Administrative Services 	Commuter Parking 	Semi-Annual Parking 	See below 
Administrative Services 	Commuter Parking 	Vehicle (Resident) 	$150.00 
Administrative Services 	Commuter Parking 	Vehicle (Non-Resident) 	$200.00 
Administrative Services 	Commuter Parking 	Vendor Lease 	$1,590.00 per qtr. 
Administrative Services 	Commuter Parking 	Replacement Placard 	$10.00 
Capital 
Projects 	Infrastructure 	Infrastructure improvement management-non Village projects 	Costs incurred 
Community Development 	Contractor Fees 	Contractor License Registration 	See below 
Community Development 	Contractor Fees 	General 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Contractor Fees 	Demolition 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Fire Permit Fees 	Fire Protection 	See below 
Community Development 	Fire Permit Fees 	Glenview — New Construction 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Fire Permit Fees 	Glenview (new systems) and Glenbrook Fire Protection District — New construction and new systems 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Fire Permit Fees 	Control panel 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Fire Permit Fees 	Sprinkler System Type 13 and 13R 	Third-Party Rate 
Community Development 	Fire Permit Fees 	Sprinkler System — Residential 13D 	Third-Party Rate 
Community Development 	Fire Permit Fees 	Stand-pipes (when not part of a sprinkler system) 	Third-Party Rate 
Community Development 	Fire Permit Fees 	Fire Pumps 	Third-Party Rate 
Community Development 	Fire Permit Fees 	Alarm Systems 	Third-Party Rate 
Community Development 	Fire Permit Fees 	Hood, Duct, and Wet Chemical 	Third-Party Rate 
Community Development 	Fire Permit Fees 	Gas Suppression/Dry Chemical 	Third-Party Rate 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Engineering Plan Review Fee 	1% of engineering estimate for costs, $200.00 minimum for first 3 lots + $100.00/lot greater than 3 lots 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Engineering Inspection — Other 	4% of estimated costs up to $500k, 3% of estimated costs if >$500k 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Engineering Sanitary Sewer Inspection Fee 	5% of the estimated sanitary sewer cost 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Infrastructure — Recapture 	as determined 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Parkway tree planting 	$365.00 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Pavement Inspection 	$2,500.00 per test up to one mile 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Public Signage 	$100.00 per sign 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Right-of-Way Excavation Escrows 	See below 
Community Development 	Engineering 	5' × 5' of public sidewalk 	$125.00 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Foot of curb and gutter 	$20.00 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Each public concrete slab 	$1,500.00 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Square yard of public asphalt road 	$550.00 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Square yard of parkway 	$225.00 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Right-of-way usage fee 	$0.10 per sq. ft. per month 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Water System Connection Fees 	See below 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Single-Family Residential Connection 	$350.00/dwelling unit 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Multi-Family Residential Connection 	$350.00/dwelling unit 
Community Development 	Engineering 	Non-residential Connection 	(Estimated annual usage / 150,000) × $350.00, and subject to verification and price adjustment in relation to actual usage determined viz reading of the water meter(s) 12, 24, and 36 months after installation 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Business Registration and License Fees 	See below 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Entertainment Establishments 	$40.00 for initial license 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Food Establishments (restaurant, store) 	$95.00 for initial license 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Restaurant Inspection Fee 	$95.00 annually 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Penalty for Restaurant Inspection Fee Outstanding after 03/31, annually 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	General Business License 	$40.00 for initial license 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Massage Establishment Application 	$100.00 non-refundable application fee 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Massage Establishment Registration 	$100.00 per year 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Warehouses, storage places and vehicle parking and/or storage garages, commercially operated 	See below 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	0 to 2,500 square feet 	$35.00 for initial license 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	2,501 to 5,000 square feet 	$70.00 for initial license 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	5,001 to 7,500 square feet 	$105.00 for initial license 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	7,501 to 10,000 square feet 	$140.00 for initial license 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	10,001 to 12,500 square feet 	$175.00 for initial license 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	12,501 to 15,000 square feet 	$210.00 for initial license 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	15,001 to 17,500 square feet 	$245.00 for initial license 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	17,501 to 20,000 square feet 	$280.00 for initial license 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Over 20,001 square feet 	$315.00 for initial license 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Chauffeur's License 	$60.00 for initial license and $20.00 for renewals + $20.00 late fee if renewed after February 28th 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Day care homes 	$100.00 for initial license and $100.00 for annual renewal 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Day care centers 	$100.00 for initial license and $100.00 for annual renewal 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Mobile Food Vendor 	$95.00 for initial license and $95.00 for annual renewal 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Taxicab License 	$60.00 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Taxicab application 	$20.00 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Plus per year for the next three succeeding renewals 	$20.00/year 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Late Penalty for annual business license 	$65.00 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Replacement License Fee 	$25.00 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Miscellaneous Licenses 	See below 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Charitable Solicitation Permit 	No Charge 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Manufactured Home Parks 	$2,500.00 + $25.00 per mobile home site/pad per year 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Outdoor Dining Application Fee 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Licenses and Registrations 	Vacant Property Annual Registration 	$200.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Liquor License Fees 	See below 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class A, authorizes sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises where sold. Must be a bona fide eating establishment. 	$2,400.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class B, authorizes sale of beer and wine for consumption on premises where sold. Must be a bona fide eating establishment 	$1,000.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class C, authorizes sale of packaged alcoholic liquor in a store, but not consumption on the premises where sold. 	$2,000.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class D, authorizes sale of alcoholic liquor by the proprietors of clubs or daily fee golf courses, for consumption on premises only by patrons. 	$1,500.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class E, authorizes retail sale of packaged beer or wine through telephone or mail order and parcel post delivery only. Not for consumption on the premises 	$2,000.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class F, authorizes and allows the service of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with, and as an incidental part of, the catering of food for parties and special events. 	$2,000.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class F-4, movie theater 	$2,400.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class F-5, salons 	$2,000.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class G, authorizes the retail sale of packaged alcoholic liquor in a store, establishment or facility in which the primary and principal business is the sale at retail of other services, goods, wares and merchandise and in which the retail sale of alcoholic liquor is secondary and incidental. 	$2,400.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class H authorizes a Class A or Class B license holder to sell packaged alcoholic liquor from the bar on the license holder's premises during the permissible hours of operation. 	$550.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class I, authorizes a Class G or C license holder to sell beer or wine by the glass for consumption on license holder's premises. Only a Class G or C license holder shall be eligible. 	$1,000.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class J, authorizes beer and wine to be served at a business where the primary and principal business is the sale of coffee or tea with the sale of beer and wine as secondary and incidental. Only for consumption on premises where sold. Sale of beer/wine from 4:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. each day of the week. Service of food is required. 	$1,000.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class K, beer sales, craft brewery 	$1,550.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class L, BYOB 	$350.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	Class L, BYOB, if licensee holds a separate class of license 	$0.00 
Community Development 	Liquor Licenses 	License — Mid Year 	pro-rated 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	In General 	See below 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Air Conditioners and/or Furnaces 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Asphalt & Concrete Flatwork (driveways, patios, sidewalks, etc.) 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Canopies or Awnings 	$50.00 per Canopy or Awning Section 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Certificates of Occupancy 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Certificates of Occupancy — Temporary (per certificate) 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Chimneys 	$60.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Commercial — Shell Only 	$2.00/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Commercial — Shell & Tenant Build-Out 	$3.00/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Commercial — Tenant Build-Out or Remodeling 	$1.00/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Commercial — Warehouse 	$2.00/sq. ft. 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Decks 	$150.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Demolition — Commercial 	$300.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Demolition — Single-Family Residential 	$200.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Demolition — Interior Only 	$100.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Detached Garages for Single-Family 	$.80/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Attached and Detached Commercial Parking Garage 	$2.00/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Electric Permit Fees 	See below 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Single-Family Residential — New, Additions, or Remodeling 	$0.045/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Commercial — New, Additions, or Remodeling 	$0.070/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Multi-Family — New, Additions, or Remodeling 	$0.070/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Elevators and Escalators 	$50.00 base fee plus $9.00/$1,000.00 value; $100.00 minimum 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Elevator and Escalator Annual Inspections 	Third-party rate 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Fences 	$60.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	with Hold Harmless Agreement 	Additional $40.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Generators 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	HVAC—Single-Family Residential 	$50.00/piece of equipment 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	HVAC—Multi-Family or Commercial 	$50.00/piece of equipment 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Lawn sprinkler systems 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Minimum Permit Fee 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Multi-Family — New 	$1.60/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Multi-Family — Additions 	$2.50/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Multi-Family — Remodeling of Unfinished Space 	$2.50/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Multi-Family — Remodeling of Basements or Finished Space 	$1.60/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Operational Permit — Spray Booth 	no fee 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Operational Permit — Welding 	no fee 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Parking Lots 	$1.00/100 square feet 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Parking Lot Re-striping 	$1.00/400 square feet 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Plumbing, Water, Sewer 	See below 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Residential 	$18.00/Toilet Room, Minimum Fee $50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Commercial 	$3.00/fixture, Minimum Fee $50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Rain Barrels 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Re-Inspections 	$150.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Revision after permit 	$150.00/revision 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Roofing — Commercial or Multi-Family 	$120.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Roofing — Residential 	$60.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Sanitary sewer 	$60.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Sanitary sewer inspection 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Storm sewer inspection 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Sheds 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Single-Family Residential — New 	$1.60/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Single-Family Residential — Additions 	$2.50/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Single-Family Residential — Remodeling of unfinished space 	$2.50/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Single-Family Residential — Remodeling of Basement or existing finished space 	$1.60/square foot 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Site Development 	$100.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Stop Work Order/Unapproved Occupancy 	$150.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Swimming Pools — Above Ground 	$300.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Swimming Pools — Hot Tub/Spa 	$350.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Swimming Pools — In-Ground 	$750.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Telecommunications Service Facilities, Small Cell Facilities, or other Utilities — Single facility 	$650.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Telecommunications Service Facilities, Small Cell Facilities, or other Utilities — Multiple upon one application 	$350.00 per facility 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Work Initiated Without a Permit 	The greater of: 
a) Two times the permit fee; or 
b) The permit fee plus $150.00 
Community Development 	Permit Fees 	Water Softener Installation (per softener) 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	New Single-Family Residences 	$300.00 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	Single-Family Additions 	$250.00 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	Remodeling of Unfinished Space 	$250.00 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	Remodeling of Basements and existing Finished Space 	$160.00 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	Accessory Buildings (Detached Garages, Guesthouses, etc.) 	$70.00 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	Other New Construction, Additions, Alterations, and Remodeling 	See below 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	Less than $10,000.00 	$150.00 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	$10,000.00—$25,000.00 	$200.00 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	$25,000.01—$50,000.00 	$350.00 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	$50,000.01—$100,000.00 	$600.00 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	$100,000.01—$250,000.00 	$750.00 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	Over $250,000.00 	[ (Value of work - $250,000) × .00075] + $750.00 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	Preliminary Proposed Site Analysis 	$70.00/hour, billable in 30 minute increments 
Community Development 	Plan Review Fees 	Fire Protection 	Third-party rate 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Annexation < 1 Acre 	$100.00 + Publication + County Recording fees 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Annexation > 1 Acre 	$500.00 + Publication + County Recording fees 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Annexation — Involuntary 	No Charge 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Conditional Use 	$200.00 + Publication Cost 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Environmental Review Commission application 	No Charge 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Historic Preservation Application 	$100.00 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Historic Preservation — Certificate of Appropriateness 	$100.00 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Historic Preservation — Unlawful removal/demolition 	$50.00—$500.00 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Public Notice 	Publication cost 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Recording Agreements 	County Recording fees 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Recording of Plats 	No Charge (incorporated in related fees) 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Reinstatement of zoning case dismissed for want of prosecution 	$25.00 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Right-of-Way Vacation 	Costs incurred 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Second Curb-Cut 	$200.00 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Single-Lot Subdivision 	$100.00 + County Recording fees 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Preliminary Site Plan Review 	$100.00 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Final site plan review — 0—3 acres 	$200.00 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Final site plan review — 3 to < 10 acres 	$400.00 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Final site plan review — >10 acres 	$600.00 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Reimbursement for development or other projects requiring outside consultant 	Third-party rate 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Final Subdivision 	$225.00 + $5/lot + County Recording fees 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Text Amendment/Rezoning 	$250.00 + Publication 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Variation — Residential 	$100.00 + Publication 
Community Development 	Planning and Zoning Fees 	Variation — Commercial 	$200.00 + Publication 
Community Development 	Sign Permit Fees 	Sign Permits 	See below 
Community Development 	Sign Permit Fees 	Commercial Real Estate > 12 square feet 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Sign Permit Fees 	Illuminated 	$100.00 
Community Development 	Sign Permit Fees 	Multi-tenant sign — new face (illuminated) 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Sign Permit Fees 	Neighborhood Residential Sign — existing 	$0.00 
Community Development 	Sign Permit Fees 	Neighborhood Residential Sign — new 	$75.00 +$25.00/sign 
Community Development 	Sign Permit Fees 	Non-illuminated 	$50.00 
Community Development 	Sign Permit Fees 	Residential Real Estate < 12 square feet 	No Charge 
Community Development 	Sign Permit Fees 	Temporary Signs 	See below 
Community Development 	Sign Permit Fees 	Construction Signs 	No Charge 
Community Development 	Sign Permit Fees 	Temporary Special Event Banner 	$25.00 
Fire 	Ambulance Fees 	Ambulance Fees (fees billed to insurance companies) 	See below 
Fire 	Ambulance Fees 	Resident 	$1,061.69 
Fire 	Ambulance Fees 	Non-Resident 	$1,196.08 
Fire 	Ambulance Fees 	Per mile of transport 	$13.44 
Fire 	Inspections & Plan Reviews 		See 
"Community 
Development" 
section 
Police 	Miscellaneous Fees 	Animal impound fee 	$50.00/day 
Police 	Miscellaneous Fees 	Animal Impound Redemption Fee 	$10.00 
Police 	Miscellaneous Fees 	Animal/Pet Identification Tag 	No Charge 
Police 	Miscellaneous Fees 	False Alarm 	See below 
Police 	Miscellaneous Fees 	Residential 1—3 	No Charge 
Police 	Miscellaneous Fees 	Residential 4—8 	$50.00 
Police 	Miscellaneous Fees 	Residential 8+ 	$100.00 
Police 	Miscellaneous Fees 	Commercial 1—3 	No Charge 
Police 	Miscellaneous Fees 	Commercial 4+ 	$25.00 
Police 	Miscellaneous Fees 	Fingerprints/background check (new license, change of owner) 	Market Rate 
Police 	Miscellaneous Fees 	Images or audio burned to CD (requested/FOIA) 	$1.00 per CD 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Overweight vehicles 	See below 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Police Escort 	Per Police Dept. 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Permit Revision 	$10.00 per permit 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Permit Reinstatement — denied permit 	No Charge 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Permit Reinstatement — suspended permit 	$50.00 per permit 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Overweight vehicle permits 	See below 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 1A — 2 axles — 54,000 pounds gross 	$25.00 
single trip 
$40.00 
round trip 
$110.00 quarterly 
$440.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 2A — 2 axles — >54,000 pounds gross 	$40.00 
single trip 
$75.00 
round trip 
$170.00 quarterly 
$680.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 3A — 3 axles — 68,000 pounds gross 	$35.00 
single trip 
$60.00 
round trip 
$150.00 quarterly 
$600.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 4A — 3 axles — 80,000 pounds gross 	$50.00 
single trip 
$95.00 
round trip 
$210.00 quarterly 
$840.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 5A — 3 axles — >80,000 pounds gross 	$75.00 
single trip 
$140.00 
round trip 
$320.00 quarterly 
$1,280.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 6A — 4 axles — 72,000 pounds gross 	$40.00 
single trip 
$70.00 
round trip 
$170.00 quarterly 
$680.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 7A — 4 axles — 80,000 pounds gross 	$45.00 
single trip 
$80.00 
round trip 
$200.00 quarterly 
$800.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 8A — 4 axles — >80,000 pounds gross 	$75.00 
single trip 
$140.00 
round trip 
$320.00 quarterly 
$1,280.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 9A — 5 axles — 100,000 pounds gross 	$50.00 
single trip 
$95.00 
round trip 
$210.00 quarterly 
$840.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 10A — 5 axles — >100,000 pounds gross 	$80.00 
single trip 
$155.00 
round trip 
$340.00 quarterly 
$1,360.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 11A — 6 axles — 120,000 pounds gross 	$55.00 
single trip 
$100.00 
round trip 
$240.00 quarterly 
$960.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 12A — 6 axles — 143,000 pounds gross 	$65.00 
single trip 
$120.00 
round trip 
$280.00 quarterly 
$1,120.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 13A — 6 axles — >143,000 pounds gross 	$100.00 
single trip 
$190.00 
round trip 
$420.00 quarterly 
$880.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 14A — 7 axles — 162,000 pounds gross 	$75.00 
single trip 
$140.00 
round trip 
$320.00 quarterly 
$1,280.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 15A — 7 axles — >162,000 pounds gross 	$110.00 
single trip 
$210.00 
round trip 
$460.00 quarterly 
$1,840.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 16A — 8 axles — 187,000 pounds gross 	$85.00 
single trip 
$160.00 
round trip 
$360.00 quarterly 
$1,440.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 17A — 8 axles — >187,000 pounds gross 	$130.00 
single trip 
$250.00 
round trip 
$540.00 quarterly 
$2,160.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 18A — 9+ axles — 225,000 pounds gross 	$125.00 
single trip 
$240.00 
round trip 
$520.00 quarterly 
$2,080.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 19A — 9+ axles — >225,000 pounds gross 	$150.00 
single trip 
$290.00 
round trip 
$630.00 quarterly 
$2,520.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Over-dimension vehicle permits 	See below 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 1B — 10 ft. wide — 14 ft. 6 in. high — 70 ft. long 	$20.00 
single trip 
$30.00 
round trip 
$100.00 quarterly 
$400.00 annually 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 2B — 14 ft. wide — 14 ft. 6 in. high — 100 ft. long 	$35.00 
single trip 
$60.00 
round trip 
$175.00 quarterly 
$700.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 3B — 18 ft. wide — 16 ft. high — 135 ft. long 	$55.00 
single trip 
$100.00 
round trip 
$275.00 quarterly 
$900.00 annual 
Police 	Overweight Vehicles 	Category 4B — >18 ft. wide — >16ft. high — >135 ft. long 	$105.00 
single trip 
$200.00 
round trip 
$525.00 quarterly 
$2,100.00 annual 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Water Sales — Glenview 	See below 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Water and Sewer service (incorporated) 	$6.87/1,000 gallons of water and $1.39/1,000 gallons of sanitary 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Water service only (incorporated) 	$6.87/1,000 gallons 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Water service only (unincorporated) 	$10.32/1,000 gallons 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Water/sewage connected to Village system (unincorporated) 	$10.32/1,000 gallons for water and $1.39/1,000 
gallons for sanitary 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Water Sales — Glenview Fixed meter fees (water/sewer each) billed quarterly 	See below 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Meter size ?" & ¾s" 	$12.00 water/$7.64 sewer 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Meter size ¾" 	$17.13 water/$10.90 sewer 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Meter size 1" 	$26.20 water/$16.67 sewer 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Meter size 1.5" 	$59.06 water/$37.58 sewer 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Meter size 2" 	$107.95 water/$68.68 sewer 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Meter size 3" 	$245.93 water/$156.46 sewer 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Meter size 4" 	$421.57 water/$268.20 sewer 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Meter size 6" 	$698.97 water/$444.68 sewer 
Public Works 	Water Sales 	Meter size 8" 	$977.53 water/$621.90 sewer 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Water Meter — Commercial 	See below 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	1.5" OMNI C2 	$1,458.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	2" OMNI C2 	$1,636.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	3" OMNI C2 	$2,138.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	4" OMNI C2 	$3,505.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	6" OMNI C2 	$5,713.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Water Meter — Irrigation/Sprinkler 	See below 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	1.5" OMNI T2 	$1,103.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	2" OMNI T2 	$1,253.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	3" OMNI T2 	$1,633.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	4" OMNI T2 	$2,863.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	6" OMNI T2 	$4,768.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Water Meter — Residential 	See below 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	¾" S iPERL 	$360.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	¾" iPERL 	$375.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	1" iPERL 	$425.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	1.5" OMNI R2 	$900.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	2" OMNI R2 	$990.00 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Construction Water 	See below 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Single Family 	Current Water Service Incorporated Rate/1,000 
gallons × 4 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Multi-Family 	Current Water Service Incorporated Rate/1,000 
gallons × 4 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Industrial/Commercial: 0—5,000 sq. ft. 	Current Water Service Incorporated Rate/1,000 
gallons × 15 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Industrial/Commercial: 5,001—10,000 sq. ft. 	Current Water Service Incorporated Rate/1,000 
gallons × 20 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Industrial/Commercial: 10,001—15,000 sq. ft. 	Current Water Service Incorporated Rate/1,000 
gallons × 22 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Industrial/Commercial: 15,001—20,000 sq. ft. 	Current Water Service Incorporated Rate/1,000 
gallons × 24 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Industrial/Commercial: 20,001—25,000 sq. ft. 	Current Water Service Incorporated Rate/1,000 
gallons × 26 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Industrial/Commercial: 25,001—30,000 sq. ft. 	Current Water Service Incorporated Rate/1,000 
gallons × 28 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Industrial/Commercial: 30,001—35,000 sq. ft. 	Current Water Service Incorporated Rate/1,000 
gallons × 30 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Industrial/Commercial: 35,001—40,000 sq. ft. 	Current Water Service Incorporated Rate/1,000 
gallons × 32 
Public Works 	Water Tap and Related Fees 	Industrial/Commercial: 40,001 + sq. ft. 	Current Water Service Incorporated Rate/1,000 gallons × (32+1 for each additional 1,000 sq. ft.) 
Resolution Center 	Refuse/Recycling 	Waste Disposal License 	Current Fee 
Resolution Center 	Refuse/Recycling 	Yard Waste Tag 	Current Fee 
 
(Code 1959, ch. 2, art. XVII, § 1; Ord. No. 3861, § 1, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 5113, §§ 8, 14, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 5183, § 2, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 5285, § 4, 12-8-2009; Ord. No. 5293, § 2 1-7-2009; Ord. No. 5367, § 5, 7-20-2010; Ord. No. 5385, § 4, 10-5-2010; Ord. No. 5411, § 2, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 5454, § 3, 6-7-2011; Ord. No. 5524, §§ 1—21, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 5623, § 2, 12-4-2012; Ord. No. 5633, § 2, 2-5-2013; Ord. No. 5656, § 2, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 5661, § 2, 4-2-2013; Ord. No. 5742, § 2, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 5802, § 4, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 5835, § 2, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 5878, § 2, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 5887, § 5, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 5901, § 4, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. 5961, § 2, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 5980, § 3, 4-19-2016; Ord. No. 6025, § 2, 11-15-2016; Ord. No. 6082, § 2, 6-8-2017; Ord. No. 6139, § 2, 12-5-2017; Ord. No. 6153, § 4, 3-6-2018; Ord. No. 6230, § 2, 12-4-2018)  
Sec. 30-2. - Improved land fair market value. 
Fair market value of improved land in the Village is $500,000.00 per acre. 
(Code 1959, ch. 2, art. XVII, § 2; Ord. No. 4146, § 2, 3-21-2000)  
Sec. 30-3. - Fee discount for certain single-family building permits. 
For building permit applications filed between December 1 and February 28 each year, the Village of Glenview will extend a twenty-five (25) percent discount on associated building and plan review permit fees for single-family home improvement projects including room additions, interior remodeling, and accessory uses to single-family dwellings including but not limited to detached garages, sheds, decks, fences, swimming pools, gazebos, and concrete and asphalt flatwork. 
(Ord. No. 6230, § 3, 12-4-2018)  
Sec. 30-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5411, § 5, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 30-4, which pertained to electrical contractor registration fee and derived from Code 1959, § 10.14; and Ord. No. 5190, § 17, adopted Jan. 3, 2009.  
Sec. 30-5. - Overweight and oversize vehicle permit fee schedule. 
(a)  The Village with respect to highways under its jurisdiction shall collect a fee as shown herein from applicants for the issuance of a permit to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicle(s), and/or loads, which fit the categories shown. 
(b)  Limited continuous use permits are not available for overweight vehicles. Limited continuous use permits are available only for over-dimension (oversized vehicles) and for a period of not more than three months from the date of issue. 
(c)  Fee schedule. All fee schedules will be included in chapter 30, section 1 (30-1) the Fees and Charges Ordinance. 
(1)  Weights which exceed those prescribed in categories 7B, 8B and 9B or larger will require an escort. The number of police escort vehicles shall be determined by the Village, based upon route and safety concerns. Fees for said escort shall be time and a half, top patrol officer pay, per officer assigned and shall provide for a minimum of two hours of service. 
(2)  Any axle or gross weight greater than the maximum weights set forth in this ordinance are subject to special assessment and investigation to determine appropriate fees for the above table. 
(3)  When a permit is requested for an overweight and over-dimension (oversized) vehicle, the higher fee schedule will be assessed. 
(4)  The number of police escort vehicles shall be determined by the police department for dimension categories 3C through 5C and shall be based on the route and safety concerns. Fees for said escort shall be time and a half, top patrol officer pay, per officer assigned and shall provide for a minimum of two hours of service. 
(Ord. No. 5082, § 3, 3-18-2008; Ord. No. 5411, § 6, 12-13-2010)  
Sec. 30-6. - Emergency medical service (EMS) fees. 
The following EMS fee schedule is hereby created and shall be applicable to all EMS transports including Basic Life Support (BLS) and Advanced Life Support (ALS) transports provided by the Village of Glenview Fire Department. Ambulance responses not resulting in patient transports will not be subject to these fees. 
(1)  Resident Rate (applies to Village of Glenview residents, Glenbrook Fire Protection District residents, and Village employees): Shall be as provided in chapter 30, section 1. The Village hereby establishes an "Insurance-Only" collection policy for residents, which means that the Village will accept the amount allowed by insurance companies, Medicare, Medicaid, etc. as payment-in-full for the service; residents will not incur any out-of-pocket expenses such as insurance co-pay or deductible fees. The rate will automatically increase by 3% on each calendar year commencing January 1, 2010 unless otherwise modified by the Village Board of Trustees. 
(2)  Non-Resident Rate: Shall be as provided in chapter 30, section 1. The Village hereby establishes a "Full-Billing" collection policy for non-residents, which means the Village will bill patients for amounts not covered by insurance, with the exception of Medicare and Medicaid payments, which by law, must be accepted as payment for these services. The rate will automatically increase by 3% on each calendar year commencing January 1, 2010 unless otherwise modified by the Village Board of Trustees. 
(3)  Mileage Rate: a per mile fee will be charged from the point of patient pick up to the hospital; the resident and non-resident collection policies apply. Such fee shall be as provided in chapter 30, section 1. The rate will automatically increase by 3% on each calendar year commencing January 1, 2010 unless otherwise modified by the Village Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 5086, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 5113, § 8, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 5802, § 3, 6-17-2014)  
Sec. 30-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5411, § 3, adopted Dec. 13, 2010, deleted § 30-7, which pertained to engineering fees and derived from Ord. No. 5159, § 3, adopted Nov. 18, 2008.  
Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 26; foreign fire insurance tax, § 70-31 et seq.; fire hydrants, § 82-321 et seq.; following, etc., fire apparatus, § 90-48; driving over fire hose, § 90-49; fire lanes, § 90-261 et seq.; fire lanes, § 90-554; fire and explosive hazards, § 98-380. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-391 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Established; composition; oath of office. 
There is hereby established an executive department of the Village which shall be known as the fire department. The fire department shall be a full-time paid department and shall consist of a fire marshal and such officers and members of the fire department and such other employees as the corporate authorities may provide from time to time. Each sworn member of the fire department shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe the oaths of office required of the sworn officers of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 7.1)  
Sec. 34-32. - Service outside corporate limits. 
Members of the fire department are authorized to go outside the corporate limits of the Village for the purpose of rendering aid to other fire departments, extinguishing fires or rendering aid in the case of accidents; provided, however, that the fire department shall not render such service outside the corporate limits of the Village, except upon order of the fire marshal, Village manager or Village president, and except where the Village has undertaken, by contract, to render service to property outside the corporate limits of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 7.11)  
Sec. 34-33. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall promulgate administrative rules and regulations to govern the operation of the fire department, and such rules and regulations are to be effective upon their approval by the Village manager. 
(b)  Members of the fire department, other than the fire marshal and other exempt ranks, shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the board of fire and police commissioners, pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code. Examination for all applicants for a position as a sworn firefighter in the fire department shall be conducted by the board of fire and police commissioners. The board of fire and police commissioners shall, according to its rules and regulations, establish an eligible list of all candidates for a position in the fire department, make all appointments thereto, provide for non-exempt promotions within the fire department, as well as provide for the suspension or removal of any member of the fire department. 
(Code 1959, § 7.12)  
Sec. 34-34. - Civil service exempt command positions. 
The fire chief, with the concurrence and the approval of the Village manager, shall have the authority to recruit and appoint individuals to civil service exempt command positions within the fire department. Civil service exempt command positions will not have certified status and rights. Individuals appointed to civil service exempt command positions shall serve at the pleasure of the fire chief and may be removed by the fire chief at any time with the concurrence of the Village manager. If an individual who holds certified status within the fire department in another position is appointed to a civil service exempt command position, the individual shall retain a guaranteed right to return to the former position with the certified status upon termination from the exempt command position. 
(Code 1959, § 7.14)  
Sec. 34-35. - Fire lieutenant. 
There is hereby created the office of fire lieutenant for the Village. The duties of a fire lieutenant shall be such as are prescribed by the fire marshal and board of fire and police commissioners. The compensation of the fire lieutenant shall be fixed from time to time by the president and board of trustees of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 7.15)  
Sec. 34-36. - Firefighters and firefighter paramedic. 
There are hereby created the positions of firefighter and firefighter paramedic for the Village. The duties of a firefighter shall be such as are prescribed by the fire marshal and board of fire and police commissioners. The compensation of a firefighter shall be fixed from time to time by the president and board of trustees of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 7.16)  
Sec. 34-37. - Residency requirements. 
Members of the Village fire department are not required to live within the corporate limits of the Village, either at the time of their appointment as firefighters or while serving as firefighters with the fire department. No geographical restrictions with respect to residency are applicable to members of the fire department. 
(Code 1959, § 7.17)  
Secs. 34-38—34-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIRE MARSHAL 
 
Sec. 34-61. - Office created; appointment. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of fire marshal, who shall be the chief of the fire department. The fire marshal shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the Village manager. The office of fire marshal is specifically exempt from the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4 and 5/10.2-1-17. 
(b)  No person shall be eligible to hold the office of fire marshal unless he shall possess technical training and knowledge, and experience in the matters of fire suppression, rescue and fire prevention. The fire marshal may be appointed from within or without the fire department. 
(Code 1959, § 7.2)  
Sec. 34-62. - Duties. 
(a)  It shall be the function and duty of the fire department and every member thereof to extinguish fires and prevent the occurrence or spread thereof. The fire department and its members shall have such additional municipal duties as may be assigned by the Village manager. The fire department is authorized to cooperate with other municipal firefighting organizations in the performance of its duties. 
(b)  The duties of the fire marshal are as follows: 
(1)  The fire marshal shall have direct charge and control of the fire department, subject to the supervision and direction of the Village manager, and shall be responsible to the Village manager for the faithful and efficient conduct and operation of the fire department. The fire marshal shall be responsible for the proper care and maintenance of all fire equipment and apparatus belonging to the Village. 
(2)  The fire marshal shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of all fire department activities and shall report such activities to the Village manager. He shall investigate the cause of all fires which may occur in the Village and keep a record of the circumstances of each case, reporting such findings to the Village manager as soon as possible. He shall have the right to enter upon the premises wherein any fire has occurred, if necessary, in order to investigate the origin of the fire. 
(3)  The fire marshal shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all buildings and premises, except the interiors of private dwellings, as often as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or any violations of the provisions of this chapter and of any other ordinances affecting the fire hazard, and to ensure compliance, in all places of assembly, with all laws, ordinances, regulations and orders dealing with overcrowding, use of decorative materials, maintenance of exitways, maintenance of fire alarm and fire detecting systems, and fire extinguishing systems and appliances, and all other similar laws, ordinances, regulations and orders. It shall further be the duty of the fire marshal to perform all duties which are set forth in this chapter. 
(4)  The fire marshal shall attend all fires occurring in the Village, and, in case of his absence, it shall be the duty of the next ranking member of the fire department in command to take charge of the fire department, and, during the absence of the fire marshal, such person in command shall have and exercise all the powers of the fire marshal. 
(5)  The fire marshal shall examine all buildings reported dangerous or damaged by fire or accident, and shall, when requested by the Village manager or director of building and zoning, also examine all buildings under application to raise, enlarge, alter or rebuild and make a report of the condition to the director of building and zoning. 
(Code 1959, § 7.3)  
Sec. 34-63. - Power to remove or destroy property. 
The fire marshal shall have the power to cause the removal of any property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from fire, to prevent the spreading of fire or to protect adjoining property. 
(Code 1959, § 7.4)  
Sec. 34-64. - Reports. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall cause records to be kept for the Village manager of all transactions in the fire department for the preceding year. Such report shall also set forth, as nearly as can be ascertained, the number of fires, the causes thereof, the number of persons injured, a description of the buildings destroyed and injured, the amount of property destroyed by fire and insurance thereon, and all other relevant statistics. He shall make such interim reports as may be requested by the Village manager. 
(Code 1959, § 7.5)  
Sec. 34-65. - Command at fires. 
In case of fire, the fire marshal and his assistants shall rank in the order named, and the officer of the highest rank at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the management thereof for the suppression of the fire, in the best manner possible. 
(Code 1959, § 7.6)  
Secs. 34-66—34-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5636, § 2(h), adopted Feb. 19, 2013, repealed art. II, div. 3, pension fund and board, § 34-91, which pertained to in general and was derived from Code 1959, § 7.13. 
 
Secs. 34-91—34-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION SERVICES 
 
Sec. 34-121. - Established; duties. 
(a)  This chapter shall be enforced by the development department of the Village. Fire prevention services shall be operated under the supervision of the director of development in consultation with the fire marshal. The development department shall be responsible for the inspection of all properties as required by the Village code. 
(b)  The director of development and the fire marshal of the fire department shall recommend any amendments to this chapter which, in their judgment are desirable. 
(Code 1959, § 7.52; Ord. No. 5380, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 34-122. - Appeals. 
(a)  Whenever the development department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this chapter do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this chapter has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the development department to the fire marshal within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. The decision of the fire marshal shall be final. 
(b)  The fire marshal, when so appealed to, may vary the applications of any provision of this chapter in any particular case in accordance with the provisions of section 34-152. 
(Code 1959, § 7.54; Ord. No. 5380, § 2, 10-5-2010)  
Secs. 34-123—34-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CODES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Building codes, § 18-191 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of the fire department and chief of the fire prevention bureau, when used in the fire prevention codes, mean the fire marshal, the authority having jurisdiction, or the director of development or their respective designees ("fire code official"). 
Corporation counsel, when used in the fire prevention codes, means the attorney for the Village of Glenview. 
Municipality, when used in the fire prevention codes, means the Village of Glenview. 
(Code 1959, § 7.53; Ord. No. 5380, § 3, 10-5-2010) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-152. - Modifications. 
The fire marshal shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention codes upon application, in writing, by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the codes, provided that the spirit of the codes shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire marshal thereon shall be entered upon the records of the development department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 1959, § 7.55; Ord. No. 5380, § 3, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 34-153. - Copies on file. 
Not less than three copies of the codes adopted under this article, all as amended in this article, have been and are filed in the office of the Village clerk, and are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 7.51)  
Sec. 34-154. - New materials, processes and occupancies requiring permits. 
The director of inspectional services or his/her designee, the fire marshal of the fire department and the fire inspector of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the codes adopted by this article. Following such determination and specification, the committee shall give written notice thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1959, § 7.56; Ord. No. 5190, § 16, 1-3-2009)  
Sec. 34-155. - Code compliance required. 
Whenever a physical change is made to a structure for which a building or remodeling permit is required, or a change of the type of occupancy occurs which, in the opinion of the fire marshal, creates a greater hazard to public safety or welfare, such property shall be brought into compliance with all codes adopted by the Village relative to the protection of health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1959, § 7.60)  
Sec. 34-156. - Reimbursement for extraordinary expenses. 
(a)  Upon report and recommendation from the fire department, the corporate authorities find and determine that the recipients of aid or emergency relief and services shall be assessed for extraordinary costs incurred and payable to third parties or Village personnel for costs associated with rendering aid or emergency relief and services, including provision of supplies and equipment exhausted in rendering of such aid or emergency relief and services. 
(b)  Examples of such items to be billed to persons receiving aid or emergency relief and services include, but are not limited to, services by third parties relative to plumbing work within property lot lines, removal of vehicles or other items necessitating use of special equipment, testing to determine life safety factors when required, handling or disposing of toxic or hazardous substances and other related or necessary emergency relief and services. 
(c)  The recipients or benefactors, or administrators, personal representatives, executors, successors, heirs or assigns thereof, all as determined by the head of the department rendering aid or emergency relief, shall be and are obligated to reimburse the Village in the actual amount of payments made by the Village to third parties for services rendered in providing aid or emergency relief and for personnel costs associated with such aid, as well as payments to replenish necessary supplies and equipment used while providing aid or emergency services. The head of the Village's department incurring such extraordinary costs shall notify the finance director's office of the circumstances and provide a copy of the invoice or billing statement from the third party that specifies the nature of the expenditure and the amount to be, or in fact, paid. The finance director shall cause an invoice to be issued for the amount certified by the department head as to each circumstance reported. 
(d)  As used in this section the term "third party" means and includes any person, company or business entity, other than the Village or its employees. The Village may not employ any person or entity as a third party directly or indirectly sharing an interest in such services with an employee or officer of the Village, nor a company of which any portion is owned by an employee or officer of the Village. 
(e)  The finance director shall allow for a reasonable time for the payment of the reimbursement amount and shall hear any complaints or objections on the type and amounts of the expense. The finance director may adjust the amounts invoiced based upon demonstrated hardship, but is not required to make such adjustment. If no payment or response to a request for reimbursement has been received within 30 days from the date of invoice, the finance director is authorized to undertake such action as provided by law for the recovery of money due the Village, including, but not limited to, the filing of a lien in the office of the recorder of deeds of the County or the office of the registrar of titles. 
(Code 1959, § 7.61)  
Sec. 34-157. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention codes adopted under this article or who fails to comply therewith, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the fire marshal or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in this article, shall severally, for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided by section 1-16. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within the time reasonably necessary as determined and specified in writing by the fire marshal, or within such further time as may be extended by the fire marshal, in writing, and, when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the penalty set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1959, § 7.57)  
Secs. 34-158—34-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOCA NATIONAL FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Secs. 34-181—34-200. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 16, adopted Jan. 3, 2009, deleted § 34-181 in its entirety. Former § 34-181 pertained to BOCA National Fire Prevention Code and derived from Code 1959, § 7.51(a).  
DIVISION 3. - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 
 
Sec. 34-201. - International Code Council (ICC) International Fire Code adopted; amendments. 
The 2012 edition of the ICC International Fire Code is hereby adopted with the following amendments: 
(1)  Section 101.1 Title. Amended to read as follows: "These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the Village of Glenview, Cook County, Illinois (the "Village") hereinafter referred to as 'this code.'" 
(2)  Section 102.7. Referenced codes and standards. Amended to read as follows: "The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 80 of this code and such codes and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between the provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. The following codes and standards are not adopted by reference and thus are not considered part of the requirements of this code. 
IPC 2012 International Plumbing Code 
IPSDC 2012 International Private Sewage Disposal Code 
IZC 2012 International Zoning Code 
IWUIC 2012 International Wildland-Urban Interface Code 
ISPSC 2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code" 
(3)  Section 202 Definitions. Amended by adding the following definition: " Consumer Novelties . Consumer novelties shall mean: (i) snakes, glow worm pellets, smoke devices, trick snappers, trick matches, cigarette loads, auto burglar alarms, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, and other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive compound are used, provided they are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and (ii) toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than 0.25 grains of explosive mixture." 
(4)  Section 202 Definitions - Fire Alarm Control Unit. Amended to read as follows: " Fire Alarm Control Unit . A system component that receives inputs from automatic and manual fire alarm devices and may be capable of supplying power to detection devices and transponders or off-premises transmitters. The control unit is capable of providing a transfer of power to the notification appliances and transfer of conditions to relays or devices. The control unit shall be used for the fire alarm only." 
(5)  Section 505.1 Address identification. Amended to read as follows: "Each structure to which an address number has been assigned shall have such number displayed in a position easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way. All numbers shall be in Arabic numerals at least six (6) inches high with a one (1) inch stroke." 
(6)  Section 506.1 Where required. Amended to read as follows: "All buildings or structures equipped with a fire alarm or fire suppression system shall provide a fire department Knox box on the exterior of the building or structure. The box shall contain keys to allow fire department entry in the event of fire alarm activation or an emergency. The fire code official may also require a fire department Knox box if access to the building, structure or area is unduly difficult. All fire department key boxes, location of the Knox boxes, and the number of key boxes required shall be approved by the fire official. The Knox box shall be mounted at a height of five feet six inches (5' 6") above the finished grade." 
(7)  Section 510 Emergency Responder Radio Coverage. Deleted in its entirety. 
(8)  Section 903 Automatic sprinkler systems. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.7 Private fire hydrants , which reads as follows: "In developed lots, subdivisions or parcels except R-3 occupancies, fire hydrants shall be located no more than 300 feet apart. Fire hydrants shall be provided on all sides of a developed lot, subdivision or parcel except R-3 occupancies as approved by the authority having jurisdiction. One (1) fire hydrant shall be located not more than 100 feet from the fire department connection on the fire protection water supply to the building or structure." 
(9)  Section 903.2 Where required. Amended to read as follows: "Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in all new buildings regardless of materials used in construction and / or use group classification. Automatic fire suppression systems shall comply with the 2010 edition of the NFPA Standards. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Detached accessory building with an intended use that is incidental to that primary building on the same lot of record as a detached one-family dwelling. Detached accessory buildings shall include, but not be limited to, detached garages, storage sheds, and animal habitats. 
2.  Detached accessory buildings with an intended use that is incidental to that of the primary building on the same lot of record where the primary building is classified as a Use Group B, F, I, M, S, and U that are less than 250 square feet in size. This exception shall not apply if the horizontal separation between the accessory building is less than 25 feet from any other building or accessory building and/or structure is used for the following hazardous materials: 
a.  Flammable and/or combustible liquids classified as Class 1A, 1B, 1C, and 111A and if the combined quantity exceeds 30 gallons. 
b.  Flammable gas if the quantity exceeds 10 gallons and/or 333 cubic feet of gas. 
c.  Corrosives. 
d.  Toxic agents. 
e.  Oxidizers classified as Class 2, 3, or 4. Class 1 oxidizers shall not exceed 100 gallons and/or 1,000 pounds. 
f.  Unstable/reactives. 
g.  Water reactives if the quantity exceeds 100 gallons and/or 1,000 pounds. 
h.  Pyrophoric materials (All classifications). 
i.  Organic peroxides (All classifications). 
j.  Explosives (All classifications). 
3.  Picnic shelters, gazebos, pergolas, and detached public restroom facilities with a minimum horizontal separation of 25 feet from all other buildings. This exception shall not apply if the picnic shelter, gazebo, pergola, or detached public restroom is equipped with a permanent heat-producing appliance that utilizes natural gas and/or propane as a fuel supply or if the detached public restroom facility exceeds a total of 400 square feet in size. 
4.  In telecommunications equipment buildings, a manual dry fire suppression system shall be installed in those spaces or areas equipped exclusively for telecommunications equipment, association electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines provided that those spaces or areas are equipped with an automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907 and are separated from the remainder of the building wire fire separation assemblies consisting of one-hour fire resistance rated walls and two-hour fire resistance rated floor/ceiling assemblies." 
(10)  Section 903.2.1 through 903.2.11 Where required. Deleted in their entirety. 
(11)  Section 903.2.12 During construction. Renumbered as Section 903.2.1. 
(12)  Section 903.3.5 Water supplies. Amended to read as follows: "Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1 of this code. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements of this section and Title 77, Part 890 of the Illinois Administrative Code (the "Illinois Plumbing Code"), as amended. Hydrant flow data used for the design of any sprinkler system shall be no more than one (1) year old." 
(13)  Section 903.3.5 Water supplies. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.3.5.3 Low water pressure factor, which reads as follows: "Provide a minimum ten percent (10%), but not less than five (5) psi, safety factor in the fire protection system hydraulic calculation. The system demand shall be a minimum 5 psi below the annual water flow test supply." 
(14)  Section 903.4.2 Alarms. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.4.2.1 Additional alarm location , which reads as follows: "A weatherproof visual strobe activated by water flow shall be provided on the exterior of the building or structure and located over the fire department connection or in a location approved by the authority having jurisdiction." 
(15)  Section 903.4.2 Alarms. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.4.2.2 Location , which reads as follows: "Alarm notification appliance and approved audio/visual devices shall be provided and located per NFPA 72. Automatic fire alarm systems shall comply with the 2010 edition of the NFPA 72 Standard." 
(16)  Section 903.4.3 Floor control valves. Amended to read as follows: "Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor of the building or structure." 
(17)  Section 903.5 Testing and maintenance. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.5.1 Accessibility, which reads as follows: "Fire sprinkler systems' inspection test valves shall be accessible at all times and located no more than six (6) feet above the finished floor surface. On multiple riser systems test valves shall be clearly identified in permanent marking as to the riser and area served. 
(18)  Section 903 Automatic sprinkler systems. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.7 Fire pump test header, which reads as follows: "Automatic sprinkler systems that are equipped with an approved fire pump shall be provided with an OS&Y (or approved equal) control valve on the fire pump test header(s). Fire pump installations shall include an exterior test header." 
(19)  Section 903 Automatic sprinkler systems. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.8 Fire department access , which reads as follows: "Rooms or spaces containing an automatic sprinkler system riser valve and/or a fire pump shall be provided with direct access from the exterior of the building or structure." 
(20)  Section 903 Automatic sprinkler systems. Amended by adding a new subsection, 903.9 Warehouse storage, which reads as follows: "A two and one-half (2 ½) inch fire hose valve with a one and one-half (1 ½) inch reducer to a one and one-half (1 ½) inch connection shall be provided at each means of egress to warehouse storage areas greater than 20,000 square feet in which storage exceeds twelve (12) feet in height. The two and one-half (2 ½) inch fire hose valve(s) shall be installed on a separate riser piping system and shall be provided with a four (4) inch water supply and a two and one-half (2 ½) inch brand water supplies. Each two and one-half (2 ½) inch fire hose valve shall be installed so no distance from the nearest two and one-half (2 ½) inch fire hose valve is greater than 120 feet." 
(21)  Section 905.3 Required installations. Amended by adding a new subsection, 905.3.9 Three story buildings , which reads as follows: "Any building that has three (3) stories or more above grade, or has any horizontal dimension exceeding 150 feet between exterior walls, shall be equipped with a standpipe system designed and installed in accordance with NFPA standard 14 for standpipe and hose systems (Class 1 service) as defined therein. Dry standpipe systems are prohibited unless written approval is received from the Fire Code Official or his /her designee. 
(22)  Section 907.2 Where required - new buildings and structures. Deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 907.2 Where required- new and existing structures and buildings. "An approved manual, automatic or combination manual and automatic fire alarm monitored system in accordance with the provision of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new buildings and structures in all use groups. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two-family dwelling units. 
2.  In existing residential multi-family use groups, initiating and notification devices required by NFPA 72 may be omitted from within the dwelling unit provided that such devices located within the adjacent common areas "outside the dwelling unit" shall provide an audible level acceptable to the fire code official." 
907.2.1 Fire alarm and detection systems - requirement. Fire Alarm Control Units shall be configured to be silenced with a key and no other method. 
907.2.2 Fire alarm and detection systems - Group I occupancies. A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in Group I occupancies. An electrically supervised, automatic smoke detection system shall be provided in accordance with Sections 907.2.2.1, 907.2.2.2, and 907.2.2.3 of this code. 
Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes in resident or patient sleeping areas of Group I-1 and I-2 occupancies shall not be required at exits located at all nurse's control stations or other constantly attended staff locations, provided such stations are visible and continuously accessible and that travel distances required in Section 903.7.1 of this code are not exceeded. 
907.2.2.1 Group I-1. Corridors, habitable spaces other than sleeping units and kitchens and waiting areas that are open to corridors shall be equipped with an automatic smoke detection system. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Smoke detection in habitable spaces is not required where the facility is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system. 
2.  Smoke detection is not required for exterior balconies. 
907.2.2.2 Group I-2. Corridors in nursing homes (both intermediate care and skilled nursing facilities), detoxification facilities and spaces permitted to be open to the corridors by Section 407.2 of this code shall be equipped with an automatic fire detection system. Hospital shall be equipped with smoke detection as required in Section 407.2 of this code. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Corridor smoke detection is not required in smoke compartments that contain patient sleeping units where patient sleeping units are provided with smoke detectors that comply with UL268. Such detectors shall be provided a visual display on the corridor side of each patient sleeping unit and an audible and visual alarm at the nursing station attending each unit. 
2.  Corridor smoke detection is not required in smoke compartments that contain patient sleeping units where patient sleeping unit doors are equipped with automatic door-closing devices with integral smoke detectors on the unit sides installed in accordance with their listing, provided that the integral detectors perform the required alerting function. 
907.2.2.3 Group I-3. Group I-3 occupancies shall be equipped with a manual and automatic fire alarm system install for alerting staff. 
907.2.2.3.1 System initiation. Actuation of an automatic fire-extinguishing system, a manual fire alarm box or a fire detector shall initiate an approved fire alarm signal which automatically notifies staff. Pre-signal systems shall not be used. 
907.2.2.3.2 Manual fire alarm boxes. Manual fire alarm boxes are not required to be located in accordance with Section 907.3 of this code where the fire alarm boxes are provided at staff-attended locations having direct supervision over areas where manual fire alarm boxes have been omitted. 
Manual fire alarm boxes shall be permitted to be locked in areas occupied by detainees, provided that staff members are present within the subject area and have keys readily available to operate the manual fire alarm boxes. 
907.2.2.3.3 Smoke detectors. An approved automatic smoke detection system shall be installed throughout resident housing areas, including sleeping units and contiguous day rooms, group activity spaces and other common spaces normally accessible to residents. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Other approved smoke detection arrangements providing equivalent protection including, but not limited to placing detectors in exhaust ducts from cells or behind protective guards listed for the purposed are allowed when necessary to prevent damage or tampering. 
2.  Sleeping units in Use Condition 2 and 3. 
3.  Smoke detectors are not required in sleeping units with four or fewer occupants in smoke compartments that are required throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
907.2.3 Automatic fire detection system required. An approved automatic fire detection system shall be installed in all use groups, not provided with an automatic sprinkler system, and in accordance with NFPA 72. Devices, combination of devices, appliances, and equipment shall comply with Section 907.1.2 of this code. The automatic fire detectors shall be smoke detectors, except that an approved alternative type of detector shall be installed in spaces such as boiler rooms where, during normal operation, products of combustion are present in sufficient quantity to activate a smoke detector. Automatic fire alarm systems shall comply with the 2010 edition of the NFPA 72 Standard. 
907.2.4 Control panel locations. All fire alarm control panels of full function annunciator panels shall be installed within ten (10) feet of the main entrance, or in a location approved by the fire code official. 
(23)  Section 907.3 Fire safety functions. Amended to read as follows: "Automatic fire detectors utilized for the purpose of performing fire safety function shall be connected to the building's fire alarm control panel where a fire alarm system is required by Section 907.2 of this code. Detectors shall, upon actuation, perform the intended function and activate the alarm notification appliances or a visible and audible supervisory signal at a constantly attended location. The detectors shall be located in accordance with Chapter 5 of NFPA72. Multi-tenant Group M buildings will be activated by individual tenant space by the automatic sprinkler system flow switch for that space or an automatic fire detection system." 
(24)  Section 912 Fire Department Connections. Amended by adding a new subsection, 912.1.1 Local fire department connections , which reads as follows: "All fire department connections shall be a NST four- (4) inch, non-swivel Storz connection with a fixed 30-degree downturn and shall be located on the building wall, 24 inches to 42 inches above the finished grade." 
(25)  Section 1006.3 Emergency power for illumination. Amended by adding a new Line Number 6, which reads as follows: "6. All rooms containing the building sprinkler riser(s), fire pump(s), and fire alarm control panel(s) shall be provided with approved emergency lighting." 
(26)  Section 1007.6 Areas of refuge. Amended by adding a new subsection, 1007.6.4 Identification , which reads as follows: "Each door providing access to an area of refuge from an adjacent floor area shall be identified by a sign complying with ICC A117.1, stating: AREA OF REFUGE, and include the International Symbol of Accessibility. Where exit sign illumination is required by Section 1011.2 of this code, the area of refuge sign shall be internally illuminated. Additionally, tactile signage complying with ICC A117.1 shall be located at each door to an area of refuge." 
(27)  Section 2404.4 Fire protection. Amended to read as follows: "Spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system complying with Chapter 9 of this code. Protection shall also extend to exhaust plenums, exhaust ducts and both sides of dry filters when such filters are used. All existing spray booths and rooms in existence as of the date of this ordinance shall be retrofitted to comply with this automatic fire-extinguishing system requirement within a period of time specified by the fire code official." 
(28)  Section 5601.1.3 Fireworks. Amended to read as follows: "The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Storage and handling and use of fireworks at display sites in accordance with Sections 5604 and 5608.5 and NFPA 1123 or NFPA 1126 listed in Chapter 35 of the 2012 ICC International Building Code. 
2.  The retail sale of approved consumer novelties as defined in Section 202 of this code shall be permitted but only to persons 18 years of age or older. Retail sales shall be permitted only in buildings equipped with approved automatic sprinkler systems. The display of consumer novelties in a building shall be separated from all exit doors by a minimum distance of 20 feet or as approved in advance in writing by the fire code official. The sale of consumer novelties shall not be permitted at any building or on any property where flammable or combustible liquids or gases are sold or dispensed." 
(29)  Section 5601.1.3 Fireworks. Amended by adding a new subsection, 5601.1.3.1. Penalties for possession , which reads as follows: "Any person, firm, corporation, or entity that violates any provision of Section 5601.1.3 of this code shall be subject to penalties as described in Section 1-16 of the Glenview Municipal Code." 
(30)  Section 5601.2.2 Sales and retail display. Amend this subsection by adding the following sentence to the end of the paragraph: "It shall be unlawful to display, sell, store, or advertise for sale any Class 1.3G or 1.4G fireworks within the Village of Glenview." 
(31)  5608.2 Permit application. Amended to read as follows: "No person shall conduct, prepare, assist, order, maintain, or participate in a supervised public display of fireworks without first having obtained a permit from the Fire Chief. Prior to issuing permits for a fireworks display, plans for the fireworks display, inspections of the display site and demonstrations of the display operations shall be submitted to, and approved by, the Fire Chief or his/her designee. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks. After such privilege shall have been granted, possession and use of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. A plan establishing procedures to follow and actions to be taken in the event that a shell fails to ignite in, or discharge from, a mortar or fails to function over the fallout area or other malfunction shall be provided to the fire code official." 
(32)  Section 5608.2.1 Outdoor fireworks displays. Amended to read as follows: "In addition to the requirements of Section 403 of this code, permit applications for outdoor fireworks displays using Division 1.3G fireworks shall include a diagram of the location at which the display will be conducted, including the site from which fireworks will be discharged; the location of buildings, highways, overhead obstructions and utilities; and the lines behind which the audience will be restrained. All outdoor fireworks displays shall be electronically fired using approved electronic firing units and approved mortar racks. All outdoor fireworks displays shall comply with the provisions of the Fireworks Regulation Act of Illinois, 425 ILCS 30/1, et seq. , and the Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 227/1, et seq. ." 
(Code 1959, § 7.51(b); Ord. No. 5190, § 16, 1-3-2009; Ord. No. 5879, § 12, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 6021, § 2, 11-15-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 12, adopted December 9, 2014, amended § 34-201 to read as set out herein. Previously § 34-201 was titled adopted.  
Sec. 34-202. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 12, adopted December 9, 2014, repealed § 34-202 in its entirety. Former § 34-202 pertained to amendments and was derived from Code 1959, § 7.62; Ord. No. 5190, § 16, adopted January 3, 2009 and Ord. No. 5380, § 4, adopted October 5, 2010.  
Sec. 34-203. - Regulations. 
Use group R-2 structures (condominiums): 
An automatic fire suppression system shall be provided throughout all multiple family buildings containing three or more dwelling units in accordance with NFPA 13D 2010 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes. 
Use group R-3 structures (town homes): 
An automatic fire suppression system shall be provided throughout all multiple family buildings containing three or more dwelling units in accordance with NFPA 13D 2010 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes. 
Use group A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 (assembly occupancies): 
An automatic fire suppression system shall be provided throughout all assembly buildings greater than 2,500 square feet in area. The design and installation of the suppression system shall be in accordance with NFPA 13 2010 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems. 
Use Group B, E, F-1, F-2, H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4, I-1, I-2, I-3, M, S-1, S-2 and U (business, educational, factory, hospital, institutional, mercantile, storage and utility): 
An automatic fire suppression system shall be installed throughout all buildings referenced herein where the size is greater than 5,000 square feet in area. The design and installation of the suppression system shall be in accordance with NFPA 13 2010 Edition: Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to existing structures where alterations or remodeling exceed 50 percent of the replacement cost of the structure. For the purpose of this article, replacement costs shall be determined by the latest building valuation data published by the International Code Council. 
(Ord. No. 5879, § 13, 12-9-2014)  
Sec. 34-204. - Additional municipal requirements. 
(a)  Fire alarm systems. 
(1)  All fire alarm control panels shall be of the addressable type only. Zone panels are not permitted. 
(2)  Where installed, all fire alarm junction boxes, covers, and connectors shall be red in color. Fire alarm box covers shall be identified as "FIRE ALARM" in a contrasting color. 
(3)  Transformers used in a fire alarm system shall be hard-wired to its source of power. 
(4)  All fire alarm control panels shall be install so they are conspicuous, unobstructed, and easily accessible. Locations shall be acceptable to fire code official. 
(5)  Fire alarm wire shall be attached to structural members by the use of bridle rings or loops. 
(6)  Duct detectors shall indicate at the fire alarm control panel as a fire alarm. 
(b)  Fire protection and fire protection systems. 
(1)  All required documentation regarding the design and procedures for maintenance, inspection, and testing of fire protection systems, including fire protection submittal documents, shall be maintained in a secured location on the premises approved by the code official for the life of the fire protection systems. 
(2)  All duct detectors shall be labeled with the HVAC unit it is associated with and clearly marked on the finished side of the ceiling under the detector or in a location acceptable to the fire code official. Keyed remote test switches shall be located on the wall closest to the detector mounted five feet above the floor. 
(3)  Battery-operated emergency lighting shall be provided in all locations required by the fire code official, in all occupancies, other than one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(4)  Smoke detector spacing shall meet the NFPA 72 requirements of heat detector spacing for ceiling heights over ten feet. 
(5)  Where 13D fire sprinkler systems are installed, they shall have dry head coverage in the garage. 
(6)  Where 13D fire sprinkler systems are installed, CPVC shall not be permitted to be exposed. 
(c)  Public safety radio amplification systems. 
(1)  Applicability. Except as otherwise provided in this division and specifically exempted below, no person shall erect, construct, change the use of, remodel, or install an addition to a building which yields a resulting building footprint in excess of 150 percent of the original building unless a public safety radio amplification system is provided. For the purposes of determining the area of the original and subsequent building footprint(s) of any structure subject to the terms of this section, a plat of survey depicting the original conditions of the given lot prior to construction of any addition or modification governed by the provisions of this section shall be furnished for review by the fire code official to be compared to a proposed site plan depicting the scope of the improvements. An "as-built" plat of survey may be required by the fire code official at the conclusion of construction to confirm compliance with the 150 percent requirement. The 150 percent requirement shall apply cumulatively to all improvements proposed to a given building as of the effective date of the amendment from which this section is derived (December 9, 2014). 
Exceptions. The following uses and structures shall be exempt from the requirements of this subsection: 
a.  Single-family detached residential buildings. 
b.  Single—family attached residential buildings comprised of up to two units. 
c.  Any building or structure comprised of a combined gross floor area of less than 5,000 square feet. 
d.  Any building, structure, or addition which supports a minimum signal level of DAQ 3 (Delivered Audio Quality 3) available in 95 percent of the area designated on a coverage acceptance test plan designed in accordance with manufacturer specifications and approved by the Village Manager or his designee. 
(2)  Specialty structures. In addition to the construction types listed in subsection (c)(1), the requirements of this section shall additionally apply to the following specialty structures: 
a.  Electronics establishments including any and all buildings which hold, carry, store, and/or operate electronic devices, electronics, electrical and/or communications equipment which creates interference with the Village's public safety communications infrastructure. 
b.  Storage vaults and basements including any floor space above or below grade designated as a storage vault and any floor space below grade in excess of 2,000 square feet. 
c.  High-rise structures including any and all high-rise buildings comprised of five stories or greater and/or a building height of 140.0 feet or greater. 
d.  Hospitals including any and all buildings within any H-1 Hospital and Medical district as defined by Section 98-134 of the Code in which medical procedures are performed. 
(3)  System requirements. 
a.  Any building, structure, or addition subject to the provisions of this section shall be equipped with any of the following systems: 
1.  A radiating cable system. 
2.  An internal multiple antenna system with FCC type accepted bi-directional UHF amplifiers as needed to encompass the very high frequency (VHF) band range from 150.0 MHz through 174.0 MHz, the extremely high frequency (EHF) band range from 769.0 MHz through 775.0 MHz and 799.0 MHz through 805.0 MHz, and the tremendously high frequency (THF) band range from 806.0 MHz through 912.0 MHz. 
3.  An alternate system that has been approved by the Village as being capable of providing amplification to meet the requirements of this section. 
b.  The system shall be capable of operating on an independent battery and/or generator system for a period of at least 12 hours without any additional external power input. The battery system shall automatically charge in the presence of external power input. 
c.  There shall be no connectivity between the amplification system and the fire/police alarm system. 
d.  If a system's bi-directional amplifiers create interference within 35 dB of the NPSPAC band, filters tuned to the frequencies specified in subsection (3)a.2. shall be required. 
e.  Signal booster requirements. If used, signal boosters shall meet the following requirements; 
1.  All signal booster components shall be contained in a National Electrical Manufacturer's Association (NEMA) 4-type waterproof cabinet. 
2.  Battery systems used for the emergency power source shall be contained in a NEMA 4-type waterproof cabinet. 
3.  The signal booster system and battery system shall be electrically supervised and monitored by a supervisory service, or when approved by the fire code official, shall sound an audible signal at a constantly attended location. 
4.  Equipment shall have FCC certification prior to installation. 
(4)  Testing . 
a.  Qualifications of testing personnel. All tests shall be conducted, documented, and signed by a person in possession of a current FCC general radiotelephone operator license. All test records shall be retained at the inspected premises by the building owner and a copy submitted to the Village within 30 days of when the test has been conducted. In the event the test shall fail to comply with the minimum requirements of the Village, appropriate modifications and/or repairs shall be made and additional tests conducted until tests meet the minimum requirements of the Village. 
b.  Testing procedure. Each floor of the building shall be divided into a grid of approximately 20 equal areas. A maximum of two nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test. In the event that three of the areas fail the test, in order to be more statically accurate the floor may be divided into 40 equal areas. In such event, a maximum of four nonadjacent areas will be allowed to fail the test. After the 40 area tests, if the system continues to fail the property owner shall repair, replace, alter, or upgrade the system altered to meet the DAQ 3 coverage requirement. Talk testing from site to the Village Public Safety Communications Center shall use a two watt portable transceiver with speaker/microphone and flexible antenna. A spot located approximately in the center of the grid area will be selected for the test, then the radio will be keyed to verify two-way communication to and from the outside of the building. Once the spot has been selected, use of another spot with the grid area will not be permitted. Field strength testing instruments are to be recently calibrated (within the past 12 months) and of the frequency selective type incorporating a flexible antenna similar to the ones used on the hand held transceivers. 
c.  Gain values. The gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured and the results kept on file with the property owner so that the measurements can be verified each year during the annual tests. In the event that the measurement results become lost, the property owner will be required to rerun the acceptance test to reestablish the gain values. 
d.  Acceptance testing. Acceptance testing for an in-building radio amplification system is required. 
e.  Annual testing. When an in-building radio system is installed, the property owner shall test all active components of the system including but not limited to amplifier, the power supplies, and back-up batteries, a minimum of once every 12 months. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it was upon initial installation and acceptance. Back-up batteries and power supplies shall be tested under load for a period of one hour to verify that they will operate during an actual power outage. All other active components shall be checked to determine that they are operating within the manufacturers specifications for the intended purpose. 
f.  Ten-year testing. In addition to the annual test, the property owner shall perform a radio coverage test a minimum of once every ten years to ensure that the radio system continues to meet the requirements of the original acceptance. The procedure set forth above shall apply to such tests. 
(5)  Maintenance responsibilities. 
a.  Maintenance contract. Upon completion of all the tests to the minimum standards of the village, the property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the system. Upon request by the Village Manager or his designee, the property owner shall furnish a maintenance contract including the name(s) of the contractor(s), who will supply a 24-hour, 7-day emergency response within two hours after notification by either the village or the property owner. 
b.  System maintenance. The property owner shall be responsible for making any repairs, replacements, or upgrades to the systems should the system fail to meet testing specifications. 
(d)  Obstruction of existing and planned public safety communications microwave paths. 
(1)  New or modified buildings or structures comprised of six stories or greater may not interrupt the microwave paths connecting facilities which comprise the Village's public safety communications infrastructure. Prior to obtaining a permit for such construction or modifications, the property owner shall furnish proof to the Village Manager or his designee in the form of a registered engineer's certification that the structure will not interfere with the present microwave path or any planned path. 
(Ord. No. 5879, § 14, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 5982, § 2, 4-19-2016)  
Secs. 34-205—34-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 34-221—34-239. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5190, § 16, adopted Jan. 3, 2009, deleted § 34-221 in its entirety. Former § 34-221 pertained to NFPA Code for Outdoor Fireworks Displays and derived from Code 1959, § 7.51(c).  
DIVISION 5. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 15, adopted December 9, 2014, repealed div. 5, § 34-240, in its entirety. Former div. 5 pertained to additional municipal requirements and was derived from Ord. No. 5380, § 5, adopted October 5, 2010. 
 
Secs. 34-240—34-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LIQUEFIED, FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE GASES AND LIQUIDS 
 
Sec. 34-251. - Liquefied petroleum gases. 
The bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases within the boundaries of the Village is strictly prohibited. Portable tank storage shall be allowed as follows, provided all IFC and NFPA requirements are met: 
(1)  Commercial. A total of 108, 20-pound cylinders, solely for the purpose of sale or exchange for private use, may be approved by the director of development, provided that vehicular impact protection and other requirements as may be deemed required for public safety, are present. 
(2)  Construction. Portable cylinders used for heating purposes at construction sites shall be allowed in an amount acceptable to the code official, provided all requirements deemed necessary by the code official are present. 
An operational permit is required for the sale and/or storage of portable LP containers. There shall be no fee for such operational permit. 
(Code 1959, § 7.63; Ord. No. 5380, § 6, 10-5-2010)  
Sec. 34-252. - Flammable and combustible liquids. 
Flammable and combustible liquid aboveground tank storage is prohibited in any and all use districts within the boundaries of the Village, as established from time to time in chapter 98, zoning, except service stations and vehicle repair garages may have aboveground tanks for the storage of combustible liquids with the approval of the bureau fire prevention and when in conformance with all other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 7.64)  
Secs. 34-253—34-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS 
 
Sec. 34-281. - Manufacture, possession, storage, sale and use. 
The manufacture, possession, storage, sale or use of explosives or blasting agents within the boundaries of the Village is prohibited, except with the specific permission of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1959, § 7.65)  
Secs. 34-282—34-310. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5879, § 16, adopted December 9, 2014, repealed art. VII, § 34-311, in its entirety. Former art. VII pertained to fire protection systems and was derived from Code 1959, § 7.67; Ord. No. 4681, § 2, adopted September 7, 2004 and Ord. No. 5190, § 16, adopted January 3, `2009. 
 
Sec. 34-311. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL CODE PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 34-312. - Street names and signs. 
Street names shall be approved by the Village building and zoning director before the final plat is approved. The following criteria shall be used in determining street names: 
(1)  Village area street names should not be duplicated. Similar sounding names should be avoided even if the suffix is different, or names which sound similar to existing street names should be avoided. 
(2)  The word "north," "south," "east" or "west" should not be used in any part of a street name. 
(3)  One word names are required. 
(4)  Where possible, existing street names should be used where the new street lines up with the existing street, consistent with the Village address grid. 
(5)  Street names should not have any punctuation. 
(6)  Where a cul-de-sac condition exists, the same street names should be used, where possible. 
(7)  Street names should always include a suffix. The following suffixes are approved for use: 
a.  Avenue (Av); 
b.  Boulevard (Bv); 
c.  Circle (Cr); 
d.  Court (Ct); 
e.  Drive (Dr); 
f.  Lane (La); 
g.  Road (Rd); 
h.  Street (St); and 
i.  Terrace (Tr). 
(8)  Where a street intersection exists, the same street name will extend through the intersection. 
(9)  No building permit will be issued for a subdivision until all the appropriate street names and addresses are approved. 
(10)  Street addresses should be consistent with the established Village street grid system. Even address numbers are designated on the north and west side of the street, and odd address numbers are designated on the south and east side of the street. 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(3); Ord. No. 4792, § 2, 9-6-2005)  
Sec. 34-313. - Fire lanes.[7] 
(a)  Designation; posting signs. The chief of the fire department and chief of the police department are authorized and empowered to designate fire lanes and to require adjoining property owners to erect, post and maintain permanent signs giving notice of the prohibition of parking of vehicles or other obstructions in fire lanes. The superintendent of public works shall post or erect signs giving notice of the prohibition of parking of vehicles or other obstructions in fire lanes, at the expense of the adjoining property owner, except when such adjoining property owner agrees to furnish and erect the signs as prescribed by the superintendent of public works. 
(b)  Obstructions. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to leave the vehicle unattended, or for any person to leave delivered materials, in designated and posted fire lanes. 
(c)  Enforcement. Members of the police and fire departments are empowered to enforce this division. 
(d)  Violations; penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00, nor more than $500.00 for each offense, and, provided further, a separate and distinct offense shall be considered committed every day a motor vehicle is parked, or other obstructions left, in the posted fire lane, and, provided further, a separate and distinct offense shall be considered committed for every ten-day period the property owner fails to comply with orders to post or erect signs in designated fire lanes. 
(Code 1959, §§ 11.17.1—11.17.4; Ord. No. 4792, § 2, 9-6-2005) 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; fire lanes, § 90-554. 
 
Sec. 34-314. - Obstruction of building exits or sprinkler system connections.[8] 
(a)  Posting signs. The chief of the fire department and chief of the police department are empowered to designate areas adjacent to buildings where the parking of vehicles or other obstructions interfere with operations of the fire department and egress of occupants in case of fire or other emergency, and to require property owners to erect and maintain permanent signs giving notice of the prohibition of parking of vehicles or other obstructions in such designated areas. The superintendent of public works shall post or erect signs giving notice of the prohibition of parking of vehicles or other obstructions in designated areas adjacent to buildings, at the expense of the property owner, except when such owner agrees to furnish and erect the signs as prescribed by the superintendent of public works. 
(b)  Designated and posted areas adjacent to buildings. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to leave the vehicle unattended, or leave delivered materials, in designated and posted areas adjacent to buildings. 
(c)  Enforcement. Members of the police and fire departments are empowered to enforce this division. 
(d)  Violations; penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00, nor more than $500.00 for each offense, and, provided further, that a separate and distinct offense shall be considered committed every day a motor vehicle is parked, or other obstructions left, in the posted area, and, provided further, that a separate and distinct offense shall be considered committed for every ten-day period the property owner fails to comply with orders to post or erect signs in designated areas adjacent to buildings. 
(Code 1959, §§ 11.18.1—11.18.4) 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
 
Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5547, § 2, adopted Apr. 3, 2012, deleted the former Ch. 38, §§ 38-1—38-317, and enacted a new Ch. 38 as set out herein. The former Ch. 38 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1959, §§ 8.1—8.7, 8.9—8.13, 8.15—8.21, 8.35—8.45, 9.5, 9.9, 9.13—9.16, 9.39—9.41, 9.43—9.46, 12.1—12.8, 12.17—12.28; Ord. No. 4551, §§ 8.1, 8.9, adopted Aug. 5, 2003. 
Cross reference— Director of community development, § 2-412; animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; solid waste, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 82. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Food delivery vehicle includes all wagons, motor vehicles and vehicles propelled by human power for the storage or the transportation of food, food products, milk and beverages intended for human consumption, including all vehicles operated in connection with the distribution of meats, vegetables and all other food products. 
Food service establishment shall be as defined in the State of Illinois Department of Public Health Food Service and Sanitation Code. 
Food waste means the source-separated organic portion of the waste resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, and the wastes from the handling, processing, storage and sale of produce. Food waste does not include packing utensils or containers from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Garbage means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Landscape waste means grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and other materials accumulated as a result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees, and includes discarded fruits, vegetables and other vegetative material generated in the care of a garden. 
Mobile food vendor means all wagons, motor vehicles and vehicles propelled by human power used for the sale to the public of food and food products intended for human consumption. 
Private naturally landscaped lot means a privately owned lot which is naturally landscaped so as to exhibit the deliberate and conscious decision to plant, cultivate and maintain those native or naturally occurring species identified as wildflower and prairie grasses in commonly accepted publications. 
Rubbish means any combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
Vector means any living agent, other than human, capable of transmitting, directly or indirectly, an infectious disease. 
Weed means any annual or perennial herbaceous plant of volunteer growth, not cultivated or useful for human food or enjoyment, and shall include, but not be limited to, jimpson, burdock, ragweed, thistles of all kinds, cocklebur, barberry (tall, common or European, further known as Barberia Vulgaria, or its other horticultural varieties), poison ivy, yellow dock, Indian mallow, sweet clove, wild mustard (including black mustard and yellow mustard), may weed, lambs' quarters, pig weed, beggar ticks, wild lettuce, shepherds purse, smart weed, sow-thistle, tumbleweed, milk weed, dandelions, etc., any plant that, when in blossom, gives off an unpleasant or obnoxious odor or pollen, irritating to human tissue, and any plant growth that may conceal rubbish, debris or filthy deposits, or constitute a fire hazard when dry, and grass that is more than eight inches in height, rank growth or volunteer growth of bushes or brush that may conceal rubbish, debris or filthy deposits, or constitute a fire hazard when dry, or any plant that causes or adds its influence in bringing on hay fever, or other similar or noxious plant, and all plants fitting within the term "weeds" as used in the Illinois Municipal Code. Herbaceous plants, other than those listed below, and those defined as noxious or invasive by the State department of agriculture, the United States Department of Agriculture, or the nature conservancy, shall not be considered weeds when they are determined by the Village manager or his designee to be located within areas of private, naturally landscaped lots as defined in section 38-313(a). Weeds not exempt within these areas include ragweed (Ambrosia spp.), teasel (Dipsacuss spp.), wild parsnip (Pastinaca umbelliferae), purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria), common reed (Phragmities australis), reed canary grass (Phalaris arundinacea), garlic mustard (Alliaria petiolata), Canadian thistle (Circium arvense), bull thistle (Circiom vulgare) or other nonindigenous thistles. 
Wood waste means untreated, unpainted and unvarnished wood. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-2. - Administration and enforcement. 
The Village manager shall have general charge and supervision over the sanitary conditions of the Village, including all persons and establishments handling, selling, manufacturing or processing any type of food within the Village that are required to be inspected by this chapter, and shall enforce all ordinances related thereto. The term "Village manager" in this chapter shall mean the Village manager or his/her designee, except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-3. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Village manager to: 
(1)  Enforce and observe all rules, regulations and orders of the Village president and board of trustees, the ordinances and regulations of the Village, the County department of public health and State department of public health, and all State laws pertaining to the preservation of the health of the people within the Village. 
(2)  Exercise a general supervision over the sanitary conditions of the Village, including all persons and establishments handling, selling, manufacturing, or processing any type of food. 
(3)  Execute and enforce all rules, regulations, and orders of the board of trustees and all ordinances of the Village relating to nuisances, public health, and sanitation. 
(4)  Make, or cause to be made, all necessary sanitary and health investigations and inspections within the Village. 
(5)  Call upon the police of the Village and such other authorities, State or municipal, as may be deemed by them to be necessary in the performance of their duties, and to cause the arrest and prosecution of offenders that violate any of the ordinances of the Village relating to public health and sanitation, or nuisances that relate to public health or sanitation. 
(6)  Furnish the Village board of trustees with all such professional advice and information as they may require, with a view to preservation of the public health. For the purpose of carrying out such requirements, the Village shall be permitted, at all reasonable hours during the day or night, to enter into or upon any house, store or other building or unimproved lot, if they shall deem it necessary, in order to make a thorough examination of the sanitary conditions of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-4. - Business license required. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service establishment or retail food store within the Village without a valid business license from the development department. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive and retain such a license. A valid business license is one that is not suspended, revoked or expired. Annual business license registration fees are as listed in section 30-1. 
(1)  Schools with food service programs located within the Village of Glenview are required to obtain an annual business license but are hereby exempt from any fees as listed in section 30-1. 
(b)  Expiration. Business licenses shall expire on December 31 following the date of issuance. Permits for temporary food service establishments and temporary retail food stores shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration 
(c)  Application; investigation; issuance; display. 
(1)  Any person desiring to operate a food service or retail food store establishment shall make written application for a business license on forms provided by the Village. Such application shall include the applicant's full name and post office address and whether such applicant is an individual, firm or corporation, and, if a partnership, the name of the partners, together with their addresses; the location and type of the proposed food service or retail food store establishment; and the signature of the applicants. If the application is for a temporary food service or retail food store establishment, it shall also include the inclusive dates of the proposed operation. 
(2)  Upon receipt of such an application, the Village manager shall make an inspection of the food service or retail food service establishment to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. When such inspection reveals that the applicable requirements of this chapter have been met, a business license shall be issued to the applicant by the Village manager. The business license must be prominently displayed for public viewing. 
(d)  Renewal. Whenever the inspection for renewal of a business license reveals serious or repeated violations of this chapter, the business license will not be issued and the Village manager shall notify the applicant immediately of such violations. Such notice shall state the reasons for not renewing the business license. Such notice shall also state that an opportunity for a hearing shall be provided for the applicant. A business license which is not renewed and expires will be considered suspended. Expired business licenses shall be removed from the establishment. 
(e)  Conditional permit. When structural, plumbing, electrical, ventilation or similar such defects exist in an established food facility that may require a significant expenditure to correct, but are not considered to be an imminent health hazard, a conditional permit may be granted, at the discretion of the Village manager. Under no circumstances will a conditional permit be issued for more than two consecutive six-month periods. The purpose of the conditional permit is to allow a reasonable period of time for correction of existing defects. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-5. - Inspections. 
(a)  Frequency. An inspection of a food service or retail food store establishment shall be performed in accordance with the frequency defined in the 2008 Illinois Department of Public Health Code. The frequency listed in the Illinois Department of Public Health Code is based on a risk assessment which states that Category 1 facilities are inspected three times a year, Category 2 facilities are inspected two times a year, and Category 3 facilities are inspected once a year. Additional inspections shall be performed as often as are deemed necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Access. Representatives of the Village manager, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food service or retail food store establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this chapter. The representatives shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used. 
(c)  [School food service programs. ] The Village manager shall make regular inspections of all school food service programs as to their hygienic and sanitary condition, and shall report the result of such inspections to the board of education and to those having charge and control of such schools, with instructions as to the remedy of such conditions, if such be found, whereby the health of those in attendance may be impaired or life endangered. In the event of failure or refusal of those having such charge or control to carry out the instructions so given, then the Village manager shall cause such faulty conditions to be remedied at the proper cost and expense of those having charge and control of the schools. 
(d)  Reports. Whenever an inspection of a food service or retail food store establishment is made, the findings shall be recorded on an inspection report form. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this chapter and shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement. Inspectional remarks shall be written to reference, by item number, the item violated and shall state the correction to be made. The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from 100. A copy of the form shall be furnished to the person in charge. The completed inspection report form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law. 
(e)  Correction of violations. 
(1)  The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period for the correction of the violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the Village manager. 
b.  All violations of four-point or five-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten days following inspection. Purchase orders or work contracts with a work completion date satisfactory to the Village manager may be accepted as interim corrective action. A follow-up inspection shall be conducted to confirm correction. 
c.  All one-point or two-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection. 
d.  When the rating score of the establishment is less than 70, the establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations within 48 hours. One or more reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure correction. 
e.  In the case of a temporary food service or special event, for single day events, all violations shall be corrected before food service is allowed to begin to continue. In the case of multiple day events, if violations are not corrected within 24 hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations until authorized to resume such operations by the Village manager. 
(2)  The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may result in cessation of food service operations. An opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time limitations, or both, will be provided if a written request is filed with the Village manager within ten days following cessation of operations. If a request for a hearing is received, a hearing shall be held within 20 days of receipt of the request. 
(3)  Whenever a food service or retail food store establishment is required under the provisions of subsection (1)(d) of this section to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until it is shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease operations no longer exist. The opportunity for reinspections shall be offered within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-6. - Building permit required for new work. 
(a)  Existing establishments. No food service or retail food store establishment existing on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall continue to operate within the Village unless it conforms with the requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that equipment and facilities installed in a food service or retail food store establishment prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which do not fully meet all of the design and construction requirements of this chapter, shall be deemed acceptable in that establishment if they are in good repair, capable of being maintained in a sanitary condition and the food contact surfaces are nontoxic. 
(b)  New establishments or improvements. All food service or retail food store establishments which are constructed, reconstructed or remodeled after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall conform in such construction to the requirements of chapter 18. New and replacement equipment shall meet the construction and installation requirements of the Village manager. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-7. - Food from food service and retail food store establishments from other jurisdictions. 
Food from food service or retail food store establishments outside the jurisdiction of the Village may be sold within the Village if such food service or retail food store establishments conform to the provisions of this chapter or to substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the Village manager requires that the Village is provided with a copy of an active license as well as the most recent food service inspection report. The Village may accept the most recent report or may require an independent inspection. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-8. - Procedure when disease transmission is suspected. 
When the Village manager has reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of disease transmission from any food service or retail food store establishment or employee, they shall make such investigation as may be indicated, including the morbidity history of suspected employees, and take appropriate action. The Village manager may require any or all of the following measures: 
(1)  The immediate closure of the food service or retail food store establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the Village manager, no further danger of disease outbreak exists. Upon such closure, the establishment may open only upon written notice from the Village manager. 
(2)  The immediate exclusion of the employee from food service or retail food store establishments. 
(3)  Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting the disease. 
(4)  Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee and, if deemed necessary, other employees. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-9. - Examination and condemnation. 
(a)  Samples of food and other substances may be examined or sampled by the Village manager as often as may be necessary to determine freedom from adulteration and misbranding, and to determine bacteriological content. The Village manager may request the condemnation, removal, destruction or denaturing of any food which is unwholesome, adulterated or misbranded. The Village manager shall, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, place a tag or hold order on any food which he determines, or has probable cause to believe, to be unwholesome. The Village manager shall permit storage of food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case, immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or alter a hold order, notice or tag placed on food by the Village manager, and neither such food or the containers thereof shall be relabeled, repacked, reprocessed, altered, disposed of or destroyed without the permission of the Village manager, except on order by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  The Village manager may vacate the hold order, or may, by written order, direct the owner or person in charge of the food which was placed under the hold order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter, provided that such order shall be stayed if the order is appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within three days. If food is to be denatured or destroyed, such action shall be taken under the supervision of the Village manager. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-10. - Sanitation standards and criteria adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the Village the series of Nationally Uniform Sanitation Standards and Criteria established by the National Sanitation Foundation as the sanitation standards and criteria of the Village for the control of buildings, structures and equipment as provided for by this Code. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such standards and criteria are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter and shall be applicable and controlling within the limits of the Village. 
(b)  The National Uniform Sanitation Standards and Criteria of the National Sanitation Foundation, as such standards and criteria exist on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-11. - Smoking in Village hall. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or light, or cause to be lit, any tobacco, cigarette or cigar, or pipe containing such materials, at any place in the Village hall, except in designated smoking areas as defined by the Illinois Clean Indoor Air Act. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-12. - Buildings with Village water and private water wells. 
(a)  Connections. Where a building exists which has Village water service, as well as private water well, there shall be no connections between the Village system and the private water well. Private water wells are not allowed to be installed within 200 feet of a potable water supply. 
(b)  Cross connections annual inspection. 
(1)  The Village may perform annual inspections of such buildings to confirm that the Village water system and the private water well are in no way connected. 
(2)  If, at the time of the annual inspection, it is determined that the private water well is not being properly maintained or is abandoned, as defined by the most recent edition of the State department of public health water well construction code, such well shall be repaired or plugged in accordance with such State code, and such repair or plugging shall be completed within 90 days. 
(3)  Should a cross connection occur between the Village water system and the private well after any inspection, the Village will terminate water service to that building pursuant to the water shutoff policy of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-13. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating, or failing to comply with, any provision of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16 for each offense. Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Secs. 38-14—38-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 38-30. - Rules and regulations adopted; amendments. 
(a)  The 2008 edition of the State department of public health food service sanitation rules and regulations (77 Ill. Admin. Code 750), and any amendments or changes thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this chapter, subject to the following amendments: 
(1)  The term "regulatory authority," when used in such rules and regulations, shall be understood to refer to the Village. 
(2)  Section 750.1160 is hereby amended by adding the following sentence thereto: "The establishment shall have a service contract with a pest control company which is currently licensed with the Illinois Department of Public Health." 
(3)  Section 750.1500 is hereby amended by adding subsections (a) and (b) thereto, which shall read as follows: 
(a)  The food processing or preparation area shall be separated by a dustproof and verminproof barrier from the mobile unit steering and operating compartments. This barrier may have a tight-fitting, self-closing door. 
(b)  Potentially hazardous foods shall be stored and displayed at safe temperatures (41 degrees Fahrenheit or below, or 135 degrees Fahrenheit or above, whichever is applicable). Adequate, properly constructed and located mechanical refrigeration shall be provided for cold foods, and adequate, properly constructed and located heating equipment shall be provided for hot foods. 
(4)  Section 750.1510 is hereby amended by adding the following sentence thereto: "All prepackaged products shall be properly labeled in accordance with applicable State and federal laws and regulations." 
(5)  Section 750.1520 is hereby amended by adding the following sentence thereto: "All single service utensils shall be pre-wrapped." 
(6)  Section 750.160, General-Food preparation, is hereby amended to add paragraph (d), as follows: Food service establishments which prepare foods on the premises shall install an additional approved food preparation sink in the kitchen area. 
(b)  The 1996 edition of the State department of public health retail food store sanitation rules and regulations (77 Ill. Admin. Code 760), and any amendments or changes thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this chapter, subject to the following amendments: 
(1)  The term "regulatory authority," when used in such rules and regulations, shall be understood to refer to the Village of Glenview. 
(2)  Section 760.1120 is hereby amended by adding the following sentence thereto: "The establishment shall have a service contract with a pest control company which is currently licensed by the Illinois Department of Public Health." 
(c)  The 1970 edition of the State department of public health food manufacturing, processing, packing or holding rules and regulations, and any amendments or changes thereto, and any and all other rules and regulations pertaining to food processing or warehousing, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-31. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a food service establishment to sell, or offer for sale, any food or beverages between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless otherwise prescribed by a valid liquor license issued by the Village and/or unless further regulated by section 98-50. Mobile food vendors units shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a food service establishment doing business on or before February 29, 1996, may continue its existing hours of operation until February 20, 1999, but may not extend hours beyond the terms of this Code. After February 20, 1999, a food service establishment must apply for and be granted a conditional use in accordance with the provisions of section 98-50 in order to extend its hours of operation beyond the terms of this section. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Secs. 38-32—38-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 
 
Sec. 38-41. - License and inspection required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a mobile food unit within the Village without first having obtained a license for that purpose. Business license requirements are as listed in chapter 22. 
(1)  Business License fees are as listed in section 30-1. 
(2)  All licenses provided for in this section shall expire on December 31 following the date of issuance. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to transfer such license from one licensee to another. 
(4)  The mobile food unit shall be inspected and approved prior to issuance of a business license and shall be subject to inspection by the Village at any time while in operation. 
(5)  Licenses issued may be suspended, revoked or refused to be issued upon good cause shown in accordance with section 22-8. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-42. - Sanitation requirements. 
All food delivery vehicles shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The exterior of the vehicle shall be kept in good repair to prevent the entrance of dirt, dust, insects or other vermin. 
(2)  The floors, walls and ceilings of the food storage compartment of the vehicle shall be smooth and easily cleanable, and shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
(3)  The use of ice as a refrigeration method shall be allowed if such use is approved by the development department. Such ice shall be self-draining and the melted ice shall be contained in a permanently installed retention tank. The liquid waste from the retention tank shall be disposed of as sewage. 
(4)  Adequate mechanical refrigeration equipment or its equivalent shall be provided for all meat, milk, dairy products, fish, poultry and any other perishable products, including meat sandwiches and cream filled pies. Food items shall be stored in the vehicle at a temperature not to exceed 41 degrees Fahrenheit, except that perishable food products commonly served as a hot food shall be stored in a heating appliance or oven equipped with a thermometer showing an internal temperature of 135 degrees or higher. 
(5)  All milk and milk products shall be served only in the individual containers or approved dispensers. 
(6)  Only single service food utensils shall be used. Single service items are to be individually wrapped and kept in a clean and sanitary fashion protected from contamination by the customers, dirt, dust and flies. 
(7)  All perishable food products shall be stored as provided in this chapter or as provided by the rules and regulations established by the Village manager until served to the customer. 
(8)  All individually wrapped portions of perishable food products including sandwiches, pies and other similar portions shall be plainly marked by the manufacturer on the wrapper or container in such a manner as to plainly identify the day and month of which each portion was prepared and wrapped at an approved and licensed establishment. The name and address of the establishment or manufacturing and wrapping portions of perishable food products shall appear on each individual portion. No food product shall be offered for sale as individual portions of a perishable food product which have been rewrapped or repackaged or portions of which the identifying wrapper has been altered. 
(9)  No sale of such food or food products shall be made from mobile food units on the public rights-of-way, streets or other publically controlled property that may create congestion or inconvenience the public. All sales of food or food products from mobile food units conducted upon private property shall have the permission of the owner of such private property to make sales from such location. Vendors shall obey any lawful order of a police officer to move to a different location to avoid congestion or obstruction of a public way or remove the mobile food unit entirely from the public way if necessary to avoid such congestion or obstruction. 
(10)  Mobile food units shall comply with all provisions of this section, section 38-30 and all applicable State, County and local rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-43. - Restrictions on use. 
(a)  Any signage should be attached to the mobile food unit. 
(b)  There shall be no bollards, seating, or any other equipment not contained in the mobile food unit. 
(c)  The mobile food unit shall display the name, phone number and address of the owner. Vendors and peddlers are required to show their license at the request of any citizen. 
(d)  Any power required for the mobile food unit shall be self-contained. 
(e)  All off-site food preparation and food storage must be done at a licensed food facility. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Secs. 38-44—38-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 38-61. - Enumeration. 
In addition to the actions which are elsewhere in this Code that are declared to be and constitute a nuisance, it is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful for: 
(1)  Any person within the territorial jurisdiction of the Village to: 
a.  So negligently conduct any business, or use any premises to create such an offensive smell as may taint the air and render it unwholesome or disagreeable to other persons. 
b.  Cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or remain in any place to the prejudice of other persons. 
c.  Throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter or the carcass of any animal in any watercourse, pond, spring, well or sewer. 
d.  Deposit any night soil, dead animal or other filthy, offensive or noisome substance upon any lot, street, alley, highway, park or other place. 
e.  Corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring, stream, pond or well to the injury or prejudice of others. 
f.  Obstruct or impede, without legal authority, the passage of any gutter, conduit, sewer or the natural drainage of any public or private property. 
g.  Construct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets, alleys or commons. 
h.  Establish, maintain and carry on any offensive or unwholesome business within the limits of the Village or within one mile of the limits thereof. 
i.  Establish a cemetery within the corporate limits of the Village or within one mile of the limits thereof without first having obtained permission to do so under an ordinance of the president and board of trustees. 
j.  Permit or suffer any offal, filth, refuse, animal or vegetable matter which is liable to become putrid or offensive, or injurious to health to remain on any premises used or occupied by him for a period of time longer than of four hours at any one time. 
k.  Keep or suffer to be kept in a foul, offensive, nauseous or filthy condition any building, yard, cellar, barn, sewer, pig sty or privy. 
l.  Own, keep or use any railroad car, yard, pen, place or premises, in or upon which cattle or swine shall be confined, or kept so as to be offensive to persons residing in the vicinity thereof. 
m.  Erect, continue or use any building or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or offensive smells, or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the health of individuals or the public. 
n.  Boil or render tainted lard or other animal substance so as to taint the air or render it unwholesome or offensive. 
o.  Keep, own or raise any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys or other fowl. 
p.  Own, manage or operate for hire or compensation an outdoor amusement park, outdoor theater, outdoor motion picture theater, outdoor dancehall, racecourse, slaughterhouse, sports arena or enclosure, garbage or refuse dump or incinerator, rendering plant or outdoor shooting gallery; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be applicable to outdoor amusements, bazaars, fairs, etc., operated by or for the benefit of charitable, religious, civic or educational groups or organizations. 
q.  Cause, maintain or permit to remain on any premises abutting on any public highway or public place any open cistern, excavation, catch basin, cesspool or vault, unless it is provided with, and completely enclosed by, an adequate wall, fence or other barrier; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to excavations made for the purpose of, and during the progress of, building construction while being carried on under a permit duly issued by Village authorities. 
r.  Permit or have any offensive water, or other liquid or substance on his premises or grounds to the prejudice of life or health, whether for use in any trade or otherwise. 
s.  Throw, run, allow to seep, drain or otherwise permit or cause to be disposed into any river, stream, lake, pond or other surface and underground water within, or which flows within, the Village, any organic or inorganic matter that may prevent, interfere with, delay or stop the flow of water in any river or stream, or which shall cause pollution of such waters, more particularly, but not limited to, sewage, industrial waste or other wastes which shall cause pollution as set forth in this subsection. In this connection, the definition of the terms "pollution," "sewage," "industrial waste," "other wastes" and "any other act which may cause pollution as set forth in this subsection" shall be the definitions as set forth in 415 ILCS 5/3.105 et seq., in effect as of the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived, and any amendments which may subsequently be made applicable thereto, all of which definitions are incorporated in, and made a part of, this subsection by reference. 
t.  The emission of dense smoke within the Village from the smokestack of any machine or contrivance, or from the smokestack or chimney of any building or premises, except for a period aggregating not to exceed six minutes in any one hour, whether consecutive or not, during which the firebox is being cleaned out or a new fire is being built therein, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be summarily abated by the Village manager or any person whom he/she may duly authorize for such purpose. 
u.  It shall be unlawful for any person to connect sanitary sewerage or industrial waste to any storm sewer system in the Village. 
v.  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any lot or premises to suffer to stand, or remain thereon, water which is or may become stagnant, foul or offensive, as well as detrimental to the health and comfort of persons residing in the neighborhood thereof. 
(2)  The conduct, operation, maintenance or sufferance of any of the nuisances declared in subsection (1) of this section within the territorial jurisdiction of the Village, or within one mile of the corporate limits of the Village, shall be unlawful and is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-62. - Duty to maintain landscaping. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant and any agent, servant, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant, having control of any real estate and improvement thereon, if any, to allow or maintain on such real estate any rubbish, garbage, construction debris, or landscape waste including but not limited to trimmings, leaves and grass clippings, to stand and accumulate thereon. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to have any growth of grass, weeds or plant growth to the height of over eight inches. The violator under this section may be punished as provided in section 1-16. Grass or weeds allowed to grow contrary to this section and any rubbish on such real estate, including but not limited to vacant lots, commercial properties, parkways, ditches, and cul-de-sacs, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(c)  Natural landscaping on private lots shall be mowed or cut to 18 inches or less at least once prior to June 1 of each calendar year. 
(d)  Natural landscaping on private lots shall not be located within three feet of the front property line or at corner side property lines of lots having a public sidewalk, or within four feet of any other property line; provided, however, no rear or side yard setback shall be required where the natural landscaping material abuts permitted natural landscaping material on an adjacent lot. No natural landscaping shall infringe upon any public right-of-way or obstruct vision at any street, alley or driveway. 
(e)  Properly maintained composting is exempt from the requirements of section 38-62. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-63. - Failure of owner, etc., to cut. 
(a)  In all cases where the owner and the person who controls the real estate on which there are such growths of weeds or rubbish as set forth in this chapter shall fail to cut or remove such weeds or rubbish, or cause such weeds or rubbish to be cut or removed, owner shall be subject to the penalties and punishment set forth in section 1-16 of the municipal code. 
(b)  Weeds, when cut down, and rubbish, when collected, must be removed from the lot or disposed of in such a manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard. 
(c)  Properly maintained composting is exempt from the requirements of section 38-63. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-64. - Abatement of common law and statutory nuisances. 
In all cases where no provision is made in this chapter defining what nuisances are and how the nuisances may be removed, abated or prevented, in addition to what may be declared as such in this chapter, such offenses which are known to the common law of the land and the statutes of the State as nuisances may, in case such nuisances exist within the Village limits, be treated as such and proceeded against as provided in this chapter, or in accordance with any other law which shall give the officer trying the nuisances jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-65. - Power of abatement. 
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be the duty of the Village manager to serve notice upon the owner, occupant, agent or person in possession or control of any lot, building or premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found or who may be the owner or cause of any such nuisance requiring him to abate the nuisance in such manner as the Village manager shall prescribe, within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Sec. 38-66. - Responsibility of expense of nuisance abatement. 
The expense of abatement of the nuisances as set forth in this Code shall be collected from the person who may have created, continued and suffered such nuisance to exist. 
(Ord. No. 5547, § 2, 4-3-2012)  
Secs. 38-67—38-90. - Reserved.  
Chapter 42 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 26; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; vehicles and traffic, ch. 90; powers and duties of chief of police generally, § 94-3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-391 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Chief of police—Office created; appointment; term; exemption. 
There is hereby created the office of chief of police for the Village. The chief of police shall be appointed by the Village manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the Village manager. The office of chief of police is specifically exempt from the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2-17. 
(Code 1959, § 14.2)  
Sec. 42-32. - Same—Salary. 
The salary of the chief of police shall be fixed by the president and board of trustees. 
(Code 1959, § 14.3)  
Sec. 42-33. - Same—Powers and duties generally. 
(a)  The chief of police shall, subject to the supervision and direction of the Village manager, have direct charge and control of the police department and shall be responsible to the Village manager for the faithful and efficient conduct and operation of the police department. He shall be the keeper of the Village jail and have custody of all persons incarcerated therein. He shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required of him by the Village manager. All records and reports, or accurate copies thereof, shall be promptly filed by the chief of police with the Village manager and kept on file in the office of the Village manager. 
(b)  The chief of police, with the concurrence and the approval of the Village manager, shall have the authority to recruit and appoint individuals to exempt command positions within the police department. 
(Code 1959, §§ 14.4, 14.7(2))  
Sec. 42-34. - Sergeant of police. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of sergeant of police for the Village. The duties of the sergeant of police shall be such as are prescribed by the chief of police and board of fire and police commissioners. The compensation of sergeant of police shall be fixed from time to time by the president and board of trustees of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 14.7; Ord. No. 5974, § 2, 1-5-2016)  
Sec. 42-35. - Police patrol officer. 
There is hereby created the office of police patrol officer for the Village. The duties of the police patrol officer shall be such as are prescribed by the chief of police, the board of fire and police commissioners and the ordinances of the Village. The compensation of the police patrol officer shall be fixed from time to time by the president and board of trustees of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 14.8)  
Sec. 42-36. - Police department members. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the terms "police officer" and "member of the police department" shall mean the following members of the regularly constituted police department of the Village, sworn and commissioned to perform police duties: 
(1)  Chief of police; 
(2)  Deputy chief of police; 
(3)  Commanders; 
(4)  Sergeants of police; and 
(5)  Police patrol officers. 
(b)  Members of the police department shall be subject to the rules and regulations prescribed from time to time by the board of fire and police commissioners pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1. Examination for all applicants for a position in the police department shall be conducted by the board of fire and police commissioners. The board of fire and police commissioners shall, according to its rules and regulations, establish an eligible list of all candidates for a position in the police department, make all appointments thereto, provide for promotions within the department, as well as provide for the suspension or removal of any member of the police department. 
(c)  The chief of police is specifically exempt from the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. In addition, the police chief, with the concurrence and the approval of the Village manager, shall have the authority to recruit and appoint individuals to exempt command positions such as deputy police chief and commander within the department. Exempt command positions are not subject to the board of fire and police commissioners. Individuals appointed to exempt command positions shall serve at the pleasure of the police chief and may be removed by the chief at any time with the concurrence of the Village manager. If an individual is appointed to such an exempt position and holds a certificate of appointment within the department in another position, the individual shall retain a guaranteed right to return to the certified position upon removal from the exempt command position. 
(d)  Members of the Village police department are not required to live within the corporate limits of the Village, either at the time of their appointment as police officers or while serving as police officers with the police department. No geographical restrictions with respect to residency are applicable to members of the police department. 
(Code 1959, § 14.9)  
Sec. 42-37. - Authority and duties of police officers generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to: 
(1)  Enforce all ordinances of the Village and all statutes and laws effective in the Village; 
(2)  Preserve order; 
(3)  Prevent infractions of law; and 
(4)  Arrest violators thereof. 
(b)  The police officers of the Village shall be conservators of the peace, and are hereby severally empowered and authorized to: 
(1)  Arrest, or cause to be arrested, with or without process, or on view, all persons who shall break the peace or are found violating any ordinance of the Village or the statutes of the State; 
(2)  Commit arrested persons for examination; 
(3)  Detain, if necessary, arrested persons in custody overnight or on Sunday in the Village jail, or any other safe place, until such persons can be brought before the circuit court of the County; and 
(4)  Exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace that the corporate authorities of the Village may from time to time prescribe. 
(c)  The Village police officers shall have all the common law and statutory power of constables. 
(Code 1959, § 14.10)  
Sec. 42-38. - Service and execution of legal process. 
Each member of the police department is hereby authorized, and it shall be their duty, within the corporate limits of the Village, to serve and execute warrants, writs, summons and other legal process for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with a violation of the Village ordinances or any crime, misdemeanor or offense against the people of the State, and, while serving or executing any such process, such police officers shall be vested with and have all the power and authority of constables by common law and the statutes of the State. 
(Code 1959, § 14.11)  
Sec. 42-39. - Service as witnesses, etc. 
Each officer of the police department making an arrest shall attend before the court as a witness at the time of the trial of the person arrested, and shall use his best efforts to secure the attendance of material witnesses for the prosecution, and at the direction of the court or Village attorney, furnish a list of names of material witnesses within his knowledge. No member of the police department shall receive from or have taxed against the Village any witness fee in any action for a violation of an ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 14.12)  
Sec. 42-40. - Accident reports. 
The police department shall document and report vehicle crashes in the manner prescribed by the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-406 
(Code 1959, § 14.13)  
Sec. 42-41. - Original reports. 
The chief of police shall be responsible for the safe and secure storage of all police reports. Public access and inspections of police reports shall comply with all applicable State statutes. 
(Code 1959, § 14.14)  
Sec. 42-42. - Oath of office. 
Each member of the police department shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe the oath required of the officers of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 14.15)  
Sec. 42-43. - Resisting or interfering with police officers. 
No person shall resist any member of the police department in the discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with, hinder or prevent such discharge, or offer or endeavor so to do. 
(Code 1959, § 14.16)  
Sec. 42-44. - Impersonating police officers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be a member of the police department or maliciously, or with the intent to deceive, or use, or imitate any of the signs of the police department, or wear the uniform accepted as a police uniform. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or wear a star or other similar device like that of a police officer, except as otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1959, § 14.17)  
Sec. 42-45. - Traffic control aides. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Traffic control aide means any unsworn person employed by the police department who may be selected and cross trained by the police department for the purpose of directing vehicular traffic, with the prior approval of the chief of police. 
(b)  Direction of vehicular traffic. Traffic control aides may direct vehicular traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with the traffic laws of the State and the applicable ordinances of the Village. In the event of a fire or other emergency, or in order to expedite vehicular traffic or safeguard pedestrians, traffic control aides may direct traffic contrary to traffic control devices as conditions may require, in the discretion of the police department. 
(c)  Requirements. Prior to acting as a traffic control aide, a person must: 
(1)  Be employed by and submit to training by the police department and demonstrate proficiency in traffic control procedures as determined by the police department; 
(2)  While performing traffic control duties, wear uniforms as directed by the police department, which clearly indicate their affiliation with the police department; and 
(3)  While performing traffic control duties, comply with all police department policies and procedures regarding traffic direction and control. 
(Ord. No. 4375, § 2(14.20), 3-5-2002)  
Secs. 42-46—42-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - POLICE PENSION FUND 
 
Sec. 42-71. - Operation under State law. 
The police pension fund shall operate under the provisions of 40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1959, § 14.18)  
Chapter 43 - MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITIES  
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL. 
 
Sec. 43-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements affecting or relating to the erection, construction, alteration, remodeling, repair, maintenance, removal and demolition of mobile home structures, and to regulate said structures within the Village limits. 
(Ord. No. 5367, § 2, 7-20-2010)  
Sec. 43-2. - Scope and applicability. 
(a)  This chapter is remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and welfare, structural strength and stability, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and hazards incidental to the construction, alteration, repair and maintenance of mobile home structures, or portions thereof, in the Village, except federal and State buildings and possessions. 
[(b)  Reserved.] 
(c)  This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other applicable ordinances, codes, legislation, and regulations prescribing standards other than are provided herein, including, but not limited to, building codes, fire codes, property maintenance codes or water and other utility codes, and in the event of conflict, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(d)  The existing zoning ordinance set forth in chapter 98, the existing subdivision ordinance set forth in chapter 66, and the existing site plan ordinance set forth in chapter 54, and the appearance code ordinance set forth in chapter 54, and all revisions to the foregoing, are hereby made a part of this chapter. Should a provision in these chapters or any provision in the State laws pertaining to the erection, maintenance or occupancy of mobile home structures conflict with a similar provision in this chapter, the most restrictive provision shall govern. 
(e)  This chapter applies to all mobile homes and mobile home parks located within the corporate boundaries of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5367, § 2, 7-20-2010)  
Sec. 43-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County means Cook County, Illinois. 
Department means the Village's development department, unless otherwise indicated. 
Dependent mobile home means a mobile home which does not have toilet and bath or shower facilities. 
Director means director of development. 
Front means the end of the mobile or manufactured home to which the hitch is or was attached and used for towing or for delivery to the site. When a mobile home is placed in a mobile home park and the hitch is removed, the department shall make a determination as to what constitutes the front. 
Immobilized manufactured home means a manufactured home served by individual utilities, resting on a permanent perimeter foundation that extends below the established frost depth, and with the wheels, tongue and hitch removed and the home secured in compliance with the Mobile Home Tiedown Act, 210 ILCS 120/1, et seq. 
Independent mobile home means a mobile home which has self-contained toilet and bath or shower facilities. 
Individual utilities means the provision for each mobile home of a separate metered connection to electrical service; separately tapped water service from an approved public water supply or a separate private water supply; and a separately tapped connection to an approved public sewer system or a separate private sewage disposal system. 
License means a mobile home park operator's license. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, including plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. Any structure defined in this chapter as a "mobile home" shall also be considered a manufactured home. For purposes of this chapter, the terms "mobile home" and "manufactured home" are used interchangeably. This term shall not include "manufactured building" which shall mean any building that is of closed construction and is made or assembled in manufacturing facilities on or off the building site for installation, or for assembly and installation of the building site. 
Manufactured home accessory buildings or structures is an assembly of materials forming a construction for use which contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the principal building or structure served, including, among other things, awnings, cabanas, garages, storage structures, sheds, decks, carports, fences, windbreaks, porches or other like appurtenances. 
Manufactured home community means a tract of land or two or more contiguous tracts of land that contain sites with the necessary utilities for five or more independent manufactured homes for permanent habitation either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such manufactured home community. Separate ownership of contiguous tracts of land shall not preclude the tracts of land from common licensure as a manufactured home community if they are maintained and operated jointly. Neither an immobilized manufactured home nor a motorized recreational vehicle shall be construed as being part of a manufactured home community. Any community defined in this chapter as a "mobile home park" shall also be considered a manufactured home community. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "mobile home park," and "manufactured home community," are used interchangeably. 
Mobile home means a structure designed for permanent habitation for use as a single family dwelling unit suitable for year-round occupancy and containing water supply, sanitary waste disposal and electrical facilities. It is so constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or subsequent locations, provided that any such structure resting on a permanent foundation, with wheels, tongue, lug bolts and hitch permanently removed, shall not be construed as a "mobile home." 
Mobile home park means an area of land or lands upon which one or more independent mobile homes are harbored either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home park. 
Park operator means an owner or manager of a mobile home park, their officers, agents or employees. 
Permanent habitation means a period of one or more months. 
Site means the lot on which the mobile home is located for permanent habitation. 
(Ord. No. 5367, § 2, 7-20-2010)  
Secs. 43-4—43-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 43-21. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The development department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. Each mobile home park shall be inspected annually by the department pursuant to the codes and regulations of the Village. Such officials or officers are hereby granted the power and authority to enter upon the premises of all mobile home parks at any time for inspection. The department shall promptly bring such action as is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and to prosecute any person or persons who fail to comply with same. 
(b)  Notices. The department shall serve or cause to be served upon the licensee a written notice which shall specify the way or ways in which a licensee has failed to comply with this chapter. Said notice shall require the licensee to remove or abate such nuisance, insanitary or objectionable condition, or to otherwise bring the mobile home park into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the licensee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of said notice, within the time specified or such extended period of time, the director may initiate enforcement actions. 
(c)  Any person found to have violated any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine as set out in section 1-16 of the Municipal Code, in addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available to the Village. 
(1)  A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  The Village may enforce this article in a system of administrative adjudication or through the Circuit Court of Cook County. 
(Ord. No. 5367, § 2, 7-20-2010)  
Secs. 43-22—43-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 43-41. - License. 
No person, firm or corporation shall maintain, conduct, or operate a mobile home park without first obtaining an annual license from the department. The term "conduct or operate a mobile home park" as used in this chapter shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, supplying or maintaining common water, sewer or other utility supply or service, or the collection of rents directly or indirectly from five or more independent mobile homes. The license year or period shall begin on January 1 of each year and expire on December 31 of that year. A new license may be issued upon proper application and payment of the annual license fee provided the applicant is in substantial compliance with the rules and regulations of the department. 
(Ord. No. 5367, § 2, 7-20-2010)  
Sec. 43-42. - License fee; rate. 
(a)  The annual license fee for the manufactured home community shall be as set out in section 30-1. In addition, there shall be an amount as set out in section 30-1 for each mobile home space in the park. 
(b)  The licensee shall pay to the Village an amount as set out in section 30-1 for each additional mobile home space added to a park under the authority of a written permit to alter the park as provided in this chapter. All requisite permits and payment of fees must be secured before any mobile homes are located on the additional mobile home sites. The department shall issue an amended license to cover such additional mobile home sites, when they are to be occupied before the end of the license year, for which an annual license has been previously issued. 
(1)  Additional mobile homes may be installed pursuant to an approved plot plan by completing a license application and complying with all applicable codes and regulations specified herein or otherwise in the Municipal Code. 
(2)  If site plan approval to construct or alter a park has been granted by ordinance, the department shall then inspect the park and if completed in accordance with the approved site plan, the department shall issue a license. 
(c)  Each license fee shall be paid to the Village and, once accepted by the Village, no license fee or portion thereof shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 5367, § 2, 7-20-2010)  
Sec. 43-43. - Registration of mobile homes with park. 
Each mobile home park shall maintain a register which shall include the name and address of the owner of each mobile home [in the] park, the square feet of floor space contained in each mobile home, and the date of entry of each mobile home into the park. The register shall be signed by the owner of the mobile home. The registration records shall be neatly and securely maintained, and no registration records shall be destroyed until six years have elapsed after the departure of any tenant from the park. The register shall be available for inspection upon request by all law enforcement officers and by the department. 
(Ord. No. 5367, § 2, 7-20-2010)  
Sec. 43-44. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ZONING/MANUFACTURED HOME DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 43-45. - Zoning. 
Mobile home developments are regulated as a conditional use in the R-1 district within the Village of Glenview. All mobile home developments shall comply with the conditions set forth in subsection 98-50(a)(20). 
(Ord. No. 5367, § 2, 7-20-2010)  
Sec. 43-46. - Existing mobile home developments. 
Mobile home developments operating as of the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be considered existing nonconforming under section 98-256. 
Sunset Village Mobile Home Community, an existing mobile home community as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall be governed by Alternate Site Plan "C", consisting of four pages, prepared by Christian-Roge and Assoc., Inc, for Capital First Realty, dated June 18, 2008, attached to and made part of this chapter, which shall be deemed the existing site plan as of the effective date of this chapter for the purpose of approving changes or alterations to the site plan. Applications for such changes or alterations shall be subject to the provisions of the site plan review ordinance, chapter 54 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 5367, § 2, 7-20-2010)  
Sec. 43-47. - Application. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall establish or construct a mobile home park without first obtaining a permit from the department. In order to obtain a permit to construct a mobile home park, the applicant shall file with the department a written application and submit plan documents, that shall be prepared by a registered engineer or architect licensed to practice in the State of Illinois, with registration seal affixed, setting forth: 
(1)  The full name and address of the applicant or applicants or names and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, or names and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the present or last occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the application; 
(2)  The address, location and legal description of the tract of land upon which it is proposed to operate and maintain a mobile home park; 
(3)  The proposed facilities in the mobile home park for water supply, sewage, garbage and waste disposal, fire protection, and any proposed alterations therein and the maintenance thereof; 
(4)  The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which the mobile home park is to be located; 
(5)  The plot plans of the mobile home park as may be required by the rules and regulations of the department under the provisions of this chapter; 
(6)  The building plans and specifications for existing buildings and facilities; and 
(7)  A statement of the firefighting facilities, public or private, which are available to the mobile home park. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount set out in section 30-1. The application fee, once paid to the Village, shall not be refunded. 
(c)  Applications for new mobile home parks shall be subject to the provisions of the site plan review ordinance, chapter 54 of the Municipal Code. 
(d)  No change in any sanitary facilities, methods of water supply, sewer, drainage, garbage or waste disposal, and no change in the plot plan shall be made without first making a written application to the department and receiving a written permit therefore. Such application shall be made in accordance with the provisions contained in chapter 54, site plan review, and shall be accompanied by an application fee as set out in section 30-1. 
(e)  No application fee or site plan approval shall be required to accompany an application for a permit to alter a mobile home park where such alteration involves only a reduction in the number of mobile home spaces to a number less than that for which such park is currently licensed. 
(Ord. No. 5367, § 2, 7-20-2010)  
Secs. 43-48—43-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 43-101. - Operating requirements. 
Each mobile home park licensed or to be constructed under the provisions of this chapter shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Every mobile home park shall be in the charge of a responsible attendant or caretaker ("manager") whose name, address and telephone number shall be on file at all times with the department, who shall maintain an office within the park, and whose duty it shall be to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The manager, along with the licensee, shall be responsible for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  All licenses and permits to construct, alter and operate the mobile home park shall be prominently displayed in the mobile home park office. 
(3)  Setbacks and pad locations; accessory structures; parking; Except as provided in section 43-46 herein: 
a.  Each site on which a mobile home is located shall have a minimum area of 2,500 square feet, except that sites existing in parks or approved by the County or the State of Illinois for construction prior to August 21, 1967, shall contain an area of not less than 1,000 square feet. 
b.  No mobile home shall be located closer than five feet to the side lot lines of a mobile home park, or closer than ten feet to a public street, alley or building. Each individual site shall abut or face on a private or public driveway or roadway of not less than 24 feet in width, which driveway or roadway shall have unobstructed access to a public highway or alley. There shall be an open space of at least ten feet adjacent to the sides of every mobile home and at least five feet adjacent to the ends of every mobile home for mobile homes placed on a site prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
c.  For mobile homes placed on a site after the effective date of this chapter, no portion of a mobile home, excluding the tongue, shall be closer than ten feet side to side, eight feet end to side, and six feet end to end horizontally from any other mobile home or community building. All manufactured home accessory buildings or structures, including, but not limited to, garages (attached and detached), carports, canopies, porches, decks or storage sheds, shall be considered as part of the mobile home for the purpose of computing distances for the setback requirement. Parking spaces shall not, however, be considered part of the mobile home for the setback requirements. 
d.  Compliance with the setback and separation requirements shall be adhered to whenever an owner of a mobile home community enlarges or expands a concrete pad used to support a mobile home, installs a new mobile home, or replaces an existing mobile home on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
e.  For new mobile home parks constructed and licensed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, no mobile home shall be located closer than ten feet to a private street. 
f.  In the instance where an owner of a mobile home community enlarges or expands a concrete pad in an existing community used to support a mobile home, installs a new mobile home in an existing community, or replaces an existing mobile home in an existing community, on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the mobile home shall be no closer than five feet to a public or private street. The licensee may apply to the department for a variance from this setback requirement. 
(4)  Utilities; drainage. 
a.  All sewage and other water-carried wastes shall be disposed of into a municipal sewerage system. 
b.  When a water carriage system of sewage is used, each site shall be provided with a sewer connection for the combined liquid waste outlet or outlets of each mobile home. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of said park to provide an approved type of water and odor tight connection from the mobile home water drainage to the sewer connection, and it shall be the duty of said owner or operator to make such connection and keep all occupied mobile homes connected to said sewer while located in the park. Sewer connections in unoccupied sites shall be closed such that they will emit no odors or cause a breeding place for flies. No water or waste shall be allowed to fall on the ground from a mobile home. 
c.  No mobile home park shall be located such that the drainage of the park area will endanger any water supply. All mobile home parks shall be well drained and shall be maintained such that the area is kept free from ponds, swamps and similar places in which mosquitoes may breed. No wastewater shall be deposited on the surface of the ground within the mobile home park. 
d.  Water supply system. 
1.  All private water supply systems and hydrants for fire safety purposes in existence prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be maintained in operable condition and good repair, and it shall be the duty of the owner or operator to connect such water supply system to all occupied mobile homes while located in the park. A mobile home park that does not have a private water supply and hydrants shall have an agreement, approved by the Village to provide an adequate and reliable water supply for fire mitigation and suppression needs. This agreement shall be signed by the licensee, and by the Glenview Village Manager. A copy of this agreement shall be on file at the Village and posted in public view at the mobile home park site by the manager. 
2.  A manufactured home community existing on the effective date of this chapter must provide an operating water supply system that meets the following requirements: 
3.  A manufactured home community based water system, with fire hydrants within at least every 500 feet of any structure. At a minimum, the hydrants within the mobile home park must be connected to a six-inch water main that generates 1,000 to 1,500 gallons per minute, with a static pressure of 35 psi; or 
4.  An adequate and reliable water supply system that meets fire mitigation needs, if approved by the department in consultation with the Glenview Fire Department. Examples include, but are not limited to, the following: 
i.  A mobile home park based system, connected to the Village of Glenview water distribution system, with fire hydrants strategically placed. At a minimum, the hydrants within the system must be connected to a six-inch water main that generates 1,000 to 1,500 gallons per minute, with a static pressure of 35 psi; 
ii.  An on-site water reservoir; and 
iii.  Fire prevention authority that has capable mobile sources, such as a water tanker or fire apparatus designed with larger water tanks. 
e.  An adequate supply of potable water of safe, sanitary quality, approved by the department and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency shall be furnished at each mobile home park. Each site shall be provided with a cold water tap located in accordance with ordinances of the Village. 
f.  A manufactured home community constructed or developed after the effective date of this chapter must provide a mobile home park based system connected to the Village of Glenview water distribution system for both potable water and fire mitigation requirements. 
(5)  Nuisances; garbage. 
a.  A sufficient number of adequate vermin, pest-resistant and watertight containers in accordance with the ordinances of the Village shall be supplied for the storage of garbage. 
b.  Grass, trees and shrubbery shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and attractive condition, which creates neither a nuisance nor menace to public health. 
c.  Garbage containers shall be emptied at least once a week and shall not be filled to overflowing, or allowed to become foul-smelling or a breeding place for insects. Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a manner which creates neither a nuisance nor a menace to health and which is approved by the department. 
d.  Adequate insect and rodent control measures shall be employed. All buildings shall be vermin and pest-resistant and rodent harborages shall not be permitted to exist in the mobile home community or pathways. 
e.  No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or cat, or other animal shall permit any offal, fecal matter or noisome substance from such animal to remain on any public or private property in any place in the Village, other than the property of such owner or keeper. 
(6)  Fire protection. 
a.  A smoke detector and a carbon monoxide detector, in working order, shall be installed in every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating condition within 15 feet of every room used for sleeping in accordance with adopted codes of the Village. 
b.  All areas and individual sites within the manufactured home community shall be maintained so as to be free of dry brush, leaves and other debris that could contribute to the spread of fire within the site or community. 
c.  The space under manufactured homes and accessory buildings and structures shall not be used for the storage of combustible materials or for the storage or placement therein of flammable liquids, gases, or liquid or gas fuel-powered equipment. 
d.  Maintenance of fire hydrants. 
1.  The licensee shall test all fire hydrants annually to establish that they are in good working order. Testing requirements include turning the hydrant stem so a positive water flow is established, static and residual pressure readings documented, and the hydrant checked to ensure that it drains. Such testing documentation shall be provided to the fire department and meet the criteria established in subsection (4)d.1 herein. During the annual test other maintenance items to be addressed shall include lubrication of the steamer and/or threads, and verification that each hydrant is clear and free of debris and obstructions, and the b-box is clear and accessible. 
2.  The licensee shall notify the fire department whenever a hydrant(s) is not operable or in working condition and shall identify the nonworking hydrant in a manner acceptable to the fire department. The location of these fire hydrant(s) shall be specified in writing along with a plan to either replace the defective hydrant(s) or restore them to working order, and an anticipated date for completion. A copy of such notification shall be provided to the department. No more than one consecutive hydrant shall be out of service at any time. 
(7)  Temporary or accessory structures. 
a.  Except as provided in section 43-46 herein: Temporary porches, canvas-roofed canopies and skirts may be permitted for mobile homes and auxiliary rooms if in compliance with applicable local fire safety and building codes. Manufactured home accessory buildings or structures constructed after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may be located immediately adjacent to a site's lot line when constructed entirely of non-combustible materials, provided that such buildings or structures are at least three feet from an accessory building or structure on an adjacent site and do not obstruct required exit doors or windows. Accessory buildings and structures constructed before the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and which do not obstruct required exit doors or windows shall be permitted, such structures to be permitted as nonconforming. 
b.  Fences are not permitted on any mobile home site. 
(8)  All streets and driveways in every mobile home park must be maintained in a passable and reasonably dustproof condition at all times. 
a.  The management of every mobile home park shall assume full responsibility for maintaining in good repair and condition all sanitary and electrical appliances in the park. 
(9)  Electrical hookup devices for each individual site shall be provided and the installation shall be in accordance with all State or local codes and ordinances. 
(10)  In no event shall a dependent mobile home, or nonpermanent shelter or other vehicle designed or used for sleeping purposes, other than an independent mobile home, be permitted for occupancy at any time in a mobile park. 
(11)  Community kitchens, plumbing and electrical installations. 
When mobile home community kitchens, dining rooms, laundries or other facilities are provided, such facilities and equipment as are supplied must be maintained in a sanitary condition and kept in good repair, and subject to the ordinances of the Village. 
(12)  All buildings constructed or altered, and all plumbing, electrical and heating installations shall be in accordance with existing Village ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 5367, § 2, 7-20-2010)  
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 42; vehicles and traffic, ch. 90. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Keeping a place of prostitution. 
Any person who has or exercises control over the use of any place which could offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution and performs any of the following acts keeps a place of prostitution: 
(1)  Knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of prostitution; 
(2)  Grants or permits the use of such place under circumstances from which he could reasonably know that the place is used, or is to be used, for purposes of prostitution; or 
(3)  Permits the continued use of a place after becoming aware of facts or circumstances from which he should reasonably know that the place is being used for purposes of prostitution. 
(Code 1959, § 13.9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/11-17.  
Sec. 46-32. - Possession of less than ten grams of cannabis. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cannabis includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any parts of the Cannabis Sativa plant, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
(b)  Possession. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to knowingly possess any quantity of any substance containing less than ten grams of cannabis. 
(c)  Violations; penalties. All persons convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 13.63)  
Sec. 46-33. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are peculiar to and marketed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance. 
(b)  Possession. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to knowingly possess an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance in the human body, or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use. 
(c)  Violations; penalties. All persons convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-16.  
Secs. 46-34—46-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OBSCENITY 
 
Sec. 46-51. - Definition; commission; interpretation of evidence. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Obscene means any material or performance that: 
(1)  The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; 
(2)  The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and 
(3)  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(b)  Commission. A person commits an obscenity, which is hereby prohibited, when, for the first time, with knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, he: 
(1)  Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or provide, any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or embodiment of the obscene; 
(2)  Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; 
(3)  Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene; 
(4)  Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition of his body for gain; 
(5)  Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with the intent to disseminate it in violation of this section or of the penal laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or 
(6)  Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene. 
(c)  Interpretation of evidence. Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specifically susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specifically designed for or directed to such an audience. Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate that material is being commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence shall be admissible to show: 
(1)  The character of the audience for which the material was designed or to which it was directed; 
(2)  What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would probably have on the behavior of such people; 
(3)  The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits of the material, or absence thereof; 
(4)  The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in the State; 
(5)  Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or other promotion of the material; 
(6)  Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator. 
(Code 1959, § 13.15) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/11-20.  
Sec. 46-52. - Writings, printing and painting on buildings, walls, etc. 
No person shall write, print or paint, with chalk, ink, paint or other material, any obscene, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-20(b), words, language or expression upon any building, tenement, fence, wall or other place. 
(Code 1959, § 13.17)  
Secs. 46-53—46-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GAMBLING 
 
Sec. 46-71. - Nuisance declared. 
Every house, room, yard or other premises, kept for the purpose of permitting persons to gamble for any valuable thing, within the limits of the Village, is hereby declared to be a common nuisance. All persons who keep, own, maintain, manage or conduct, or who are interested in any such place, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 13.36)  
Sec. 46-72. - Suppression and prevention. 
It shall be the duty of all members of the police department to give information to the chief of police of each house, room or other place within the Village wherein games, devices, tables or other instruments or things for the purpose of gaming are, or may be, set up, kept or maintained; and such police officers shall take all lawful means to suppress and prevent the playing at such tables, games or devices, and, for such purpose, when and as often as any one of them shall have reasonable cause to suspect that any such table, game or device is set up, kept or maintained as set forth in this section, he shall forthwith make complaint thereof before a judge or magistrate, and obtain a warrant authorizing him to enter such house or place, or any room therein, and such police officer shall thereupon have authority to demand entry therein, and any person who shall refuse or neglect to open the door or entrance to such house, yard, place or any room therein, upon the application of any police officer having such warrant, shall forfeit and pay a fine of not less than $25.00, nor more than $500.00 for each and every offense. 
(Code 1959, § 13.37)  
Sec. 46-73. - Commission; exemptions. 
(a)  A person commits gambling when he: 
(1)  Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value, unless excepted in subsection (b) of this section; 
(2)  Makes a wager upon the result of any game or contest, or any political nomination, appointment or election; 
(3)  Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any gambling device; 
(4)  Contracts to have or give himself or another the option to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain or other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, where it is, at the time of making such contract, intended by both parties thereto that the contract to buy or sell, or the option, whenever exercised, or the contract resulting therefrom, shall be settled, not by the receipt or delivery of such property, but by the payment only of differences in prices thereof; however, the issuance, purchase, sale, exercise, endorsement or guarantee, by or through a person registered with the secretary of State pursuant to section 8 of the Illinois Securities Law of 1953 (815 ILCS 5/8), or by or through a person exempt from such registration under section 8 of the Illinois Securities Law of 1953 (815 ILCS 5/8), of a put, call or other option to buy or sell securities which have been registered with the secretary of State or which are exempt from such registration under section 3 of the Illinois Securities Law of 1953 (815 ILCS 5/3) is not gambling within the meaning of this subsection; 
(5)  Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or knowingly possesses any money which he has received in the course of a bet or wager; 
(6)  Sells pools upon the result of any game, contest of skill or chance, political nomination, appointment or election; 
(7)  Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery; 
(8)  Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document or other similar device; 
(9)  Knowingly drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticket or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, except for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by and conducted in accordance with the laws of the State or any other state or foreign government; 
(10)  Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by and conducted in accordance with the laws of the State or any other state; 
(11)  Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds or changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar means, or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or receipt of such information, except that nothing in this subsection prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting of sporting events or contests; or 
(12)  Knowingly establishes, maintains or operates an internet site that permits a person to play a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value by means of the internet or to make a wager upon the result of any game, contest, political nomination, appointment or election by means of the internet. 
(b)  Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted of gambling therefor: 
(1)  Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance, including, without limitation, contracts of indemnity or guaranty, and life, health or accident insurance; 
(2)  Offers of prizes, awards or compensation to the actual contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest; 
(3)  Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of the State; 
(4)  Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside the State when such transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law; 
(5)  The game commonly known as bingo, when conducted in accordance with the Bingo License and Tax Act (230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.); 
(6)  Lotteries, when conducted by the State in accordance with the Illinois Lottery Law (20 ILCS 1605/1 et seq.); 
(7)  Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used, nor intended to be used, in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "antique slot machine" means a slot machine manufactured 25 or more years ago; 
(8)  Raffles, when conducted in accordance with the Raffles Act (230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq); 
(9)  Charitable games, when conducted in accordance with the Charitable Games Act (230 ILCS 30/1 et seq.); 
(10)  Pull tabs and jar games, when conducted under the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act (230 ILCS 20/1 et seq.). 
(Code 1959, §§ 13.38, 13.40, 13.42)  
Sec. 46-74. - Possession of gaming tables, things and devices. 
No person shall bring into the Village, or have in his possession in the Village, for the purpose of gaming, any table, thing or device of any kind or nature, whereon or with which money or any other thing of value may in any manner be played for. 
(Code 1959, § 13.39)  
Sec. 46-75. - Duty to seize and destroy. 
It is hereby made the duty of every member of the police department to seize any table, instrument, device or thing used for the purpose of gaming, and all such tables, instruments, devices or things shall be destroyed. Any person obstructing or resisting any member of the police department in the performance of any act authorized by this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00, nor more than $500.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1959, § 13.41)  
Secs. 46-76—46-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-101. - Disorderly conduct. 
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly: 
(1)  Does any act in such an unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and provokes a breach of the peace; 
(2)  Transmits, or causes to be transmitted, in any manner, to the fire department of any city, town, village or fire protection district, a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such fire exists; 
(3)  Transmits, or causes to be transmitted, in any manner, to another, a false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature or a container holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive substance is concealed in such place that its explosion or release would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such bomb, explosive or a container holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive substance is concealed in such place; 
(4)  Transmits, or causes to be transmitted, in any manner, to any peace officer, public officer or public employee, a report to the effect that an offense will be committed, is being committed or has been committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such an offense will be committed, is being committed or has been committed; 
(5)  Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other opening therein; 
(6)  While acting as a collection agency, as defined in the Collection Agency Act (225 ILCS 425/1 et seq.), or as an employee of such collection agency, and while attempting to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which is designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; 
(7)  Transmits, or causes to be transmitted, a false report to the department of children and family services under section 4 of the Abused and Neglected Child Reporting Act (325 ILCS 5/4 et seq.); 
(8)  Transmits, or causes to be transmitted, a false report to the department of public health under the Nursing Home Care Act (210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq.); 
(9)  Transmits, or causes to be transmitted, in any manner, to the police department or fire department of any municipality or fire protection district, or any privately owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an ambulance, emergency medical technician-ambulance or emergency medical technician-paramedic, knowing at the time there is no reasonable grounds for believing that such assistance is required; 
(10)  Transmits, or causes to be transmitted, a false report under article II of an act in relation to victims of violence and abuse, approved September 16, 1984, as amended (320 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.); 
(11)  Transmits, or causes to be transmitted, a false report to any public safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe that transmitting such a report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the public; or 
(12)  Calls the number 911 for the purpose of making or transmitting a false alarm or complaint and reporting information when, at the time the call or transmission is made, the person knows there is no reasonable grounds for making the call or transmission and further knows that the call or transmission could result in the emergency response of any public safety agency. 
(13)  No person shall make any other false alarm of any kind calculated to disturb the peace of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 13.2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/26-1.  
Sec. 46-102. - Congregating unlawfully. 
No person shall, with other persons, congregate about or upon any stairway, doorway, window or in front of any business or dwelling, house, theater, lecture room, church or elsewhere, and, by so doing, obstruct or interfere with free passage of persons entering or occupying any such buildings or premises. 
(Code 1959, § 13.4)  
Sec. 46-103. - False alarms. 
No person shall make any false alarm of any kind, excluding alarms of fires, bombs and crimes, calculated to disturb the peace of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 13.12)  
Sec. 46-104. - Noises generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, convenience, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the Village. 
(b)  The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns and signaling devices. 
a.  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of the Village, except as a danger warning; 
b.  The creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; 
c.  The sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; 
d.  The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and 
e.  The use of any such signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television receiving set or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or with louder volume than is necessary for the convenient hearing of the persons who are in the room, chamber, vehicle or outdoor area, within the Village limits, in which or where such machine or device is played, used or operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the location of such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers, etc., for advertising or attracting the attention of the public. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets of the Village for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure, except when a permit has been first procured from the Village manager as required by other ordinances. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets of the Village, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of persons in the vicinity, within the limits of the Village. 
(5)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird, shut up or tied up in any yard, enclosure, stable, house or other place within the Village, which, by barking, howling, crying, singing or causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air within the Village of the exhaust of any steam engine, gasoline engine, stationary internal combustion engine or other kind or type of engine, motor boat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Defect in vehicles or loads. The use within the Village of any wagon, cart, automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle, so out of repair or loaded in such a manner or with material of such nature as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises. 
(8)  Loading and unloading vehicles, and opening boxes, etc. The creation within the Village of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading of any vehicle, or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates, containers, etc., without exercising reasonable care to limit and confine such noise. 
(9)  Building construction, repair, etc., and street excavation. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building within the Village, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Monday—Friday, 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, and 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Sunday, except in case of urgent necessity, in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building commissioner, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building commissioner should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets and highways between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday—Thursday, 7:00 p.m. on Friday and 9:00 a.m. on Saturday, 6:00 p.m. on Saturday and 9:00 a.m. on Sunday, and after 5:00 p.m. on Sunday, and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest if the work was not undertaken, he may grant permission for such work to be done within such hours only upon prior written application from the person requesting to do the work. 
(10)  Schools, institutions of learning, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation within the Village of any excessive noise in the vicinity of any school, institution of learning, church, court or hospital, while such school, institution of learning, church, court or hospital is in use, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in the vicinity of any such building indicating that the building is a school, institution of learning, hospital, court or church. 
(11)  Drums and other instruments or devices. The use within the Village of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention, by the creation of noise, to any place of business, entertainment or public assembly. 
(Code 1959, § 13.22; Ord. No. 5748, § 2, 12-10-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5748, § 2, adopted December 10, 2013, set out provisions noting this section of the Code shall not be applicable to automotive sales and leasing dealership uses; provided, however, that all other standards and regulations set forth in this Code relating to automotive sales and leasing uses shall remain in full force and effect.  
Sec. 46-105. - Obedience to police officers in public places. 
All persons when at or about any public place in the Village shall obey the commands and directions of any police officer who may be stationed or on duty on or about such public place for the preservation of order and enforcing the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the Village. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to obey the commands and directions of a police officer as set forth in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 13.23)  
Sec. 46-106. - Obstructing view at intersections. 
The owner or occupant of every lot or parcel of land adjoining a street or alley intersection in the Village, upon which any tree, shrub, bush or plant is growing, shall trim, prune or cut the tree, shrub, bush or plant or cause it to be trimmed, pruned or cut so as not to obstruct the passage of light from any streetlight or traffic signal light and so that it shall not interfere with, nor obstruct the passage or vision of persons using the sidewalks, alleys, streets, highways or driveways on or adjacent thereto. The existence of any tree, shrub, bush or plant on the premises of any owner or occupant adjoining a street, alley or driveway intersection, which shall obstruct the passage of light from any street light or traffic signal light, or which shall interfere with or obstruct the vision at street intersections or the intersection of a street with a public alley or driveway, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. No bushes, shrubs or plants, other than trees, that are more than 36 inches above the crown of the adjacent alley, street or highway, shall be planted or maintained in the public right-of-way. No bushes, shrubs or plants, other than trees, that are more than 36 inches above the crown of the adjacent alley, street or highway, shall be planted or maintained on private property within 100 feet from the intersecting centerlines of the public rights-of-way at the intersection of any streets or highways. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of such premises to fail, neglect or refuse to abate any violation of this section by removing, trimming, cutting or pruning such tree, shrub, bush or plant within ten days after being notified, in writing, to do so by the Village. Such ten-day period shall commence with the date that a written notice shall have been deposited in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or occupant of such premises. 
(Code 1959, § 13.24)  
Sec. 46-107. - Abandonment of refrigerators and deep freezes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or discard, in any place accessible to children, any refrigerator, icebox or ice chest, of a capacity of 1½ cubic feet or more, which has an attached lid or door which may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch, or who, being the owner, lessee or manager of such place, knowingly permits such abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox or ice chest to remain in such place in such condition. 
(Code 1959, § 13.27)  
Sec. 46-108. - Bungee jumping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, operate, construct, utilize or make available any apparatus, crane, building or other structure from which a person may jump and/or be suspended by any cords, parachutes, ropes and/or other devices (such activity is commonly referred to as "bungee jumping"). 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in the activity of bungee jumping and/or being suspended by any means from any apparatus, crane, building or other structure; provided, however, that this subsection does not apply to a scaffold, body harness or similar apparatus, while being used in the construction, maintenance or cleaning of a building or structure. 
(Code 1959, §§ 13.34, 13.35)  
Sec. 46-109. - Windshields must be unobstructed; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to do business under the provisions of this article to sell, equip, apply or manufacture, or cause to be sold, equipped, applied or manufactured, a motor vehicle which is not in compliance with 625 ILCS 5/12-503. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to motor vehicles manufactured prior to January 1, 1982. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16. 
(Ord. No. 5113, § 9, 6-17-2008)  
Secs. 46-110—46-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FALSE BURGLAR ALARMS 
 
Sec. 46-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Burglar alarm means any security device installed and directly or indirectly connected to the police department for the purpose of alerting others to an unauthorized entry onto the premises or to vehicles, or the commission of an unlawful act, or any audible security device installed for the purpose of alerting others to the unauthorized entry onto the premises or to vehicles, or the commission of an unlawful act. 
False alarm means a burglar alarm system activated by any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Mechanical failure; 
(2)  Malfunction of the burglar alarm system; 
(3)  Improper installation or maintenance of the burglar alarm system; 
(4)  Willful or negligent act of a person under the control or direction of a burglar alarm system; 
(5)  Any other cause not related to an actual or attempted unauthorized entry onto the premises or to vehicles, or the commission of an unlawful act or a fire emergency; provided, however, that any burglar alarm activated by natural causes, including, but not limited to, tornadoes and severe windstorms, or by malicious acts of persons not under the direction or control of the alarm system's owner/lessee or any other cause clearly beyond the control of the owner/lessee of the alarm system shall not be considered a false alarm. 
(Code 1959, § 13.55) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-132. - Activation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly activate a burglar alarm system for the purpose of summoning the police, except if such person knows or suspects that there is an actual or attempted unauthorized entry onto the premises or to vehicles, or the commission of an unlawful act. 
(Code 1959, § 13.56)  
Sec. 46-133. - Automatic reset or disconnection. 
It shall be unlawful for any exterior audible alarm not to automatically reset or be disconnected within ten minutes of activation. 
(Code 1959, § 13.57)  
Sec. 46-134. - Response charges; reconsideration. 
(a)  If the Village police department responds to more than three residential false burglar alarms per residential system at the same premises within any 12-month period, the owner/lessee of such residential burglar alarm system shall pay the Village $50.00 for four—eight alarms, and $100.00 for each subsequent alarm. Commercial premises shall be charged a flat charge of $25.00 per false burglar alarm after the third false burglar alarm. 
(b)  If a residential property is cited for a violation of section 46-133, each such violation shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00, nor more than $100.00 for each such violation. 
(c)  Within seven days after notice of a false burglar alarm, the burglar alarm system owner/lessee may file a written request with the chief of police of the Village to reconsider whether such burglar alarm was false. Such request shall state the owner/lessee opinion with respect to the cause of the burglar alarm and shall indicate the facts upon which the owner/lessee bases his opinion. 
(d)  Within five days after the receipt of a request for reconsideration from an owner/lessee, the chief of police or his agent shall determine whether or not the burglar alarm was false and shall notify the owner/lessee of his decision, in writing, by personal delivery or mail. 
(e)  If the owner/lessee fails to contest the validity of a finding by the chief of police of the Village, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, that a burglar alarm was a false alarm, it shall be conclusively presumed that the alarm was a false burglar alarm. 
(Code 1959, § 13.59)  
Sec. 46-135. - Over ten responses within a six-month period. 
If the police department responds to more than ten false burglar alarms per system at the same premises in a six-month period of time, the chief of police or his agent may initiate burglar alarm system revocation proceedings. 
(Code 1959, § 13.60)  
Sec. 46-136. - Grace period. 
Whenever a new burglar alarm system is installed, the owner/lessee shall be given 30 days from the date of the installation of such burglar alarm system within which no alarm from the premises shall be deemed to be a false burglar alarm, except where such system operates in violation of sections 46-132 and 46-133. 
(Code 1959, § 13.61)  
Sec. 46-137. - Final approval. 
Final approval of a burglar alarm system shall be obtained from the Village or its agents before such system is connected to the police department. 
(Code 1959, § 13.62)  
Sec. 46-138. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16, and each day that such a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, § 13.58)  
Secs. 46-139—46-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 
 
Sec. 46-171. - Assault and battery. 
(a)  A person commits an assault, which is hereby prohibited, when, without lawful authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. 
(b)  A person commits battery, which is hereby prohibited, if he intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification, and by any means: 
(1)  Causes bodily harm to an individual; or 
(2)  Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual. 
(Code 1959, § 13.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 720 ILCS 5/12-1, 5/12-3.  
Secs. 46-172—46-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-201. - Damage to public property. 
No person shall damage, remove, destroy, break, cut, injure, mutilate, mark or deface in any way any public building, sewer, water pipe, hydrant, lamppost, curbstone, fence, wall, bridge, pavement or any motor vehicle of the Village, or any other public property, including, but not limited to, the posting of any and all notices, papers and posters of any and all types on trees, utility posts or any posts of any type on public rights-of-way or public property; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the use of posters, notices, papers which may be used for religious decorations, if permission for such usage is first had and obtained from the board of trustees of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 13.5) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62.  
Sec. 46-202. - Defacing notices, handbills and posters. 
No person shall willfully and maliciously tear down, mutilate or deface or render illegible any notice, handbill or poster lawfully posted upon any street, avenue, alley or other place in the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 13.6)  
Sec. 46-203. - Damage to property. 
Within the corporate limits of the Village, no person shall knowingly or recklessly damage any property of another person without such person's consent. 
(Code 1959, § 13.51)  
Sec. 46-204. - Theft of property. 
(a)  "Petit theft" is hereby defined as a theft when the property taken is of a value of less than $150.00. 
(b)  Within the corporate limits of the Village, it shall be unlawful for any person to commit petit theft. 
(Code 1959, § 13.51; Ord. No. 5141, § 2, 9-16-2008)  
Sec. 46-205. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person issued a citation for such violation may settle and compromise the violation claim in respect of such ordinance by paying the Village the amount of $100.00 within a period to be specified in the citation. If payment has not been received during this specified period of time, payment of $200.00 may be accepted as settlement. 
(b)  Every person found guilty of an offense set forth in this division shall be subject to one or all of the following penalties: 
(1)  Punishment as provided in section 1-16; 
(2)  Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed the actual loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss. 
(Ord. No. 5141, § 3, 9-16-2008)  
Secs. 46-206—46-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TRESPASS 
 
Sec. 46-221. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Legal guardian includes a person appointed as guardian or given custody of a minor by a circuit court of the State, but does not include a person appointed as guardian or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act, 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq. 
Minor means a person who has attained 11 years of age, but who has not yet reached 18 years of age. 
Person includes any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Property includes any real estate, including improvements thereon, and tangible personalty. 
(Code 1959, § 13.50) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-222. - Real property. 
(a)  A person commits a violation of this division if such person: 
(1)  Knowingly and without lawful authority enters or remains within or on a building; 
(2)  Enters upon the land of another after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden; 
(3)  Remains upon the land of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart; or 
(4)  Enters upon one of the following areas while in or on a motor vehicle, including an off-road vehicle, motorcycle, moped or any other powered two-wheel vehicle, after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the entry is forbidden, or remains upon or in the area after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart: 
a.  Any field that is used for growing crops or which is capable of being used for growing crops; 
b.  An enclosed area containing livestock; 
c.  An orchard; or 
d.  A barn or other agricultural building containing livestock. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a)(1) of this section, this section shall not apply to being in a building which is open to the public while the building is open to the public during its normal hours of operation; nor shall this section apply to a person who enters a public building under the reasonable belief that the building is still open to the public. 
(c)  A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of subsection (a) of this section if he has been notified personally, either orally or in writing, including a valid court order as defined by section 112A-3(7) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (725 ILCS 5/112A-3), granting remedy (2) of section 112A-14(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963 (625 ILCS 5/112A-14), or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land, or the forbidden part thereof. 
(d)  This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or his agent having apparent authority to hire workers on such land and assigns them living quarters or a place of accommodations for living thereon, nor to any person living on such land at the request of, or by occupancy, leasing or other agreement or arrangement with, the owner or his agent, nor to any person invited by such migrant worker or other person so living on such land to visit him at the place he is so living upon the land. 
(e)  A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section if he beautifies unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial properties located within any municipality. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial property" means any real estate for which the taxes have not been paid for a period of at least two years, and which has been left unoccupied and abandoned for a period of at least one year; and the term "beautifies" means to landscape, clean up litter, repair dilapidated conditions or board up windows and doors. 
(f)  This section does not prohibit a person from entering a building or upon the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of this subsection, the term "emergency" means a condition or circumstance in which an individual is, or is reasonably believed by the person to be, in imminent danger of serious bodily harm or in which property is, or is reasonably believed to be, in imminent danger of damage or destruction. 
(Code 1959, § 13.31)  
Sec. 46-223. - Liability of parent or legal guardian of minor offender. 
The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for a violation of this division, provided that such minor has not paid the fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the court, and, further provided, that such parent or legal guardian has been served with a summons or notice to appear in the original cause and all proceedings thereafter as provided by law. 
(Code 1959, § 13.53)  
Sec. 46-224. - Violations; penalties. 
Every person found guilty of an offense shall be subject to one or all of the following penalties: 
(1)  Punishment as provided in section 1-16; 
(2)  Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment, or treatment for drug addiction or alcoholism; 
(3)  Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed the actual loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss; and 
(4)  If a minor: 
a.  Reside with his parent or in a foster home; 
b.  Attend school; 
c.  Attend a nonresidential program for youth; or 
d.  Contribute to his own support at home or in a foster home. 
(Code 1959, § 13.52)  
Secs. 46-225—46-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MINORS 
 
Sec. 46-261. - Curfew. 
(a)  By the adoption of a curfew ordinance, the Village is attempting to provide for the protection of minors from each other and from other persons, for the reduction of juvenile criminal activity, and for the protection of the public. 
(b)  The Village Board has determined that because minors under the age of 17 years possess a particular vulnerability to crime and harmful influence under certain circumstances or when not supervised or accompanied by a parent or legal guardian at night, and because minors under the age of 17 years often lack the ability to make critical decisions in an informed and mature manner when exposed to nighttime influences, a critical need exists for a minor curfew ordinance in the Village. 
(c)  A curfew for those under the age of 17 years will be in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare and will assist in the protection of minors as described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 13.64; Ord. No. 4630, § 2(A), 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 46-262. - Curfew hours. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning: 
Curfew hours means: 
(1)  11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
(2)  11:59 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
"Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  An authorized person of a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation managing, conducting or operating any establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of a minor; or 
(ii)  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of the minor in question. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer, or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
(b)  Offenses The following are committed offenses of curfew violation: 
(1)  A minor commits the offense of curfew violation in the event he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the Village during curfew hours. 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the Village during curfew hours. 
(3)  The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(c)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(1) and (2) of this section that the minor was: 
a.  Accompanied by the minor's parent, or a person who is named as guardian of the minor under court order or who is an authorized person of a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court; 
b.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
c.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
d.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
e.  Involved in an emergency; 
f.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if a neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
g.  Attending a school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults or sponsored by the Village, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, a school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults or sponsored by the Village, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
h.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right to peaceably assemble; or 
i.  Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the Emancipation of Mature Minors Act, 750 ILCS 30/1 et seq. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) of this section that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Code 1959, § 13.64; Ord. No. 4630, § 2(B)1—3, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 4666, § 2(A),(B), 6-15-2004)  
Sec. 46-263. - Enforcement. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a police officer shall ask the alleged offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this article unless, after a reasonable preliminary investigation, appropriate under the circumstances, including, but not limited to, questioning of the alleged offender, the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and no defense under subsection 46-262(c) is available. 
(Code 1959, § 13.64; Ord. No. 4630, § 2(B)4, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 46-264. - Penalties. 
A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in an amount not less than $75.00 nor more than $500.00. In addition, the court, upon its exercise of discretion, may sentence any person found in violation of this article to community service work, in lieu of or in addition to the above referenced fine. 
(Code 1959, § 13.64; Ord. No. 4630, § 2(B)5, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 46-265. - License—Tobacco. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver or keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering tobacco products within the Village without having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Application for a license under this article shall be made in writing to the Village manager and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(c)  Fee. The license fee for a tobacco dealer's license shall be as set forth in section 30-3. 
(d)  Sales to persons under 21 years of age. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products to any person under the age of 21 years. 
(2)  Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for in this subsection (d) shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products and upon every vending machine which offers tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state the following: 
The sale of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products to persons under 21 years of age is prohibited by law. 
The text of such signs shall be in red letters, on a white background, and such letters shall be at least one inch high. 
(Ord. No. 5113, § 9, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 6279, § 2, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 46-266. - Minors. 
(a)  Sales by minors. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to engage, employ or permit any person under 21 years of age to sell tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products in any licensed premises. 
(b)  Purchase by minors. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products, misrepresent their identity or age, or use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products. 
(c)  Possession by minors. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products, provided that the possession by a person under the age of 18 years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited. 
(d)  Proximity to certain institutions. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products within 1,000 feet of any pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or junior college or university, or day care center or day care home, or group day care home or part day child care facility, or playground, or public library, or other building used for educational or recreational programs for persons under the age of 21 years. 
(e)  Certain free distribution. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person engaged in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee's or person's business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products free of charge to any person on any right-of-way, park, playground or other property owned by the Village, any school district, park district or public library. 
(Ord. No. 5113, § 9, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 6279, § 3, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 46-267. - Vending machines. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or keep with the intention of selling, giving away or delivering tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending machine is equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of 21 years. 
(b)  Any premises where access by persons under the age of 21 years is prohibited, or premises where the public is generally not permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of the business located at such premises, shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 5113, § 9, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 6279, § 4, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 46-268. - Responsibility for agents and employees. 
Every act or omission of any nature, constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this article by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee, shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. 
(Ord. No. 5113, § 9, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 46-269. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The president shall be charged with the administration of this article. The president may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provision of this article if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the president may instead levy a fine on the licensee. The imposed fine shall not exceed that provided in section 1-16 for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. However, no such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined, except after a public hearing by the president, with a seven-day written notice to the licensee affording the opportunity to appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven-day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery of such notice by certified mail or personal service. 
(b)  The president shall, within seven days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written order and either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked and serve a copy of such order upon the licensee within such seven-day period. 
(c)  Any licensee determined by the president to have violated any of the provisions of this article shall pay to the Village the costs of the hearing before the president on such violation. The president shall determine the costs incurred by the Village for such hearing, including, but not limited to, court reporter's fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorneys' fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders, and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the Village or such lesser sum as the president may allow. 
(d)  The licensee shall pay such costs to the Village within 30 days of notification of the costs by the president. Failure to pay such costs within 30 days of notification is a violation of this article and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the levy of a fine. 
(e)  Any minor under the age of 18 years, violating this article, in possession of tobacco products as defined by this article, shall be fined $50.00 for the first offense, and an additional $50.00 for each additional offense within a one-year period of time. 
(Ord. No. 5113, § 9, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 46-270. - Granting license after revocation. 
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to the licensee for a period of six months thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling tobacco products as defined in section 22-151. 
(Ord. No. 5113, § 9, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 46-271. - Secondhand, pawn shops: dealing with minors under 18 years of age; stolen goods. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person having a license from the Village under the provisions of this article to purchase or receive from minors who are under 18 years of age, without the written consent of their parents or guardians, any article of property whatsoever. 
(b)  Every licensee who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or other property of value which may have been lost or stolen shall report to the police department, and shall, upon demand, produce such goods, articles or other property to any Village official for examination. 
(Ord. No. 5113, § 9, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 46-272. - Transaction restrictions. 
(a)  No pawnbroker shall take or receive in pawn or pledge for money loaned, any property from any minor under 18 years of age, or the ownership of which is in or claimed by any minor under 18 years of age, or which may be in the possession or under the control of any minor under 18 years of age, or otherwise have any business dealings with any minor under 18 years of age. 
(b)  No pawnbroker shall receive, as purchased, pawned or pledged, any gun, blackjack, knife or other weapon of any kind. No pawnbroker shall display any such weapon for sale. 
(c)  No pawnbroker shall conduct the business of a secondhand dealer without having obtained a license therefore in addition to the pawnbroker's license. 
(Ord. No. 5113, § 9, 6-17-2008)  
Secs. 46-273—46-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PICKETING 
 
Sec. 46-291. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee includes any employees, except employees of persons who are not employers under the definition of that term in this section, but shall not include any individual having authority, in the interests of an employer, to hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge, assign, reward or discipline other employees or responsibly direct them, or to adjust their grievances, or effectively to recommend such action, if in connection with the exercise of such authority is not of a merely routine or clerical nature, but requires the use of independent judgment. 
Employer includes any person acting as an agent of an employer, directly or indirectly, but does not include any person subject to the Federal Railway Labor Act, as amended from time to time, nor within the jurisdiction of the National Labor Relations Board, as announced from time to time by the board. 
Labor organization means any organization of any kind or any agency or employee representation committee or plan in which employees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment or conditions of work. 
Person includes one or more individuals, labor organizations, partnerships, associations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees in bankruptcy or receivers. 
Picket and picketing mean the patrolling or stationing of one or more persons about the premises being picketed, upon the sidewalks and streets thereabouts, to convey, in oral or written form, by means of banners, signs, placards, advertisement or handbills, the message of the persons picketing. 
(Code 1959, § 6.65) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-292. - Secondary boycotts or activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any labor organization, or any officer, member or agent thereof, by picketing or otherwise, to directly induce, encourage, force or require any person to reduce or cut off the transportation or delivery of any goods, articles, materials or commodities to an employer with which the labor organization has a primary dispute, or to refuse to perform any services within the scope of his employment with an employer other than one with which the labor organization has a primary dispute. 
(Code 1959, § 6.66)  
Sec. 46-293. - Interference with transportation or delivery of goods, performance of services and free access to premises of employer by threats and intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful for any labor organization, or any officer, member or agent thereof, by force, threat or intimidation, whether oral, written or by gesture, to interfere with the transportation or delivery of any goods, articles, materials or commodities to, or the performance of any services for, an employer, or to restrict or curtail free access to an employer's premises. 
(Code 1959, § 6.67)  
Sec. 46-294. - Harassment, coercion or intimidation of employers and employees, etc., when no labor dispute exists between the employer and employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any labor organization, or any officer, member or agent thereof, by harassment, coercion or intimidation, including threats of violence, or loss of business or employment, or following or trailing by automobile or truck, of any employer or his employees, or any other person, to interfere in any way with the normal business operation of any employer or the employment or work of his employees when no labor dispute exists between such employer and his employees. 
(Code 1959, § 6.68)  
Sec. 46-295. - Reducing or cutting off deliveries to self-employed persons for purpose of requiring membership in labor organization by picketing. 
It shall be unlawful for any labor organization, or any officer, members or agency thereof, to cause deliveries to or from the premises of any self-employed person to be reduced or cut off by means of picketing for the purpose of requiring such self-employed person to join or pay any dues, fees or other sums of money to such labor organization or to any officer, member or agent thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 6.69)  
Sec. 46-296. - Threats, gestures or intimidations causing deliveries to self-employed persons to be reduced or cut off for purpose of requiring membership in labor organization. 
It shall be unlawful for any labor organization, or any officer, member or agent thereof, by oral or written statement, gesture, threat, intimidation or force, to cause deliveries to or from any premises of a self-employed person to be reduced or cut off, or free access to or from such premises to be interfered with, for the purpose of requiring such self-employed person to join or pay any dues, fees or other sums of money to such labor organization or to any officer, member or agent thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 6.70)  
Sec. 46-297. - Harassment, coercion or intimidation of self-employed persons for purpose of requiring membership in labor organization. 
It shall be unlawful for any labor organization, or any officer, member or agent thereof, by harassment, coercion or intimidation, including threats of violence or loss of business or employment, or following or trailing by automobile or truck, of any self-employed person or any other person, to interfere in any way with the normal business operation of any self-employed person for the purpose of requiring such self-employed person to join or pay any dues, fees or other sums of money to such labor organization or to any officer, member or agent thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 6.71)  
Sec. 46-298. - Representation of majority of employees required for labor dispute between employer and employees. 
No labor dispute between an employer and his employees shall be deemed to exist for the purposes of this article where the labor organization participating or sponsoring the activity prohibited by this article does not in fact represent a majority of the employees of such employer and an objective of such activity is to obtain recognition or designation as the exclusive collective bargaining representative of such employees. 
(Code 1959, § 6.72)  
Sec. 46-299. - Circumstances under which labor organization does not represent a majority of employees. 
It shall be presumed, for the purposes of this article, that a labor organization does not represent a majority of the employees of an employer under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where such labor organization refuses to join with the employer in requesting the department of labor of the State to administer a secret ballot election for such employees after the employer has, in writing, so requested of the labor organization; 
(2)  During the period of time pending such election where the labor organization and employer have jointly requested the department of labor of the State to administer a secret ballot election; and 
(3)  For a period of 12 months after such an election is conducted, if the labor organization fails to procure a majority of the votes of the employees voting in such election. 
(Code 1959, § 6.73)  
Sec. 46-300. - Circumstances under which labor organization does represent a majority of employees. 
It shall be presumed, for the purposes of this article, that a labor organization does represent a majority of the employees of an employer under the following circumstances: 
(1)  For a period of 12 months after a secret ballot election has been administered by the department of labor of the State in which the labor organization has procured a majority of the votes of the employees voting in the election; or 
(2)  Where an employer refuses to join with such labor organization in requesting the department of labor of the State to administer a secret ballot election for such employees after the labor organization has, in writing, so requested of the employer. 
(Code 1959, § 6.74)  
Sec. 46-301. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than $50.00, nor more than $500.00 for each offense, and each day that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1959, § 6.77)  
Secs. 46-302—46-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - WEAPONS 
 
Sec. 46-331. - Discharge. 
No person shall fire or discharge any cannon, gun, fowling piece, pistol or firearm of any kind or description, explode or set off any cracker or anything containing powder or other explosive substance in the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 13.7)  
Secs. 46-332—46-360. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - TELEPHONE DEVICES ACTIVATING POLICE AND FIRE EMERGENCY NUMBERS 
 
Sec. 46-361. - Installation and use. 
No person shall install or use, or cause to be installed or used, any telephone device or attachment which automatically selects a public telephone line of the Village fire or police department and which reproduces any prerecorded message to report any burglary, robbery, fire or other emergency. 
(Code 1959, § 13.45)  
Sec. 46-362. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 13.46)  
Secs. 46-363—46-390. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - LAKE GLENVIEW REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5675, § 2, adopted May 7, 2013, amended the title of ch. 46, art. X, to read as set out herein. Formerly ch. 46, art. X, pertained to Fishing Regulations for Lake Glenview. 
 
Sec. 46-391. - Fishing regulations on Lake Glenview. 
(a)  A State fishing license is required. 
(b)  Catch and release fishing is strictly enforced. Common Carp (Cyprinus carpio) is the exception to catch and release, and its removal from the lake is encouraged. 
(c)  Fishing is permitted in designated areas only, and fishing and is only permitted from the shore. 
(d)  Emptying of bait buckets in or near the lake is prohibited. 
(e)  Spear, gig, and bow and arrow fishing are prohibited. 
(f)  One-pole limit per person. 
(g)  Personal floatation devices or waders are prohibited. 
(h)  Fishing is permitted from April 15 to November 15 from sunrise to sunset. 
(Ord. No. 4686, § 2, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 5382, § 2, 10-5-2010; Ord. No. 5675, § 3, 5-7-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5675, § 3, adopted May 7, 2013, amended the title of § 46-391 to read as set out herein. Formerly § 46-391 pertained to generally.  
Sec. 46-392. - Signs showing fishing regulations. 
The director of public works shall post or erect signs indicating the above regulations relating to Lake Glenview. 
(Ord. No. 4686, § 3, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 5675, § 4, 5-7-2013)  
Sec. 46-393. - Swimming and boating and ice skating. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, float or enter the water, or use a boat or other watercraft, or ice skate on Lake Glenview. 
(Ord. No. 5675, § 5, 5-7-2013)  
Secs. 46-394—46-410. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - FILM PRODUCTION 
 
Sec. 46-411. - Statement of policy and purpose. 
It is the policy of the Village to allow interior or exterior locations on public or private property to be used in film production, as hereinafter defined, only if the personal and property rights of affected residents and businesses can be adequately protected, unreasonable and unnecessary disruptions to the community can be avoided, the rights of the public to the safe and normal use of the public streets, rights-of-way and property can be protected, the rights of the public to the orderly functioning of government and the provision of public services can be protected and hazards to the public health, safety, and welfare can be prevented. It is the purpose of this section to establish standards for evaluating requests for the use of public or private property as a location for film production be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, recognizing that the nature of the film, the type of production, the location desired to be used, the length of time of production activities, and the impact of such activities on Village operations and services makes each request unique. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(a), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-412. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings and be constructed in accordance with the definitions set forth below: 
Film production: The process of recording live action on film, magnetic tape, or any other medium, for later sale or distribution as a movie, commercial, training film, or educational program, and any activities relating thereto including set-up and site restoration. 
Film production equipment: Any object used in film production, including but not limited to: lighting equipment, sound equipment, cameras, dressing rooms, trailers, props, furnishings, and vehicles. 
Film production permit: A permit issued in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this section. 
Village manager: The manager of the Village of Glenview, Illinois, or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(b), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-413. - Permit required. 
No person, group of persons, or entities shall use any interior or exterior public or private location or property in the Village of Glenview for film production, or place any film production equipment on any public street or right-of-way, on any public property, or on the exterior of any private property without first having obtained a film production permit from the Village in accordance with the procedures established in the section. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(c), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-414. - Application and permit fees. 
All applications for film production permits shall be accompanied by a fee as outlined by chapter 30-1 and determined by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(d), 9-15-1998; Ord. No. 5113, § 9, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 46-415. - Submission for application for a permit. 
All applications for a film production permit shall be submitted on a standard form prescribed by the Village and to be made available in the Village manager's office. The completed application shall be filed with the Village manager no less than 30 days prior to the proposed commencement of film production. The application shall be accompanied by all documentation and statements required under sections 46-416 through 46-424. In addition, the application shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The name, permanent address, local address, and local telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is an entity, the nature of the entity shall be described and proof of its current, lawful existence provided. 
(2)  The name, permanent address, local business address, permanent phone number, and local phone number of the individual or individuals responsible for the day-to-day operations of the film production. 
(3)  A statement that the person signing the application is authorized to do so. 
(4)  A description of the type of film production and type of film production equipment to be used. 
(5)  The proposed dates for the film production. 
(6)  The proposed hours for the film production. 
(7)  A letter or statement signed by the owner or owners and occupants of each property which the applicant proposes to use as a location for film production in the format provided in section 46-417. 
(8)  The identification of the location of all public streets, public ways, and public property which the applicant proposes to use for the film production or for the location and/or storage of film production equipment. 
(9)  A description of all public streets and public rights-of-way for which the applicant requests the imposition of restrictions on or the alteration of normal parking or vehicular pedestrian traffic patterns, and the nature of such restriction or alteration. 
(10)  A description of the personnel and equipment the applicant proposes to have on the film production location to provide emergency medical treatment for persons involved in the film production. 
(11)  A description of the methods and procedures to be used for food service and health and sanitation on the film production location. 
(12)  A description of the methods and procedures for the removal of garbage and other waste from the film production location. 
(13)  Such other and further information as the Village manager may deem necessary in order to evaluate and process the application. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(e), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-416. - Notification of neighbors. 
Once the application for permit has been approved by the Village manager, the applicant must notify all owners of record and occupants of all property situated within two blocks in every direction of each separate film production location of the proposed film production within three days of approval. The notice must be delivered personally or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall contain a written description of the proposed film production, including the proposed production schedule and the type of film production activities and film production equipment the applicant proposes to use. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(f), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-417. - Property owner letter of approval. 
The letter or statement required by subsection 46-415(7) above shall state the approval and consent of the owner or owners and, where applicable, the lessee or lessees of the property to its use as a location for film production. The signatures on the letter shall be notarized. The letter of approval shall contain the following statement: "I hereby certify that I am the owner of record (or, where applicable, the occupant) of the property located at (street address) which will be used for film production. I hereby waive any claim against the Village of Glenview arising out of or in connection with the issuance of the film production permit and will indemnify and hold harmless the Village of Glenview for and from any loss, damage, expense, claims, and costs of every nature and kind arising out of or in connection with the film production pursuant to said permit." 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(g), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-418. - Certificate of insurance. 
The film production permit application shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance, issued by a company acceptable to the Village and authorized to do business in the State of Illinois. The certificate of insurance shall be in an amount of not less than $5,000,000.00 general liability, including bodily injury, property damages, and automobile liability. The certificate of insurance shall name the Village as an additional insured, using the following language: "The Village of Glenview, its corporate authorities, officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees, attorneys, agents, and representatives are made additional insured with respect to any and all claims which arise out of, or in any way related to, the operations of (insert name of film maker) while present in the Village of Glenview." The certificate of insurance shall be accompanied by a letter from the insurer stating that there are no outstanding claims against the policy. The Village also requires a copy of the policy in order to satisfy that no exclusions exist which would defeat the anticipated coverage. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(h), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-419. - Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance. 
The application for film production permit shall be accompanied by proof acceptable to the Village manager that the applicant has provided worker's compensation insurance, employer's liability insurance, and all other insurance required by law to be provided for the employees of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(i), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-420. - Indemnification and hold harmless agreement. 
The application for a film production permit shall be accompanied by an indemnification agreement in a form acceptable to the Village wherein the applicant agrees to defend and hold the Village of Glenview, its officers, employees and agents, harmless from any loss, damage, expense, claim and cost of every nature and kind whatsoever, including attorney's fees, arising out of or in connection with applicant's use of the public property, public right-of-way, public equipment, or public personnel specified in the film production permit or arising out of or in connection with the film production authorized under the permit. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(j), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-421. - Restoration and repair of property. 
The application for film production permit shall contain a statement of the applicant agreeing to pay in full, promptly upon receipt of an invoice, the cost of repair for any and all damage to public property, resulting from or in connection with, the film production, and to restore the property to its condition prior to the film production. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be conditioned upon such agreement. The applicant shall deposit funds with the Village in the amount of $1,000.00 in order to secure such restoration. At the discretion of the Village manager, the applicant may be required to deposit additional funds based upon the circumstances of the film production and its impact upon public property, in order to secure such restoration. 
Such funds shall be placed in escrow by the Village. The Village may draw against said escrow to pay any portion of an invoice for the repair or restoration of public property that is not paid within 14 days of its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(k), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-422. - Use of Village personnel. 
The applicant shall agree to pay in full, before film production, the costs of any police, fire, public works, or other Village personnel resulting from the film production. Such costs shall include costs of services specifically requested by the applicant and costs of services which, in the judgment of the Village manager, is directly related to the film production. The costs billed for such direct Village labor shall be equal to one and half times the hourly rate of pay for each individual Village employee so assigned, including any applicable overtime, plus an administrative charge equal to ten percent of such costs. The Village reserves the right to assign additional fire and/or police personnel to the film production or film production location, where in the opinion of the chief of police or fire chief, such protection is warranted by the nature of the film production. Any expenses not incurred will be reimbursed to the applicant after the film production by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(l), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-423. - Use of Village equipment. 
The use of Village equipment as film production equipment is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(m), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-424. - Use of Village property. 
The applicant shall agree to pay in full, before film production, the costs for the use of all Village property and public ways. The costs billed for such use of Village property shall be at the rates hereinafter set forth, based on the extent of interference with or disruption of the normal use and operation of Village property or public way. The rates for such costs shall be as follows: 
(1)  For any use of any public building, the cost shall be $1,000.00 per day. Any building occupied by the Glenview Police or Fire Departments cannot be used for film production. 
(2)  For the partial closure or obstruction of any public street or right-of-way within any block, the cost shall be $250.00 per day. Total closure of any public street or right-of-way is prohibited. 
Any expenses not incurred will be reimbursed to the applicant after the film production by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(n), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-425. - Processing of application. 
The Village manager shall distribute copies of the completed application for film production permit to the chief of police, fire chief, and public works director. The chief of police, fire chief, and public works director shall evaluate the application to determine its impact on the functions of their respective departments and the extent of need to provide additional personnel and/or services in the event the permit is issued. In addition, the chief of police, fire chief, and public works director shall evaluate the application on the basis of the impact of use on the public streets, the impact on traffic safety, and potential fire hazards. The reports of the chief of police, fire chief, and public works director shall be forwarded to the Village manager, who shall determine as to whether the permit should be granted. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(o), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-426. - Authority of Village manager. 
The Village manager shall review the report and recommendation of the chief of police, fire chief, and public works director and, based on all of the circumstances surrounding the film production permit application and the assessed impact of the film production, shall: 
(1)  If the film production is for five days or less, the Village manager shall determine whether the film production permit shall be issued or be denied. 
(2)  If the film production is for more than five days, the applicant must appear before the Village Board to seek approval. The Village manager shall recommend to the Village Board of Trustees whether to issue or deny the film production permit for an extended period. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(p), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-427. - Reservation of rights. 
The Village hereby reserves the following rights: 
(1)  To prohibit the issuance of the film production permit in the event that the applicant does not meet the conditions of the permit; 
(2)  To order the cessation of the film production in the event the Village manager determines either that any of the terms and conditions upon which the film production permit was issued have been violated or that the operation of the film production has otherwise caused a detriment to the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(3)  To inspect all structures, devices and/or film production equipment to be used in connection with the film production at any time the film production is in process; 
(4)  To impose such regulations, conditions or restrictions other than or in addition to those provided in this section as the Village, acting through the Village manager, may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, which regulations, conditions, or restrictions shall be stated in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(q), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-428. - Number of permits limited. 
No more than one film production shall be authorized in the Village on any given day. Specific locations will be granted one film production permit every 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(r), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-429. - Time limitation for permit. 
Any film production permit issued under this section shall be valid only for the time period specified within the permit. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(s), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-430. - Hours of production. 
Film production, including time for set-up and restoration, shall be limited to the hours of between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(t), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-431. - Specific location for permit. 
Film production must have a specific location. Random filming from Village streets is prohibited. The use of film production equipment is not to be mobile on Village streets. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(u), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-432. - Compliance with applicable ordinances, regulations, conditions, and restrictions. 
All film production permits issued pursuant to this section shall be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with all applicable ordinances of the Village of Glenview and with any additional regulations, conditions, or restrictions set forth in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(v), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-433. - Compliance with police orders. 
The Village hereby reserves the right of the chief of police to order any holder of a permit under this section to immediately vacate the public ways and/or public property if, in his determination, such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. All film production permits issued pursuant to this section shall be conditioned upon the applicant's immediate compliance with any such order. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(w), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-434. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  General penalty. Any person who violates a provision of this article, who makes a false statement in obtaining a permit under this article, or who violates a condition of any permit issued under this article, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(b)  Revocation of permit. Any permit issued pursuant to this section may be revoked by the Village manager upon any violation of the terms or conditions upon which it was issued, or upon the violation of this section or any other applicable Village ordinance or State law. Such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed for any such violation. 
(c)  Separate offenses. Each act of violation and each day on which a violation of this section or a permit issued pursuant to this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Liability of permit holder. Every permit holder shall be subject to penalties or violations of this section or a permit issued pursuant to this section by an officer, director, manager, employee, agent or representative of the permit holder as if such violation had been committed by the permit holder personally. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 2(x), 9-15-1998)  
Sec. 46-435. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the Village of Glenview. 
(Ord. No. 3990, § 3, 9-15-1998)  
Chapter 50 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS 
 
Sec. 50-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Handbill distributor means any person who travels either by foot or by some means of conveyance, to or from any residence, and hangs, affixes or otherwise distributes any book, handbill, flyer, circular, poster or other form of writing that contains advertisements for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, insurance, publications, subscriptions or services of any kind, character or description whatsoever, on any premises or residence, either for or on behalf of himself or any other person; or any person who travels either by foot or by some means of conveyance, to or from any residence, or upon any highway, street, byway or sidewalk, distributing, delivering and/or handing out any handbill, flyer, circular, poster or other form of advertisement for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, insurance, publications, subscriptions or services of any kind, character or description whatsoever, either for or on behalf of himself or any other person. 
Peddler means any person who takes orders for, offers to sell, sells, or seeks to obtain orders or sales from persons within the Village, including, but not limited to, any person within any residence or apartment, or from any person upon any street, highway, byway, alley or sidewalk within the Village, for any goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, insurance, publications, subscriptions or services of any kind, character or description whatsoever. 
Residence means every separate living unit occupied for dwelling purposes by one or more persons, and contained within any type of building or structure. 
(Code 1959, § 6.43) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-32. - License—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any individual to engage in business as a peddler within the Village without first having obtained a license for such purpose as provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6.44)  
Sec. 50-33. - Same—Application; fee. 
(a)  Any individual who desires to peddle or distribute handbills within the Village shall make an application, in writing, in duplicate, to the Village manager, on a form to be furnished by the Village manager, in which the following information shall be given, under oath: 
(1)  Applicant's name and address, together with his places of residence during the preceding 12 months; 
(2)  Name and address of the employer of the applicant, if any, together with written evidence of the employment relationship; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the property to be sold in the Village; 
(4)  Length of time for which the privilege to do business as a peddler is desired, the hours of the day that such function will be performed and the approximate area within the Village where the peddling will take place; 
(5)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle, together with the vehicle's current license number issued by the secretary of State, or such other identification as will serve to identify the vehicle and its owner; 
(6)  If a vehicle is used, a certificate of insurance of a responsible company, in sufficient amounts to protect the public; 
(7)  Two photographs of the applicant, taken within 30 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the peddler in a clear and distinguishing manner, together with a personal description of such individual; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor under the laws of the State or any other State or federal law of the United States; 
(9)  A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any provision of this article or any ordinance of any state municipality regulating peddling. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application, a fee as outlined in chapter 30-1 shall be paid to the village manager to help defray the cost of investigation. 
(Code 1959, § 6.45; Ord. No. 5113, § 10, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 50-34. - Same—investigation; issuance; record; display; transferability. 
(a)  The Village manager shall cause an investigation to be made by the police department, director of development and other officers and employees of the Village as to the applicant's character, record and compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, and such other matters as the Village manager may deem necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The applicant shall cooperate with such investigation and furnish such additional information as may be requested by the Village manager or corporate authorities. 
(b)  If the investigation shows proper character, record and compliance, the Village manager shall issue a peddler's license to the applicant upon payment of the license fee as set forth in section 50-35. 
(c)  The Village manager shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
(d)  Each peddler shall carry with him, as evidence of his licensing, the license form issued to him, evidencing the license issued under this article, and he shall exhibit the license upon demand by any resident, police officer or other public official of the Village. The license issued under this article shall not be transferable and it shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit any other person to use or display the license issued to him. 
(Code 1959, § 6.46)  
Sec. 50-35. - Same—Fee. 
Every peddler shall pay an annual license fee for each year, or part thereof, in which the peddler conducts business in the Village. Such license fee shall be as provided in chapter 30-1. 
(Code 1959, § 6.47; Ord. No. 5113, § 10, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 50-36. - Display vehicles. 
No vehicle used by a peddler shall be permitted to be utilized by such peddler as a showcase, sample case or display area for the sale, or offering for sale, of foods, goods, wares, merchandise or any article of any kind whatsoever. 
(Code 1959, § 6.48.1)  
Sec. 50-37. - Fraud, cheating or misrepresentation. 
Any peddler who shall, in the Village, be guilty of any fraud, cheating or misrepresentation with respect to peddling, or who shall neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 6.49)  
Sec. 50-38. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person shall be a peddler who has been convicted of the commission of a felony or misdemeanor under the laws of the State or any other state, or federal law of the United States, within five years of the date of application, or who has been convicted of a violation of any provision of this article or any ordinance of any other state municipality regulating peddling, within five years of the date of application. 
(b)  No peddler shall make, or cause to be made, any loud or obnoxious noise of such volume that is sufficient to disturb the peace of the residents of this Village. 
(c)  No peddler shall have the exclusive right to any location in the public streets, sidewalks, alleys or ways, nor shall any peddler be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public or the public safety or contribute to the creation of traffic obstructions, hazards or congestion. For the purposes of this subsection, the judgment of a Village police officer, exercised in good faith in the course of his employment, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced, or the public safety impaired or placed in jeopardy or a traffic obstruction, hazard or congestion is created. 
(Code 1959, § 6.50)  
Sec. 50-39. - Hours regulated. 
In order to preserve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and the residents of the Village, it is hereby declared unlawful and constitutes a nuisance for any person to peddle within the Village before the hour of 9:00 a.m. and after the hour of 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 1959, § 6.50.1)  
Sec. 50-40. - Duty of peddlers, handbill distributors. 
It shall be the duty of each peddler or handbill distributor, upon going onto any premises in the Village, to first examine the premises for the notice provided for in section 50-41. If a "NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS INVITED" notice is posted, then the peddler or handbill distributor, whether registered under the provisions of this article or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. 
(Code 1959, § 6.50.2)  
Sec. 50-41. - Uninvited peddling. 
No person, whether or not registered under this article, shall hang, affix or distribute any book, handbill, flyer, circular, poster or other form of writing that contains an advertisement for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, insurance, publications, subscriptions or services of any kind, character or description whatsoever, on any premises or residence, either for or on behalf of himself or any other person, whether or not registered under this article, or peddle goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, insurance, publications or subscriptions on any premises within the Village, if the premises are posted against solicitation or peddling by means of a notice, prominently displayed, on which the following is printed: "NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS INVITED." The premises shall be deemed to be posted against solicitation or peddling if there is exhibited on or near the main entrance to the property, or on or near the main door, a sign, at least three inches by four inches, which bears such notice in letters at least one-third inch in height. For the benefit of the public health, safety and welfare, the Village and public utilities are specifically exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 6.50.3)  
Sec. 50-42. - Charitable peddling. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable peddling includes the selling of any foods, goods, wares and merchandise upon or along the streets, highways or public places of the Village, or at the doors of residences or apartments, where the proceeds from the sale of such foods, goods, wares and merchandise are received by a charitable, religious, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or eleemosynary organization. 
(b)  Regulation. Charitable peddling shall be regulated by the provisions set forth in article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 6.50.4)  
Sec. 50-43. - Compliance with other Code provisions required; license revocation; appeals. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this article shall relieve any person from the necessity of obtaining a license or paying the required fee for such license, when otherwise required by this Code. 
(b)  Any license issued under this article shall be revoked by the chief of police or his authorized representative if the holder of the license is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or has made a false statement in the representation in the course of peddling or distribution activities contrary to the conditions of the licensing requirements, or conducts peddling or distribution activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or so as to constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a license under the terms of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police or his authorized representative to the holder of the license, in person or by certified U.S. mail, addressed to the license holder's residence address set forth in the application, stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such action. Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the license shall become null and void. 
(c)  Persons who are denied a peddling license or who have had licenses suspended or revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the office of the Village manager, addressed to the attention of the Village manager. The appeal must be filed within five working days after receipt of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation. The Village manager or his designee shall hear and determine the appeal and the decision of the Village manager or his designee shall be final. 
(Code 1959, § 6.50.5)  
Secs. 50-44—50-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITORS AND DISTRIBUTORS 
 
Sec. 50-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means any person who takes orders for or offers to sell or sells or seeks to obtain orders or sales from persons within the Village, including but not limited to any person within any residence or apartment or from any person upon any street, highway, byway, alley or sidewalk within the Village for any goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, insurance, publications, subscriptions, or services of any kind, character or description whatsoever; or any person who travels either by foot or by some means of conveyance, to or from any residence, and hangs, affixes, or otherwise distributes any book, handbill, flyer, circular, poster, or other form of writing that contains advertisement(s) for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, insurance, publications, subscriptions or services of any kind, character or description whatsoever, on any premises or residence, either for or on behalf of himself or any other person; or any person who travels either by foot or by some means of conveyance, to or from any residence, or upon any highway, street byway, or sidewalk distributing, delivering and/or handing out any handbill, flyer, circular, poster, or other form of advertisement for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, insurance, publications, subscriptions or services of any kind, character or description whatsoever, either for or on behalf of himself or any other person. 
Person means any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation or trust, or any combination thereof. 
Residence means every separate living unit occupied for dwelling purposes by one or more persons contained within any type of building or structure. 
Solicitor means any person requesting or seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other thing of value or the pledge of any type of future donation for the support or benefit of any charitable, political, religious or nonprofit association, organization, project, corporation, partnership, trust or joint venture, or any combination thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 6.7; Ord. No. 4426, § 2, 8-6-2002; Ord. No. 4729, § 2(6.7), 12-6-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-72. - Registration required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a solicitor or peddler unless such person is registered as provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6.7.1; Ord. No. 4729, § 2(6.7.1), 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 50-73. - Registration application. 
Any person who desires to act as a solicitor or peddler as defined hereinabove, within the Village shall make application in writing to the chief of police, on a form to be furnished by the chief of police or his authorized representative(s), with the following information to be given under oath or affirmation, as the case may be, as to its truth and veracity: 
(1)  Applicant's name and address, together with the applicant's place of residence during the preceding 12 months. 
(2)  Name and address of the employer of the applicant, if any, together with written evidence of the employment relationship. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature and subject matter of the solicitation or distribution that the applicant seeks to undertake or a brief description of the nature of the peddler's business and the property to be sold in the Village. 
(4)  If a vehicle is to be used: 
a.  A description of the vehicle, together with the current license place number issued by the Secretary of State of such vehicle, or such other identification as will serve to identify the vehicle; and 
b.  A certificate of insurance of a responsible company in sufficient amounts as required by Illinois law. 
(5)  The length of time for which the solicitation, distribution or peddling is desired, the hours of the day that such function will be performed, and the approximate area within the Village where the solicitation, distribution or peddling will take place. 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant taken within 30 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the solicitor in a clear and distinguishing manner, together with a personal description of such individual. If the applicant is a corporation or firm, such photographs and such description shall be of the employee or employees who are conducting the solicitation, distribution or peddling. 
(7)  A statement by applicant as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or has been convicted of a felony under the federal laws of the United States. 
(8)  A statement by the applicant as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any provision of this article or of any ordinance of any State municipality or of any other State regulating solicitation or peddling as defined herein. 
(Code 1959, § 6.8; Ord. No. 4729, § 2(6.8), 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 50-74. - Investigation of applicant; issuance of registration. 
(a)  The chief of police or his authorized representative(s) shall cause an investigation to be made by the police department of the Village as to the applicant's criminal record, if any, and compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the State, the Village, other states and federal law. The applicant shall cooperate with such investigation and furnish such additional information as may be reasonably requested by the chief of police or his authorized representative(s) in furtherance of such investigation. 
(b)  If the investigation indicates that the applicant is in compliance with the regulations contained in section 50-75, depending on the type of solicitation applied for, the chief of police or his authorized representative shall notify the applicant within 24 hours from the time the application is made, and shall cause a registration badge to be issued directly to the applicant. 
(c)  All registration badges issued under this section shall expire on December 31 following the date of issuance and must be thereafter renewed in the same manner as the original registration as provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6.9; Ord. No. 4729, § 2(6.9), 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 50-75. - Regulations. 
(a)  In general. 
(1)  Each solicitor or peddler registered hereunder shall wear a registration badge as evidence of registration. The registration badge shall be worn by the solicitor or peddler on the left front chest of the solicitor's outer clothing in such a way that the badge may be easily read while in the course of solicitation, or distribution or peddling activities. If a badge becomes damaged or obscured, the solicitor or peddler shall return it to the chief of police or his authorized representative(s) and receive another badge at a cost of $5.00 for each replacement badge. The registration badge issued hereunder shall not be transferable, and it shall be unlawful for any solicitor or peddler to permit any other person to use or display the registration badge issued to such solicitor or peddler. 
(2)  Denial of a registration badge. The chief of police or his authorized representative(s) shall not issue a registration badge: 
a.  To any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony (excluding those felonies which relate to political protest) under the laws of the State of Illinois, the laws of any other State or the federal laws of the United States, within five years of the date of application; 
b.  Nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any provision of this article or of an ordinance of any other Illinois municipality or in any other State regulating soliciting or peddling, within five years of the date of application; 
c.  Nor to any person whose registration badge issued hereunder has been previously revoked as provided under Section 50-76. 
(3)  No solicitor or peddler shall have the exclusive right to any location in the street, sidewalks, alleys, byways or highways, nor shall any solicitor or peddler be permitted a permanent stationary location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any area where his solicitation, distribution or peddling impedes the public safety or contributes to the creation of traffic obstructions, hazards, or congestion. 
(4)  Only persons registered with the Attorney General of the State of Illinois as a charitable organization as provided by "An Act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and making an appropriation therefore," approved July 26, 1963, as amended, shall be permitted to solicit or peddle for charitable purposes within the Village of Glenview. 
(5)  No person, whether registered or not under this article, shall solicit, distribute or peddle within the Village or on any premises if the same are posted against solicitation, distribution or peddling by means of a notice, prominently displayed, on which is printed: "No Solicitors or Peddlers Invited." Premises shall be deemed to be posted against solicitation, distribution or peddling if there is exhibited on or near the main entrance to the property, or on or near the main door, a sign at least three inches by four inches which bears the above legend in letters at least one-third inch in height. 
(6)  No person, whether registered or not under this article, shall hang, affix, or distribute any book, handbill, flyer, circular, poster, or other writing requesting or seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing, or any other thing of value, or the pledge of any type of future donation for the support or benefit of any charitable, political, religious or non-profit association, organization, project, corporation, partnership, trust, joint venture, or any combination of the foregoing, or espouse any political, religious, atheistic, philosophical, thought or idea, or any combination thereof if the same are posted against solicitation or peddling as described above. For the benefit of the public health, safety and welfare, the Village and public utilities are specifically exempted from the provisions of this subsection. 
(7)  It shall be the duty of each solicitor or peddler upon going onto any premise in the Village upon which a residence as herein defined is located to first examine for the notice provided for in subsection (a)(5) above. If a "No Solicitors or Peddlers Invited" notice is posted, then the solicitor or peddler, whether registered under the provisions of this article or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. 
(8)  Any solicitor or peddler who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(9)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any solicitor or peddler, whether registered under this article or not, to go upon any residential property and ring the door bell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and/or engage in soliciting or peddling as herein defined, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
(10)  No vehicle used by a solicitor or peddler shall be permitted to be utilized by that solicitor or peddler as a showcase, sample case, or display area for the sale or offering for sale of foods, goods, wares, merchandise or any article of any kind whatsoever. 
(b)  Soliciting on streets and sidewalks. 
(1)  Permitted intersections. Solicitation or peddling on streets, sidewalks, alleys, highways or byways within the Village of Glenview shall be allowed only at the following intersections: Glenview Road and Harlem Avenue; Glenview Road and Waukegan Road; and East Lake Avenue and Waukegan Road. 
(2)  Any solicitor seeking to engage in solicitation for charitable purposes at permitted intersections will be allowed to do so once per calendar year, for a period of two consecutive days. Only one soliciting organization may engage in intersection solicitation on a single date. Intersection solicitation will be permitted during daylight hours. Solicitors seeking to solicit at approved intersections must obtain prior approval from the Village Chief of Police, or his designee, as set forth below in subsection (b)(3). 
(3)  Application. Solicitors seeking to engage in solicitation for charitable purposes at permitted intersections must make written request for authorization for same to the Village Chief of Police, or his designee, no later than 30 days prior to the requested date(s) for solicitation. The request must include the requested date(s), times, and location(s) for the solicitation; the solicitor's name and contact information; the name and contact information for the person(s) designated by the solicitor the coordinate the solicitation; proof of approved status as set forth in subsection (a)(4) above; and proof of insurance at limits approved by the Village. 
(4)  Solicitors may designate rain dates, subject to approval by the Village Chief of Police, or his designee. If a rain date is required, the Village may, at its sole discretion, exempt the solicitor from the requirement of soliciting on consecutive days as set forth in subsection (b)(2). 
(5)  Any person engaged in solicitation, distribution or peddling on any public street or highway shall be at least 16 years of age or more and shall wear a high-visibility vest and the registration badge required hereunder along with an emblem, insignia, sign, or button that clearly informs the public of the identity of the organization for which the solicitation or peddling is being undertaken. 
(Code 1959, § 6.10; Ord. No. 4729, § 2(6.10), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 5099, § 2, 5-20-2008; Ord. No. 5425, § 2, 2-15-2011)  
Sec. 50-76. - Effect of noncompliance; revocation. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this article shall relieve any person from the necessity of obtaining a license, permit, registration card or other authority or from paying the required fee therefor, when the same is otherwise required by this Code. 
(b)  Revocation of a registration badge. The chief of police shall revoke the registration badge of any solicitor or peddler who: 
(1)  Is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article; or 
(2)  Has made a false statement in the application for registration; or 
(3)  Perpetrates a fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting solicitation, distribution or peddling activities; or 
(4)  Conducts solicitation, distribution or peddling activities contrary to the conditions of the registration requirements; or 
(5)  Conducts solicitation, distribution or peddling activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance; or 
(6)  Otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a registration badge under the terms of this article. 
Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police, or his authorized representative(s), to the holder of the registration badge in person or by certified U.S. mail addressed to his residence address set forth in the application stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such action. Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the registration badge shall become null and void. 
(c)  Persons who are denied registration or whose registration has been revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the office of the Village manager addressed to the attention of the Village manager. The appeal must be filed within five working days after receipt of the notice of denial or revocation. The Village manager or his designee shall hear and determine the appeal. 
(d)  The Village manager's determination as to the denial or revocation of a registration badge shall be a final administrative decision, and may be appealed to the Circuit Court of Cook County, Illinois, in accordance with the procedures specified in the Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq. Such an action must be filed and summons issued within 35 days of service of the Village manager's decision. 
(Code 1959, § 6.11; Ord. No. 4729, § 2(6.11), 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 5099, § 2, 5-20-2008)  
Sec. 50-77. - Penalty for noncompliance. 
Any person charged with violation of this article for solicitation, distribution or peddling contrary to the terms hereof who shall be found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense and shall be fined therefor not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each such offense. 
(Code 1959, § 6.11.1; Ord. No. 4729, § 2(6.11.1), 12-6-2004)  
Chapter 54 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; fees and charges, ch. 30; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Fees. 
Fees for matters under the jurisdiction of the plan commission are as provided in chapter 30-1. 
(Ord. No. 5113, § 11, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 54-2. - Time limits. 
Time limits for regulations set forth in sections 18-143 (Permit expiration time limits), 98-47 (Variances), 98-49 (Amendments), 98-50 (Conditional uses), and 54-87 (Site plan approval), shall be as shown in the table below: 
Regulatory Review Process Time Limits 

Final approvals granted by Zoning Board of Appeals (BZA) 

or Board of Trustees (BOT) 	Building Permit Process Time Limits 

Regulated by Director of Development 
Types of Regulatory Review 	Jurisdiction 	Issuance of building permit to enact the conditions approved by the associated regulatory review within time listed or approval expires 	Regulatory Review Extension Process 	Commencement of construction shall occur with time listed following issuance of building permit or permit expires 	Time from issuance of building permit to complete permit work 	Building Permits Extension Process (up to 1 yr. possible w/extension relative to amount of outstanding work) 
Residential 
Variance 	ZBA 	180 days 	Submit letter and appear before ZBA 	180 days 	1 year 	Submit letter and reasoning. 
Commercial Variance 	ZBA & BOT 	180 days or if no permit is required then from date of ordinance approval 	Submit letter and appear before BOT 	180 days 	1 year 	Submit letter and reasoning. 
Commercial Variance Associated with Final Site Plan Approval 	ZBA, Plan Commission (PC) & BOT 	1 year 	Submit letter and appear before BOT 	180 days 	1 year 	Submit letter and reasoning. 
Conditional Use 	PC & BOT 	180 days or issuance of Certificate of Occupancy within 180 days 	Submit letter and appear before BOT 	180 days 	1 year 	Submit letter and reasoning. 
Conditional Use Associated with Final Site Plan Approval 	PC & BOT 	1 year 	Submit letter and appear before BOT 	180 days 	1 year 	Submit letter and reasoning. 
Final Site Plan Approval 	PC & BOT 	1 year 	Submit letter and appear before BOT 	180 days 	1 year 	Submit letter and reasoning 
 
(Ord. No. 5352, § 3, 6-15-2010)  
Secs. 54-3—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5636, § 2(b), adopted February 19, 2013, repealed art. II, plan commission, §§ 54-31—54-36, which pertained to created; members appointed; chairman; secretary; compensation; technical advance or services and incurring expenses; powers; official comprehensive plan map, respectively, and were derived from Code 1959, § 2.63; Code 1959, § 2.64; Code 1959, § 2.65; Code 1959, § 2.66; Code 1959, § 2.67 and Ord. No. 4769, § 4, adopted June 21, 2005; and Code 1959, §§ 2.68, 2.69, respectively. 
 
Secs. 54-31—54-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - APPEARANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 54-61. - Purposes. 
This article is adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of the Village. 
(2)  To enhance the values of property throughout the Village. 
(3)  To protect and stabilize the general appearance of buildings, structures, landscaping and open area, in the multiple dwelling, business, commercial, planned development, public lands, hospital and industrial zoning districts of the Village. These regulations shall also apply to nonresidential uses which are located in any single-family residential district, except churches, schools and parks, and buildings and grounds associated therewith. 
(4)  To ensure adequate light, air and privacy for property in the multiple dwelling, business, commercial, planned development, public lands, hospital and industrial zoning districts of the Village. These regulations shall also apply to nonresidential uses which are located in any single-family residential district, except churches, schools and parks, and buildings and grounds associated therewith. 
(5)  To encourage and promote acceptability, attractiveness, cohesiveness and compatibility of new buildings, developments, remodeling and additions so as to maintain and improve the established standards of property values within the multiple dwelling, business, commercial, planned development, public lands, hospital and industrial zoning districts of the Village. These regulations shall also apply to nonresidential uses which are located in any single-family residential district, except churches, schools and parks, and buildings and grounds associated therewith. 
(Code 1959, § 25.2)  
Sec. 54-62. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
External architectural feature means the architectural style and general arrangement of such portion of a building or structure as is designed to be open to view from a public street, place or way, including the kind, color and texture of the building material, or a portion thereof, and the types of windows, doors, lights, attached or ground signs and other fixtures appurtenant to such portion. 
(Code 1959, § 25.9) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5636, § 2(d), adopted February 19, 2013, repealed § 54-63, which pertained to appearance commission and was derived from Code 1959, §§ 25.3—25.5; and Ord. No. 4811, § 1, adopted Nov. 1, 2005.  
Sec. 54-64. - Appearance plan adopted. 
The Glenview Appearance Plan adopted and approved by the corporate authorities on September 15, 1968, by Ordinance No. 1688, is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed, is made a part of this article as though specifically set forth in this section and is incorporated in this article by reference. Awnings shall be governed by the Awning Design Guidelines, attached hereto and incorporated into this section [as if fully set out herein], which may be amended from time to time. Parking lot landscaping shall be governed by the Parking Lot Landscaping Design Guidelines, attached hereto and incorporated into this article, which may be amended from time to time. Signs in downtown Glenview shall be governed by the signs in the downtown design guidelines, attached hereto and incorporated into this section, which may be amended from time to time. Multi-Tenant Ground Signs shall be governed by the signs in the Multi-Tenant Ground Sign Design Guidelines, attached hereto and incorporated into this section, which may be amended from time to time. Real estate signs shall be governed by the real estate signs design guidelines, attached hereto and incorporated into this section, which may be amended from time to time. Lighting shall be governed by the lighting design guidelines, attached hereto and incorporated into this section, which may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1959, § 25.6; Ord. No. 4925, § 2, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 4965, § 2, 3-20-2007; Ord. No. 5069, § 2, 1-8-2008; Ord. No. 5309, § 3, 2-16-2010; Ord. No. 5394, § 3, 11-16-2010)  
Sec. 54-65. - Regulatory powers of appearance commission over external architectural features of buildings and structures. 
(a)  Scope of powers. No building or other permit otherwise required under any ordinance of the Village for the erection, construction, alteration or repair of any building or structure in multiple dwelling, business, commercial, planned development, public lands, hospital and industrial zoning districts shall be issued by the building and zoning director, and no work shall be started on any elements in any of the jurisdictional areas of the appearance commission as outlined in section III of the appearance plan as adopted by Ordinance No. 1688, passed and approved September 15, 1969, except upon the granting of a certificate of appropriateness by the appearance commission. Such requirement shall not preclude the issuance of a building permit without such certificate if the building and zoning director shall determine that no external architectural feature, as defined in section 54-62, is involved in the work for which the building permit is sought. These regulations shall also apply to nonresidential uses which are located in any single-family residential district, except churches, schools and parks, and buildings and grounds associated therewith. 
(b)  Preliminary consideration. The appearance commission shall, at the written request of a prospective applicant for a certificate of appropriateness, give consideration to preliminary exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans, and materials on a specific project before a formal application is filed, and shall provide such advice, counsel, suggestions and recommendations on matters pertaining to aesthetics as they may deem necessary to guide the prospective applicant in the development of a plan which would comply with the requirements and purposes of the appearance plan, except that the appearance commission shall act in an advisory capacity only with regard to preliminary plans, and shall provide consultation only on projects for which preliminary drawings and materials are furnished by the prospective applicant, and shall not participate in the development of the basic concept, plans or drawings. All hearings on preliminary plans are to be public, and are to be held in accordance with the provisions and requirements provided for in subsection (c) of this section. Upon finding the preliminary exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans, and materials are appropriate to, or compatible with, the character of the immediate neighborhood and will tend to affect the general purposes of the appearance plan, the appearance commission will issue a preliminary approval. The approval will be irrevocable, and makes the issuance of the certificate of appropriateness mandatory upon application, unless the final presentation does not comply in all respects with the preliminary presentation upon which the preliminary approval was based. 
(c)  Hearing. Coincidental with the filing of an application for a building permit or for permission to work on any elements in any of the jurisdictional areas of the appearance commission for which a certificate of appropriateness is required under subsection (a) of this section, the applicant shall file a written application for such certificate of appropriateness, on forms provided for such purpose, with the office of the building and zoning director not later than seven days prior to any regularly scheduled hearing of the appearance commission for consideration by them. Upon such hearing, the appearance commission shall consider the application for a certificate of appropriateness and, if necessary, receive additional evidence (such as exterior elevation renderings) and statements from the applicant, his agent or attorney, and from Village personnel or other persons as to whether the external architectural features of the proposed building or structure, or other improvement, comply with the appearance plan. At the request of any member of the appearance commission, testimony given at such hearing shall be under oath. 
(d)  Action of appearance commission. If preliminary consideration has not been requested under the terms and provisions of subsection (b) of this section, prior to making its decision, the appearance commission may make recommendations to the applicant as to changes in the exterior drawings, sketches, landscaping, site plans and materials which, in the judgment of the appearance commission, would tend to effect the general purposes of the appearance plan. The appearance commission shall make its decision within 15 days after the hearing is closed and shall issue to the building and zoning director a certificate of appropriateness, unless the appearance commission finds that the plan does not conform to the appearance plan and that the proposed building or structure will be inappropriate to, or incompatible with, the character of the immediate neighborhood and cause substantial depreciation in property values. If preliminary hearings have been held on the project for which application is being made, and preliminary approval has been issued by the appearance commission as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the appearance commission shall issue a certificate of appropriateness immediately, provided that the final drawings, plans and materials as presented comply in all respects with the preliminary presentation upon which the preliminary approval was based. 
(e)  Denial by appearance commission. The appearance commission shall not deny a certificate of appropriateness, except upon the concurring vote of three members. 
(f)  Appeals. All final decisions of the appearance commission under this section shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and all amendments and modifications thereof, 735 ILCS.5/3-101 et seq.). 
(g)  Administrative approvals. Requests for approval regarding the elements identified in this subsection may be administratively approved by the director of community development and a certificate of appropriateness issued without appearing before the appearance commission. In lieu of the provisions of this subsection, the director of community development reserves the right but not the obligation to forward any request for approval of elements described by this subsection to the appearance commission for formal consideration. 
(1)  Minor architectural changes to buildings and/or tenant spaces including replacement and/or modification of doors, windows, storefront systems, and/or hardware if such replacement and/or modification is comprised of materials, finishes, and colors which match the existing architectural features and approximate rough openings of the building and/or tenant space. 
(2)  Landscape substitutions for diseased, dead, dying, and infested plant materials subject to review and approval of the director of public works or other village manager designee. 
(3)  Extensions to or replacement of fencing comprised of materials, finishes, and colors which match the previously installed fencing in locations permitted by section 98-213. 
(4)  Awnings without signage and comprised of a single color, when designed in compliance with the awning design guidelines and with the structural requirements of section 18-192. 
(5)  Signage for any tenant space within a shopping center with shopping center sign design guidelines previously approved by the appearance commission which is designed in compliance with said shopping center sign design guidelines and the requirements of chapter 98, article VII, signs, the wall sign design guidelines, single-tenant ground sign design guidelines, multi-tenant ground sign design guidelines, downtown sign design guidelines, and glen town center tenant design criteria, as applicable. 
(Code 1959, § 25.7; Ord. No. 6091, § 2, 8-1-2017)  
Sec. 54-66. - Followup by building and zoning director. 
(a)  Upon the granting of a certificate of appropriateness, the exterior drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans, renderings and materials upon which the certificate was granted shall be turned over to the building and zoning director, whose responsibility it shall be to determine, from time to time as the project is in progress and finally upon its completion, that there have been no unauthorized deviations from the evidence upon which the granting of the certificate of appropriateness was originally based. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the person to whom a certificate of appropriateness has been granted to comply with the requirements of the certificate of appropriateness and to obtain such inspections as may be necessary in order to assure such compliance. The building and zoning director will notify such person of any deficiencies found to exist. Failure to correct any deficiency within ten days after notification of such deficiency will constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  When, by reason of nonavailability of planting materials or any other valid circumstance, it becomes necessary to vary any of the provisions under which a certificate of appropriateness has been granted and, in the opinion of the building and zoning director, such variation will be aesthetically equal to or be better than the original provisions and will not conflict with the intent of the appearance plan, the building and zoning director shall have the power to grant such variation. To the extent that the building and zoning director exercises such power, within 30 days thereafter, he shall submit a written report of the circumstances to the appearance commission. 
(d)  Before any use may be made of improvements constructed under the provisions of this article, a final inspection of the premises must be obtained from the building and zoning director, who will consider his findings in matters under the jurisdiction of the appearance commission, together with other codes, in the issuance of an occupancy certificate. An occupancy certificate will not be issued unless such an inspection has been made and the completed work found to be in compliance with plans approved by the appearance commission and under which the certificate of appropriateness was issued, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  If it should become impossible, by reason of weather, strike or any other circumstance beyond the control of the person to whom the certificate of appropriateness has been granted, to complete all work required before occupancy or start of use, a temporary occupancy permit may be granted upon either the depositing with the Village of a sufficient cash escrow to guarantee completion of the work or upon the execution of an agreement, in a form satisfactory to the Village manager, in which the applicant shall be firmly bound to comply with the terms, provisions and conditions of the certificate of appropriateness as soon as the circumstances causing such impossibility shall have been abated. Refunds of such cash escrow may be made progressively as work is completed or in a lump sum upon final inspection and approval by the building and zoning director. 
(f)  If the person to whom the certificate of appropriateness has been granted fails to complete the work required in accordance with provisions under which the cash escrow amount set forth in subsection (e) of this section has been deposited within nine months of the date of such escrow deposit, the cash deposit shall be forfeited and the Village shall use all or part of such deposit as may be required to complete work in accordance with drawings submitted and approved by the appearance commission, and under which a certificate of appropriateness and certain permits have been granted. The nine-month time limit may be extended by the building and zoning director if, in his opinion, it is in the public interest to do so. In the event of such forfeiture, the person to whom the certificate of appropriateness has been granted shall only be entitled to the refund of that portion, if any, of the cash deposit that remains in escrow after completion of the work entailed. 
(Code 1959, § 25.8)  
Sec. 54-67. - Amendments. 
(a)  Proposal. Amendments to this article and the appearance plan may be proposed by the board of trustees, the appearance commission or any resident or owner of property in the Village. 
(b)  Application; notice of hearing. An application for an amendment to this article or the appearance plan shall be filed with the office of the building and zoning director, who shall forward a copy thereof to the appearance commission, without delay. The application shall contain such information as the appearance commission may, from time to time, by rules, provide, and the application shall be accompanied by a fee of $75.00 in the case of any applicant other than the board of trustees or the appearance commission. Not more than 60 days after the filing of such application, a hearing shall be held by the appearance commission on the application. Such hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of the appearance commission. Notice of such hearing shall be published at least once, not more than 30 days, nor less than 15 days before the hearing, in a newspaper with a general circulation within the Village. The published notice may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as the appearance commission, by rules, may provide. 
(c)  Report by appearance commission. Following such hearing, and within 180 days after the filing with the building and zoning director of the application for amendment, the appearance commission shall transmit to the board of trustees a written report giving its findings and recommendations for action to be taken by the board of trustees in regard to the application. If no such report is transmitted within 180 days of the filing of the application, the appearance commission shall be deemed to have recommended that the application be denied, unless the petitioner has, prior to the expiration of such 180 days, requested and has been granted a stipulated extension of time by the appearance commission. 
(d)  Action by board of trustees. After receiving the report of the appearance commission, the board of trustees may enact the amendment with or without change, or may reject it, or may refer it back to the appearance commission for further consideration. If no action is taken by the board of trustees within six months of the date of the filing of the application with the building and zoning director, the application shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(Code 1959, § 25.11)  
Sec. 54-68. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 25.10)  
Secs. 54-69—54-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
 
Sec. 54-81. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  Site plan review is a procedure for the review of proposed developments or redevelopments to ensure they are compatible with adjacent development by taking into account the relationship of the new development to its surroundings. The purpose of site plan review is to go beyond the basic zoning, subdivision, design and building requirements in order to address site details which the other codes adopted in this chapter may not regulate. It should be noted that site plan review is in addition to, and not an exception from, other required procedures under Village ordinances, including, but not limited to, those established by article III of chapter 18 pertaining to the building code, article III of this chapter pertaining to the appearance plan, chapter 66 pertaining to subdivisions and chapter 98 pertaining to zoning. Instead, it augments these regulations in order to promote more orderly and harmonious development. It is also intended to ensure, generally, that all codes and ordinances have been met and to provide a logical and coordinated review of proposed developments. 
(b)  In conducting a site plan review of a proposed development, the following elements of the development are examined: 
(1)  Parking arrangement and location. 
(2)  Site circulation, pedestrian and vehicular. 
(3)  Traffic and driveway access. 
(4)  Building location on the site. 
(5)  Transitions to adjacent properties. 
(6)  Drainage and stormwater detention. 
(7)  Environmental impact and open space, including existing vegetation. 
(8)  Intensity of use. 
(9)  Building massing, scale and relationship to surrounding development. 
(10)  Impact on provision of Village services, including public safety and infrastructure demands. 
(c)  Specific building and landscaping design and materials are not examined, for such details are addressed as part of the required appearance commission review. Instead, the focus is on the aspects of site planning as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  In addition to upgrading site planning through the site plan review, the Village hopes to create a process, which will expedite the review of development proposals, by addressing the fundamental details of site planning early in the review process. By providing a forum for the communication of Village requirements and applicable policy documents and plans, it is hoped that costly delays may be avoided. During the site plan review, there is an opportunity for direct communication between the developer, Village staff, the plan commission and the Village Board prior to the preparation of final plans. 
(e)  Finally, given the essentially developed nature of the Village, it is intended that site plan review should help minimize adverse impact on, protect and enhance property values of and promote compatibility with adjacent development and surroundings. 
(Code 1959, § 25.13)  
Sec. 54-82. - Developments requiring approval; exemptions. 
(a)  The following developments require final site plan approval prior to the issuance of building permits for the development: 
(1)  Any use in the business, limited commercial, light industrial, public land or hospital district that results in the construction of a new building or structure, major modifications to the exterior dimensions of an existing building or structure (including building additions), alteration in area to a paved parking lot or the addition of or change to a curb cut. 
(2)  All new multifamily dwellings or conversions of existing buildings to create new multifamily units, including attached single-family residences and townhomes. 
(3)  All nonresidential uses in residential districts that result in construction of a new building or structure, major modifications to the exterior dimensions of an existing building or structure (including building additions), alterations in area to a paved parking lot or the addition of or change to a curb cut. 
(4)  All planned developments. 
(5)  Single-family subdivisions which will result in more than two lots. 
(b)  Uses determined by the director of community development as having no land use impact and which are consistent with the intent of this article as set forth in section 54-81(a) shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. Additionally, the following site plan changes shall be eligible for administrative approval by the director of community development: 
(1)  Parking lot improvements comprised of 25 or fewer parking stalls which comprise fewer than five-percent of the quantity of existing parking stalls upon any property which would include a sufficient quantity of parking stalls onsite for the existing and/or proposed uses on the property as required by code upon completion of the improvements, would include no impacts to the land use or site circulation, and otherwise have no outstanding staff review comments. 
(2)  Building additions comprised of up to 3,000 square feet which comprise less than five-percent of the total existing building square footage upon any property provided the building additions would include no impacts to the land use or site circulation, and otherwise have no outstanding staff review comments. 
(3)  The director of planning can require appearance before the plan commission for any project which he/she does not feel meets the intent of the above requirements. 
(4)  Once quarterly, the director of community development shall forward a list of all administrative approvals granted in accordance with this section to the plan commission for their information. 
(c)  Uses in the P-1 district which are subject to a conditional use public hearing conducted by the Village Board of trustees shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Uses specified in section 98-135(a)(2), not otherwise authorized on the ground floor of an existing building, or addition or expansion thereto, located in a D-1 downtown district, may be permitted to occupy such ground floor space by approval of the plan commission and Village Board under the site plan approval process established in this article, but only in accordance with the permitted use requirements established in section 98-135(a)(1). 
(Code 1959, § 25.14; Ord. No. 6091, § 3, 8-1-2017)  
Sec. 54-83. - Procedures. 
(a)  Preliminary conference (development meeting). Prior to filing an application for site plan review with the director of development, an applicant shall request and attend a development meeting with the Village staff to obtain all necessary filing information and have the procedures for review explained. 
(b)  Preliminary review. Within 21 days of filing a complete application, including all information as shall be required from time to time by the Village, for site plan review with the director of development, the applicant shall attend a preliminary site plan review conference with the Village staff. The purpose of the conference is to acquaint the Village staff with the proposal and convey the concerns of those participating early in the process, when designs are still flexible and refinements and adjustments are possible. The preliminary site plan review is also intended to assist the applicant in bringing the site plan into conformance with the requirements of this article and other applicable regulations. The staff will also review the application for completeness and apply the evaluation criteria set forth in subsection (c) of this section. The review will form the basis of the staff report, which will be considered by the plan commission and board of trustees as part of final site plan review. 
(c)  Final review. 
(1)  Final site plan review approval by the plan commission is required for all developments specified in section 54-82. The final site plan review shall be scheduled by filing with the director of development the necessary number of site plans as may be established by departmental procedure. Such submittal shall accompany the necessary applications and other required documents for rezoning, subdivision, conditional use, variation and/or annexation, if applicable. If the applicant elects, final site plan approval may be considered in conjunction with preliminary subdivision approval. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the information required in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the director of development shall circulate the application for staff review and cause a staff report to be prepared for transmittal to the plan commission. The director of development shall also schedule the matter for consideration by the plan commission at the next available meeting, taking into account procedural requirements for other related approvals, if applicable. 
(3)  Within 60 days of the submission to the director of development of a completed application for final site plan review approval, the proposed development shall appear on a plan commission agenda to determine compliance with the evaluation criteria as established in section 54-85. The plan commission shall consider the application at one or more meetings and then forward its recommendation to the board of trustees for final action. The plan commission and board of trustees shall make one of the following decisions on the matter: 
a.  The proposed site plan satisfies the evaluation criteria established in section 54-85 and is therefore approved. 
b.  The proposed site plan, with specific modifications, could satisfy the evaluation criteria and is therefore approved, conditionally. 
c.  The proposed site plan does not satisfy the evaluation criteria and is therefore disapproved. 
(4)  One copy of the site plan will be marked with the final decision of the Village Board and returned to the applicant and one copy will be placed in the Village case file on the matter. Upon approval of the final site plan, the applicant may seek and the Village may issue a building permit for the proposed development, provided all other Village requirements are satisfied. 
(Code 1959, § 25.15; Ord. No. 5352, § 4, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 54-84. - Submission requirements. 
(a)  Preliminary review. Submission of the following documents shall be deemed a complete application for preliminary site plan review: 
(1)  A current plat of the survey for the proposed property, depicting existing structures, top of foundation elevation, site improvements, utilities and legal description. 
(2)  A preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, which includes the following information: 
a.  The number and location of proposed buildings and/or all proposed structures. 
b.  Dimensional setbacks from all property lines for all structures and accessory uses. 
c.  Project density, including: 
1.  Gross building area. 
2.  Percentage of impervious surface coverage. 
3.  Floor area by use, bedroom count and dwelling units per acre. 
4.  Gross floor area ratio (FAR), excluding interior parking. 
d.  Signage location, height and area. 
e.  Lighting location and type. 
f.  Fence locations, types and heights. 
g.  Parking lots, including: 
1.  Number of stalls, including those designated for handicapped uses. 
2.  Dimensions. 
3.  Aisles. 
4.  Drives. 
5.  Location of all curbing. 
h.  Loading areas. 
i.  Roadways, public and private. 
j.  Trash areas. 
k.  Preliminary building elevations and floor plans. 
l.  Surrounding land use, location and zoning. 
m.  Preliminary landscaping. 
n.  Utility locations and stormwater detention improvements. 
o.  Any additional information requested by staff during the course of preliminary site plan review. 
(b)  Final approval. 
(1)  Submission of the required number of the following documents to the director of development shall be deemed a complete application for final site plan review: 
a.  All information required in connection with the preliminary site plan review, including any revisions thereto. 
b.  All information required in connection with an application for rezoning, conditional use, variation and/or annexation. 
(2)  At the applicant's option, the applicant may submit all information required in connection with preliminary subdivision approval to be considered in conjunction with the final site plan review. 
(Code 1959, § 25.16)  
Sec. 54-85. - Evaluation criteria. 
The goals and objectives of the Village comprehensive general plan and other applicable Village planning and policy documents shall be utilized in the review of proposed site plans. In addition, the following criteria shall also be used to determine whether a proposed site plan fulfills the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Building and structure locations. The arrangements of the structures on the site shall allow for the effective and efficient use of the proposed development. Such arrangement shall be compatible and harmonious with development on adjacent property. The arrangement of structures on the site shall be evaluated to ensure effective and efficient provision of municipal services. In the downtown and downtown frame area, the site plan shall embody a pedestrian orientation, generally represented by a building location at or near the street, with parking at the rear. 
(2)  Building scale. The scale of the proposed building must be appropriate to the site, location and function of the site. The building scale must promote harmonious transitions to adjacent developments and land uses. 
(3)  Open space. The proposed development should be designed to maximize the preservation of natural site features, including vegetation, drainage and topography. The landscape treatment of exterior open spaces should enhance the quality of the project and create a desirable and functional environment for patrons, visitors and occupants. Stormwater detention facilities should be integrated into the proposed site design to provide functional and attractive open space. The amount of open space provided shall be appropriate to the proposed use and compatible with surrounding development. Excessive lot coverage shall be prohibited, notwithstanding the amount of such coverage permitted by chapter 98 pertaining to zoning. 
(4)  Landscaping:. Landscape design shall provide an aesthetically pleasing design, create a logical transition to adjoining development, screen incompatible uses, screen unsightly activities from public view and break up large expanses of asphalt with plant materials. Existing mature trees and shrubs should be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. Plant materials shall be selected so as to withstand the Village's climatic conditions and the specific constraints imposed by adjacent functions. 
(5)  Graphics and signage. Signs and other site graphics shall be minimized in size and number to promote their effectiveness. Such signs and site graphics shall be integrated with architectural and site landscape features. 
(6)  Circulation. All site circulation systems, vehicular and pedestrian, shall provide adequate and safe access to the site. Dangerous traffic movements will be prohibited and curb cuts shall be minimized. Disruption of traffic flows on adjacent streets and undue congestion shall be minimized or avoided. Connections and linkages with adjacent developments are encouraged to promote logical circulation patterns and minimize curb cuts. 
(7)  Parking lots. Proposed parking lots shall be designed, located and screened to minimize visual impact on adjacent properties. Such parking shall also be designed and located to minimize the number of curb cuts. Shared parking lot access shall be promoted, where practical. Perimeter screening is encouraged and interior lot landscaping shall be provided to break up large expanses of asphalt with plant and other landscape materials. 
(8)  Site illumination. Site illumination shall be designed, located and installed in such a manner that will minimize adverse impact on adjacent properties. 
(9)  Preservation. Preservation of unique architectural, cultural, environmental or historical resources is encouraged. Development designs and treatments that respect such desirable resources on adjacent properties are also encouraged. 
(10)  Completeness. The application for the site plan review must contain all the information required in section 54-84. 
(Code 1959, § 25.17)  
Sec. 54-86. - Amendments. 
Amendments to an approved site plan shall require approval in the same manner as required for the original site plan. 
(Code 1959, § 25.18)  
Sec. 54-87. - Approval time limit. 
Final site plan review approval granted by the board of trustees shall be established in accordance with the period set forth in section 54-2, unless a longer period of time is expressly authorized by the board of trustees or by further board of trustees action. Time extensions may be authorized by the board of trustees, as provided in section 54-2, if the applicant demonstrates that there are circumstances, difficulties or practical hardships which make compliance with the original time period unreasonable. 
(Code 1959, § 25.19; Ord. No. 5352, § 5, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 54-88. - Exceptions and waivers. 
Consistent with the intent and purpose of this article, the plan commission and Village Board may, in any particular case where such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the Village comprehensive plan, chapter 66 pertaining to subdivisions, chapter 98 pertaining to zoning or other applicable codes and ordinances of the Village, waive strict compliance with the regulations of this article. Any waivers granted shall be specifically listed on the face of the site plan submitted for approval and include the date of such grant. Any waivers granted shall be included in the official records and minutes of the meeting. 
(Code 1959, § 25.20)  
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Dead animals, § 14-4; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 38; weeds and rubbish, § 38-311 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REFUSE 
 
Sec. 58-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Household means any single-family property or any unit of a multi-family property. 
Landscape waste sticker means the official sticker purchased through the Village or its designees, to be placed on each bag or bundle of landscape waste, unless the person has landscape waste subscription service. 
Multi-family property means a residential building consisting of three or more attached units, and capable of being serviced by one or more waste containers, as such are defined herein. 
Person includes the owner, occupant or lessee of any premises, and firm, corporation or organization of any kind. 
Premises means any house, residence building, flat, apartment, dwelling place or place of abode, commercial or industrial establishment, office building, hotel, church, school, hospital, club building or meeting hall. 
Waste means any or all of the following: garbage, refuse, ashes, tin cans, bottles, cartons, books, newspapers, boxes and other household rubbish, discarded household furniture, furnishings, fixtures and appliances of all kinds, manure, dead animals or parts thereof, trees, tree branches, tree roots, tree trunks, brush, shrubs, grass clippings, plant stalks, leaves and all other rubbish of any kind, and shall be further classified as follows: 
Bulky items means any and all of the following: stoves, refrigerators and other large appliances, large furniture, bedding, large crates, trees and dead tree branches more than four feet in length and four inches in diameter. 
Construction and demolition wastes means any or all of the following: lumber, roofing, rubble, plaster, pipe, wire, insulation, earth, sod, sand, gravel, stone, brick, concrete and other building materials. 
Garbage means any rejected waste or waste household food, offal, swill or carrion and every accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking and dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables and any other matter of any nature, which are subject to decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies or other germ-carrying pests; discarded household fixtures, manure, dead animals or parts thereof, tree branches, roots and trunks four inches or greater in diameter; building materials from home remodeling and repairs; and small amounts of bricks, sod, earth, concrete and rocks. 
Landscape waste means all accumulations of grass, shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs or trunks less than four inches in diameter and less than four feet in length, other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees. 
Recyclable material means aluminum cans, tin/steel/bimetal cans, newspapers, clear and colored glass bottles/containers, HDPE and PET plastic beverage containers, liquid laundry detergent containers, plastic bleach bottles, fabric softener containers and windshield washer solvent bottles for automobile windshield washers. 
Special wastes means any or all of the following: hazardous wastes, paint sludges, chemical wastes, metal scraps and metal shavings. 
Waste container means a container made of nonabsorbent, durable, noncorrodible metal or plastic, with a tightfitting cover, rodentproof and insectproof, of a capacity of not less than ten gallons, nor more than 32 gallons, unless 90-gallon toter carts are used, and with suitable handles on the can and lid. Landscape waste containers shall be 30-gallon, two-ply, 50-pound wet strength per ply kraft paper bags or 90-gallon toter carts. Light hedge clippings and tree branches not more than four feet, may also be tied in bundles not more than 24 inches in diameter and not more than 60 pounds in weight. 
Waste disposal firm means any licensed person engaged in the business of removal and disposal of waste as defined in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 9.26; Ord. No. 5436, § 2, 3-15-2011) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-32. - Administration. 
(a)  Whenever directed by the provisions of sections 58-31—58-37, the health administrator shall carry out such directions and perform such duties as provided thereby, unless the Village manager shall designate some other officer to perform such duties. The term "health administrator," as used in this article shall refer to such officer or other officer as designated from time to time by the Village manager. 
(b)  All matters relating to or affecting the accumulation, collection, removal or disposal of waste, unless specifically otherwise assigned, shall be subject to and under the supervision of the health administrator. 
(c)  The occupancy of any premises for residential purposes shall be prima facie evidence that waste is being produced and accumulated on such premises. 
(Code 1959, § 9.27)  
Sec. 58-33. - Storage. 
(a)  Accumulations. 
(1)  Waste, garbage and rubbish. Waste shall be promptly removed from the premises and every person shall keep his premises free and clean from waste accumulation at all times. All waste must be disposed of at least once weekly. No person shall permit any garbage or rubbish to accumulate within the Village unless the garbage or rubbish shall be suitably enclosed in waste containers, and filled to a weight no greater than 60 pounds, unless a 90-gallon toter cart is used. 
(b)  Yard refuse. No person shall permit any yard refuse to accumulate within the Village unless it is suitably placed in official bags or bundles, with official stickers attached, and disposed of at least weekly. 
(c)  Containers required. 
(1)  A sufficient number of waste containers for a weekly accumulation of normal waste shall be provided and at all times maintained in good order and repair by the owner, lessee or head of household of any premises in the Village. 
(2)  All waste containers shall be as defined in section 58-31 and no other type of container shall be acceptable. Filthy, leaking or defective receptacles shall be cleaned, repaired or replaced by the owner, lessee or head of household of the premises served, and at his expense, as directed by the health administrator. All containers shall be kept clean and disinfected with an antiseptic solution as often as necessary to maintain the containers in a sanitary condition. Evidence of neglect of these requirements or unsafe containers shall be determined by the health administrator. 
(3)  Institutional, commercial and industrial waste containers not mounted on wheels shall be stored on durable racks or placed on an easily cleanable, impervious surface. The racks shall raise the waste containers at least 12 inches off the storage surface. Containers mounted on wheels shall be specifically designed for use with collection vehicles. The container's wheels must elevate the base of the container a distance of at least six inches off the storage surface. 
(d)  Container contents. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or head of household of any premises to cause all garbage produced on the premises to be thoroughly drained of all surplus liquid, securely wrapped or bagged in paper or packed in a covered box or carton of such dimensions as will permit its free passage into and out of the waste container, and finally deposited, after such wrapping or bagging, in such waste container as soon as practicable after the garbage is produced thereon. 
(2)  Garbage and rubbish shall be securely wrapped or bound in such a manner as may be necessary to prevent the scattering thereof, and shall be deposited in a waste container as prescribed in subsection (c)(1) of this section. It shall further be the duty of every owner, lessee or head of household of any premises to cause all yard refuse to be properly placed in containers or bundled. 
(e)  Container placement and use. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or head of the household of any premises to place any such waste containers within any alley, street or walkway of the Village. 
(2)  Waste containers shall be stored at an accessible outdoor location for backdoor service. Curb service customers shall place containers at the curb, between the lot lines of their property as if such lot lines were continued to the street, not closer than two feet nor more than five feet from the street no earlier than 7:00 p.m. the night before pickup and remove the containers, including the recycling bin, no later than 7:00 p.m. on the service day. 
(3)  Waste containers shall be maintained and used in a rodentproof and sanitary condition, and in accordance with standards prescribed by the health department. Underground waste containers are prohibited unless they presently exist on the date of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Household waste containers, landscape waste, bulky items and recycling bins shall be placed on the parkway, between the lot lines of the customer requesting service as if such lot lines were continued to the street, for service no earlier than 7:00 p.m. the day before collection. 
(f)  Container inspection and approval. All waste containers shall be subject to inspection and approval by the health department. 
(Code 1959, § 9.28; Ord. No. 4268, § 1(9.28(d)), 2-6-2001)  
Sec. 58-34. - Collection and disposal. 
(a)  Garbage, rubbish and landscape waste refuse. 
(1)  All garbage, rubbish and landscape waste refuse shall be called for and disposed of at least once per week by a waste disposal firm duly appointed by the Village. The waste disposal firm will not call for waste at the residence of any person before 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. on Monday—Friday, and before 8:30 a.m. or after 12:00 noon on Saturday and before 9:00 a.m. or after 12:00 noon on Sundays. These hours shall also apply for refuse pickup within 100 feet of residential areas as defined by Chapter 98, Article III, Division 2. 
(2)  Every household having once a week collection shall be permitted to use a 35, 65, or 95-gallon toter cart. 
(3)  Landscape waste will be collected once weekly from April 1—November 30, and must be placed at the curb, between the lot lines of the customer requesting service as if such lot lines were continued to the street, with the official stickers, properly bagged or bundled. If the subscription program is used, no stickers are required. 
(4)  A multi-family property may apply to the Village to receive collection and disposal services from the waste disposal firm duly appointed by the Village, which application shall be approved by the Village at its sole discretion. In order to receive these waste disposal services, a multi-family property must: 
a.  Be capable of receiving service using waste containers, as defined herein; 
b.  Have participation from all households within the multi-family property; and 
c.  Pay the Village for Village-provided waste containers. 
(5)  Any multi-family property that chooses to receive collection and disposal services from the waste disposal firm duly appointed by the Village may not revoke that decision, and is henceforth bound to receive collection and disposal services from the waste disposal firm duly appointed by the Village. A multi-family property electing to receive collection and disposal services from the waste disposal firm duly appointed by the Village voluntarily relinquishes its right to contract for collection and disposal services with an entity other than that with which the Village has appointed to provide such services. 
(b)  Construction, demolition and special wastes. All construction and demolition wastes, and special wastes not resulting from the performance of work within the Village by a building or other construction contractor shall require a special collection within one week of the time the waste is produced on the premises. Building and other construction contractors shall remove construction and demolition wastes, and special wastes resulting from the performance of work within the Village as frequently as necessary to maintain sanitary conditions, but at least once per week, employing either their own equipment and employees or a waste disposal firm which either is duly licensed by the Village or conforms to the standards set forth in this article. 
(c)  Dumping, scattering and burying waste. No waste shall be dumped, scattered or buried within the Village limits. 
(d)  Open burning. The open burning of leaves, branches, trunks and roots of trees, bushes and shrubs, rubbish, waste, garbage, paper, carbonaceous materials or any other combustible materials on any public or private property within the Village is unlawful and prohibited; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to the noncommercial cooking of food in outdoor fireplaces or grills. 
(e)  Garbage and combustible wastes. Garbage and other combustible wastes may be disposed of by grinding or shredding such waste finely and disposing of it through pipes leading to a public sanitary sewer, provided that all garbage or combustible matter so disposed of in such pipes shall have been ground or shredded to such a degree that all particles are carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the sewers into which such garbage or combustible matter is deposited. 
(f)  Frequency of collections. Any person contracting for residential waste collection may specify either one or two collections per week. The frequency of residential waste collection may be changed by arrangement between the individual resident and the waste disposal firm; however, a $10.00 service fee will be charged for each service change after the first change in the contract year (July 1—June 30). 
(g)  Bulky waste. All bulky waste removal shall require a special collection as curb service at an extra charge. It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or head of household of any premises to contact the hauler to make special arrangements to have bulky wastes removed. Bulky items shall be placed at the street, between the lot lines of the customer requesting service as if such lot lines were continued to the street, not closer than two feet nor more than five feet from the street after 7:00 p.m. the night before service and a pickup request by telephone to the waste service company shall be made prior to the scheduled service day. 
(Code 1959, § 9.29; Ord. No. 4268, § 1(9.29((a),(g)), 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 4860, § 2, 4-18-2006; Ord. No. 5436, § 3, 3-15-2011; Ord. No. 6007, § 2, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-35. - Sanitation requirement. 
No person shall transport waste, or cause waste to be transported, over the streets or other public ways in the Village unless such waste being transported is entirely and securely covered. Garbage shall not be transported over or along the streets of the Village or other public property thereof, except in a leakproof, compaction type body, commonly referred to as a "packer type" refuse body, approved by the health department. Such equipment shall be cleaned frequently enough to prevent nuisances and insect breeding, shall be maintained in good condition, repair and appearance, and may be stored or kept, when not in use, in a tightly constructed and closed building or shed within the Village, provided, such building or structure shall conform with the requirement of chapter 98, zoning, or in open storage areas, subject to the approval of the health department. The waste disposal firm shall immediately clean up any waste that he may have caused to spill on private premises, parkways, streets, alleys or other public places, in a neat and workmanlike manner, and shall replace, at his expense, containers or other property which may be seriously damaged by carelessness of his employees. 
(Code 1959, § 9.30)  
Sec. 58-36. - Waste disposal firm requirements. 
(a)  The Village shall contract with waste disposal firms for the collection of waste materials within the Village from single-family residences, as specified in the contract. It shall be the purpose of the Village in issuing such contracts to seek the highest quality of service at the lowest economic cost to each category of customer. 
(b)  The Village shall license waste disposal firms for the collection of waste materials from other than single-family residences. Either party thereto may, upon 90 days' written notice, sooner if mutually agreeable, cancel such license. 
(c)  The waste disposal firm shall be required to dump or dispose of the waste collected under the license of the Village in a sanitary landfill which is being operated in compliance with all applicable statutes, rules and regulations. 
(d)  The Village reserves the right to receive, and/or have prepared, annual audits of the licensee's books of account, at the licensee's expense, for the purpose of establishing fair rates for each category of customer and to provide for adequate and sanitary collection, provided that such audit may be performed by a certified public accountant of the licensee's choosing, who shall apply usual and normal accounting techniques to the audit of the licensee's books. 
(e)  The Village shall establish rate ceilings and service standards. Such rate schedule shall include rate ceilings for special collections, referred to in section 58-34(b), but shall not include commercial, institutional and industrial collection rate ceilings. The contracted waste disposal firm shall adhere to such standards and shall not exceed such rate ceilings. 
(f)  Each waste disposal firm shall be required to post a performance bond with adequate surety to carry out the purposes of the license. 
(g)  The waste disposal firm shall be required to serve premises serviced by a licensed waste disposal firm no less than once per week; provided, however, that all institutional, commercial and industrial garbage shall be collected as frequently as necessary to maintain sanitary conditions, but at least once per week. 
(h)  All trucks operating within the Village shall carry in the cab the rules of collection as provided by the Village. The disposal firm shall display its name and telephone number on both sides of the compactor unit, in letters and numerals no less than six inches in height. Every licensee shall have a local telephone number listed in a telephone directory of general circulation in the Village, and an answering service shall be provided between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Monday—Friday, except legal holidays. 
(i)  No person, except as provided in this article, shall remove waste from any premises in the Village or transport waste through the streets, alleys or public ways of the Village, or in any other manner dispose of waste originating in the limits of the Village, or contract for or permit himself to be employed or engaged for any such removal, transportation or disposal without first having secured a license from the Village for performing such waste disposal service. Any new license shall be approved by the board of trustees. 
(j)  Application for and issuance of such license shall be made in accordance with the general licensing provisions of chapter 30, and the annual license fee for operating a waste disposal firm within the Village shall be as provided in section 30-3. Evidence of such license shall be provided by the Village and displayed on each motor vehicle of the license used in the Village, in accordance with the regulations promulgated by the Village manager. 
(k)  Every applicant must submit adequate assurances as to his character, morals and business reputation for himself and his employees. 
(l)  Every applicant must submit complete financial statements and references as to his financial responsibility. 
(m)  Every applicant must demonstrate that he has adequate and sufficient equipment, personnel and financial responsibility to render service to any customer requesting such service and in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(n)  Every licensee shall carry comprehensive general public liability and automobile insurance in basic limits of not less than $200,000.00/$400,000.00, plus $50,000.00 property damage insurance, plus an amount of liability umbrella coverage which, together with the basic amounts and any coverage now carried in excess thereof, will total not less than $2,000,000.00 of such comprehensive general public liability and automobile coverage. In addition thereto, such licensees shall carry workmen's compensation for his employees. Certificates of insurance for all of such coverages shall be furnished to the Village within 30 days after the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(o)  No licensee shall dump or otherwise place or dispose of waste in violation of the laws of the State or the ordinances of any municipality. 
(p)  The president and board of trustees of the Village reserve the right to deny the applicant a license if any reasonable doubt exists as to the applicant's compliance with the provisions of this article or any other ordinance provisions of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 9.31)  
Sec. 58-37. - Rate ceilings. 
In accordance with section 58-36(e), the rates are established through the Village manager. 
(Code 1959, § 9.33)  
Sec. 58-38. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16. 
(b)  If a waste disposal firm violates any provision of any ordinance of the Village, the Village shall have the right, in addition to enforcing the penalties otherwise provided, to revoke or suspend the license of such waste disposal firm. 
(c)  If it becomes necessary for the Village or a property owner or person in possession and/or control of property to have a survey prepared to determine the location of lot lines as referenced in sections 58-33 and 58-34 because of a dispute between or among affected persons or entities, the person or entity determined by a court to have violated the provisions of section 58-33(e) or section 58-34(a) and (g) shall be liable for payment or reimbursement of all survey costs and expenses to the survey company or the person or entity having advanced the cost for payment of the survey. 
(Code 1959, § 9.32; Ord. No. 4268, § 2, 2-6-2001)  
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; moving buildings, § 18-155; occupation of streets, § 18-691 et seq.; sanitary requirement of public places, § 38-9; damage to public property, § 46-201; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 50; planning, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 66; design standards for street arrangement, extent, width grade and location in subdivisions, § 66-16; design standards for street plan in subdivisions, § 66-163; location and layout of streets, blocks, depth of lots, parks and other public grounds, § 66-192; design standards for streets in floodplains, § 66-193; required improvements for street paving in subdivisions, § 66-235; telecommunications (other than wireless), ch. 74; telecommunications (wireless services), ch. 78; vehicles and traffic, ch. 90; one-way streets and alleys, § 90-81 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 94; zoning, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Construction permit required; escrow. 
No street, public or private, nor any sidewalk, water main, storm sewer, sanitary sewer, street lighting system, gas and electric service or other public improvement shall be constructed in the Village unless a permit for such construction shall be obtained, and such permit shall be issued by the superintendent of public works. At the time application is made for the permit, the applicant shall deposit in escrow in a bank designated by the Village manager a sum of money equal to the cost of construction and improvement covered by the permit, and such amount is to be determined by the superintendent of public works. Such escrow shall provide that if the applicant fails to complete the construction in accordance with the requirements of all pertinent Village ordinances within a time fixed in the escrow, the Village shall be permitted to use all or such portion of the escrowed money as may be required to enable the Village to complete the construction of the improvements involved. 
(Code 1959, § 17.1)  
Sec. 62-2. - Installation or extension of public utilities. 
Whenever any public utility is installed or extended, pursuant to the provisions of section 62-1, to serve any lot or subdivision, then, in such event, the person making such installation or extension shall extend such utility along the frontage to the most distant limit of the lot or subdivision involved. No permits for any house service connections to such public utilities shall be granted unless and until such utilities are extended the full frontage of the lots involved. For the purpose of this section, the term "public utility" shall include streets, sidewalks, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, street lighting systems and gas, electric and telephone services. 
(Code 1959, § 17.2)  
Sec. 62-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6083, § 16, adopted June 8, 2017, repealed § 62-3, in its entirety. Former § 62-3 pertained to "Bond," and was derived from Code 1959, § 17.4.  
Sec. 62-4. - Construction of streets required as prerequisite for building permit. 
No permit shall be issued for the erection or construction of any building or structure, or for the excavation for any building or structure, on any lot or parcel of land within the Village unless a highway, road, street or way for public service facilities improved with water mains, sanitary sewers and storm sewers has been provided to serve the lot or parcel of land, or the applicant shall have deposited in escrow a sum of money equal to the cost of constructing the highway, road, street or way for public service facilities improved with water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and curb and gutter, pursuant to all of the provisions of section 62-1, except in such cases where a paved highway, paved road, paved street or paved way for public service facilities has already been provided prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Code 1959, § 17.5)  
Sec. 62-5. - Injury to new pavement. 
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon or injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the pavement is guarded by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft or newly laid pavement. 
(Code 1959, § 17.6)  
Sec. 62-6. - Street obstructions. 
A person shall not erect, construct, place or maintain any bump, fence, gate, chain, bar, pipe, wood or metal horse, or any other type of obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of the municipality, without the expressed written permission of the Village Board. The Village Board shall, prior to issuing such approval, obtain an opinion from the chiefs of the fire and police departments and the public works director regarding the impact any obstruction might have on public safety. The term "street," as used in this section, shall mean any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(Code 1959, §§ 7.66, 17.7)  
Sec. 62-7. - Barricading excavations and defects. 
(a)  Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place, or making any excavation in any such place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work. Such barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime. 
(b)  Any defects in any pavement shall be barricaded to prevent any injury, and any person properly maintaining any opening or excavation in any such place shall guard such opening or excavation while it remains open by proper barricades and lights. 
(Code 1959, § 17.8)  
Sec. 62-8. - Disturbing or interfering with barricades and lights. 
It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or light lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement, or excavation or opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk. 
(Code 1959, § 17.9)  
Sec. 62-9. - Deposits on sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any material which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass or other article which might cause injury to persons, animals or property. 
(b)  Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks preparatory to delivery, provided that the usable width of the sidewalk is not thereby reduced to less than four feet and, provided that no such article shall remain on such sidewalk for more than a period of one-half hour. 
(Code 1959, § 17.10)  
Sec. 62-10. - Snow and ice removal. 
(a)  Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having charge of any building or lot of ground in the Village abutting upon any public way or public place shall remove the snow and ice from the sidewalk in front of such building or lot of ground. 
(b)  If the sidewalk is of greater width than five feet, it shall not be necessary for such person to remove snow and ice from the sidewalk for a space wider than five feet. 
(c)  If the snow and ice on the sidewalk shall be frozen so hard that it cannot be removed without injury to the pavement, the person having charge of any building or lot of ground as set forth in this section shall, within the time specified, cause the sidewalk abutting on the premises to be strewn with ashes, sand, sawdust or some similar suitable material, and thoroughly clean the sidewalk as soon thereafter as the weather shall permit. 
(d)  The snow which falls or accumulates during the day before 4:00 p.m. shall be removed within three hours after the snow has fallen or accumulated. The snow which falls or accumulates after 4:00 p.m. and during the night shall be removed before the following 10:00 a.m. 
(Code 1959, § 17.11; Ord. No. 5032, §§ 5, 6, 10-2-2007)  
Sec. 62-11. - Manner of removal and deposit of snow or ice. 
(a)  No person engaged in removing snow or ice from any building, private property, driveway, driveway approach or public sidewalk shall sweep, plow, shovel, scrape, drag or in any other manner move or deposit snow or ice in such a way as to narrow the traveled portion of any street or alley, block the vision of motorists at intersections, prevent parking at the curb, cover or interfere with the use of fire hydrants, block sidewalks or driveways, damage parkway trees, sod or curbing, or otherwise create any traffic hazard. Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person that contracts for the removal of snow or ice shall bear responsibility for actions by their agents. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16 for each and every offense. 
(Code 1959, §§ 17.11.1, 17.11.2)  
Sec. 62-12. - Duty of to keep streets, alleys and sidewalks in good repair. 
All public streets, alleys and sidewalk pavements shall be kept in good repair. All sidewalks shall at all times be kept in good repair by the abutting owners, at their own expense. If the Village shall sustain damages because of the failure of the abutting owner to keep the sidewalks in good repair, such owner shall be liable to the Village to the extent of all damages sustained by the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 17.12)  
Sec. 62-13. - Removal of dirt from public way. 
No person shall plow, dig up or remove any dirt from any dedicated public way in the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 17.13)  
Sec. 62-14. - Moving buildings. 
(a)  No person shall move, or cause to be moved, or aid in moving any building into, along or across any street, alley or public ground in the Village without having first obtained the written permission to do so from the director of public works and director of development, which permit shall state the street, alley or public ground to be traversed in the moving of such building and the length of time the moving of such building shall be permitted thereon. 
(b)  Any owner of any building and/or any contractor for its removal who shall move any building contrary to the provisions of this section, shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 17.14) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18.  
Sec. 62-15. - Poles and wires. 
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any poles or wires on or over any public street, alley or other public way without having first secured permission from the board of trustees. 
(Code 1959, § 17.15)  
Sec. 62-16. - Objects in public rights-of-way and/or public easements. 
The Village shall bear no responsibility to maintain, replace and/or repair any objects or plantings in any public right-of-way or public easement. Any party who places such objects or plantings in public rights-of-way or public easement does so at its own risk. The Village shall, at its sole discretion, retain the right to remove any plantings or objects placed in the public right-of-way or public easement at any time, for any reason, without any liability to the party who placed such planting and/or object in the public right-of-way or public easement. 
(Ord. No. 5393, § 2, 11-16-2010)  
Secs. 62-17—62-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND DRIVEWAYS 
 
Sec. 62-51. - Street construction minimum requirements. 
No street shall be constructed which does not conform to the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Pavement quality. The pavement of such street must be of a material which, in quality, equals or exceeds water-bound macadam. For the purpose of this subsection, pit gravel is to be considered inferior to such macadam and may not be used in street construction within the Village. 
(2)  Thickness, etc., of materials. A water-bound macadam base, not less than eight inches in thickness, surfaced with not less than 2¼-inch thickness of asphaltic concrete, type I—II or equal, of which the upper one inch shall be of fine aggregate, dense graded asphaltic concrete, all manufactured and laid in accordance with the current specifications of the State division of highways, shall be used. 
(3)  Specifications of State division of highways. The material or construction requirements with respect to streets constructed, whether macadam or a superior construction is used, shall meet all specifications of the State division of highways for the particular type of pavement used. 
(4)  Curb and gutter. All streets constructed must be provided with concrete curb and gutter which shall meet all specifications of the State division of highways for the particular type of curb and gutter used. 
(5)  Drainage. Proper drainage shall in all cases be provided at the time such street is constructed. 
(6)  Driving widths. No pavement shall be constructed that will afford less than a driving width of 25 feet, except that the minimum driving width afforded shall not be less than 20 feet in cases where the minimum lot area on both sides of the street proposed to be paved is not less than one-half acre, and where the average frontage of each such lot fronting on the street proposed to be paved is not less than 90 feet. 
(7)  Half streets. Where half streets are dedicated on any plat of a subdivision, no pavement shall be constructed on such half streets that will afford less than a driving width of 20 feet. 
(8)  Identical pavement in same block. Where a portion of a street in any block is already improved with a paving of a type which is superior to the minimum requirements set forth in this section, the pavement of the balance of the street within the same block shall be of identical construction with the existing pavement. 
(9)  Commercial and industrial streets. Where any pavement is to be constructed in any public right-of-way within the Village limits to serve commercial or industrial property, and where any concrete pavement is to be widened, altered or repaired, such new pavement shall be of concrete not less than eight inches in thickness and constructed in accordance with the current specifications of the State division of highways. 
(10)  Permit fee. The charge for a permit as required by section 62-1 shall be one percent of the estimated cost of the improvement. 
(Code 1959, § 17.28)  
Sec. 62-52. - Driveway construction rules, regulations and specifications; permit required; fee. 
The board of trustees shall adopt, from time to time, reasonable and necessary rules, regulations and specifications pertaining to entrance and exit driveways to serve residential or commercial establishments and other uses of property abutting upon streets, including specifications for drainage and structures appurtenant to such driveways. All such rules, regulations and specifications adopted by the board of trustees shall be on file in the office of the superintendent of public works. No permit shall be issued by the superintendent of public works for the construction of any such driveway which does not conform to the rules, regulations and specifications prescribed by the Village. The charge for a permit as required by this section shall be $25.00. 
(Code 1959, § 17.29)  
Secs. 62-53—62-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-81. - Cost to be deposited in escrow. 
At the time application is made for a permit, the applicant shall deposit in escrow, in a bank designated by the Village manager, a sum of money equal to the cost of excavation and restoration covered by the permit, and such amount is to be determined by the superintendent of public works. The provisions of section 62-1 shall apply fully if the applicant shall fail to complete all or any part of the work covered by the permit. 
(Code 1959, § 17.19)  
Sec. 62-82. - Manner. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to make any excavation or tunnel in any way contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. 
(b)  Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground, and in excavations, the excavation shall not have any place below the surface, any portion which extends beyond the opening at the surface. 
(c)  No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making of such excavations or tunnels, and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits, or to the Village department or officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel, before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be disturbed. Proper care shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub, wherever possible. 
(Code 1959, § 17.20)  
Sec. 62-83. - Availability of street during work; temporary sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful to render more than one-half the width of any street unavailable for travel in connection with any excavation or tunnel. If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. 
(Code 1959, § 17.21)  
Sec. 62-84. - Time limit; extension. 
Each application for a permit shall state the length of time it is estimated will elapse from the commencement of the work until the restoration of the surface of the ground, or until the refill is made ready for the restoration of the pavement. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with such time limitation unless the permission for an extension of time is granted by the superintendent of public works. 
(Code 1959, § 17.22)  
Sec. 62-85. - Surface restoration. 
(a)  Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the Village shall restore the surface thereof to its original condition if there is no pavement thereon. Refills shall be of suitable materials, placed under the supervision of the superintendent of public works and properly tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation shall be left in the ground. 
(b)  If the excavation or opening has necessitated an opening in a pavement or sidewalk, the refill and restoration of the pavement or sidewalk shall be made in accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the Village pertinent thereto, under the supervision of the superintendent of public works. 
(Code 1959, § 17.23)  
Sec. 62-86. - Inspections; notice of commencement of work. 
The superintendent of public works shall from time to time inspect all excavations or tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the Village to ensure the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be given to the superintendent of public works at least ten hours before the work or refilling of any such excavation or tunnel commences. 
(Code 1959, § 17.24)  
Sec. 62-87. - Railings and fences. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person engaged in digging into any street, alley or other public highway, in paving any street or alley, or building any sewer or drain, or trench for water pipes, in any of the public streets, avenues or other public places, under contract with the Village, or by virtue of any permission which may have been granted by the Village to them or their principals, where such work, if left exposed, would be dangerous to passersby, to erect a fence or railing at such excavations or work, in such a manner as to prevent danger to passersby who may be traveling on such streets, roads or avenues, and to continue and uphold the railing or fence until the work shall be completed or the obstruction or danger removed. It also shall be the duty of such persons to place upon such railing or fence, at twilight in the evening, suitable and sufficient red lights as danger signals and such persons shall keep such lights burning through the night until dawn, during the performance of the work. 
(b)  A similar fence or railing and lights shall be put up and maintained in all cases in which a street or public place is excavated by the Village. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00, nor more than $500.00 for each and every offense. Each day such offense shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1959, §§ 17.25, 17.26)  
Sec. 62-88. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article relative to securing permits shall not apply to officers or employees of the Village engaged in doing work for the Village, nor to persons or corporations doing work for the Village under contract. 
(Code 1959, § 17.27)  
Secs. 62-89—62-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 62-111. - Required; compliance with regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in any street, alley or other public place in the Village or to tunnel under any street, alley or other public place in the Village without first having obtained a permit as set forth in this division, or without complying with the provisions of this chapter or in violation of or at variance from the terms of any such permit. 
(Code 1959, § 17.16)  
Sec. 62-112. - Application. 
(a)  Applications for permits to excavate or tunnel in or under the streets of the Village shall be made to the superintendent of public works and shall contain the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose thereof, the name of the person doing the actual excavation work and the name of the person for whom or for which the work is being done. 
(b)  Such application shall also contain an agreement signed by the person doing the work to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this chapter, and restore any pavement or sidewalk which may be opened as a result thereof. Such restoration shall be made as provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 17.17)  
Sec. 62-113. - Bond required. 
No permit to excavate or tunnel in or under the streets of the Village shall be issued unless and until the applicant has filed with the Village manager. 
(Code 1959, § 17.18; Ord. No. 6083, § 17, 6-8-2017)  
Secs. 62-114—62-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 62-141. - General supervision of construction and repairs. 
It is hereby declared to be the duty of the superintendent of public works to exercise a general supervision over the construction and repairs of all the sidewalks within the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 17.30)  
Sec. 62-142. - Construction permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a sidewalk within the Village without having obtained a permit as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 17.31)  
Sec. 62-143. - Permit application; fee. 
Application for a permit to construct a sidewalk shall be made to the superintendent of public works, and shall state the location and length of the proposed sidewalk. The charge for a permit as required by this article shall be $5.00 per 100 lineal feet of such sidewalk, or part thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 17.32)  
Sec. 62-144. - Minimum requirements. 
No sidewalks shall be constructed which do not conform with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Material, and minimum width and thickness. Sidewalks on public property shall be constructed of concrete. Such sidewalks shall be a minimum width of five feet and a minimum thickness of five inches. Specifications for concrete shall be as adopted by the Village for such purpose. 
(2)  Grades and slopes. The grades of the proposed sidewalk shall be approved by the superintendent of public works or his representative. A slope of one-eighth inch to the foot shall be maintained toward the street in order to take care of surface drainage. 
(3)  Subgrades. All sod and vegetable matter in the subgrade shall be removed and any soft spots shall be dug out and filled with sand or limestone screenings, and be thoroughly tamped. Exceptionally hard, compact spots shall be loosened and tamped to provide the same bearing power as the remainder of the subgrade. When additional fills are required under the sidewalks to bring the sidewalks to the proper grade, they shall also be of sand or limestone screenings, and thoroughly compacted in six-inch layers. A well-compacted, well-drained subgrade does not require a specially prepared subbase. 
(4)  Surface finish. Sidewalks shall be finished with a slightly roughened surface to ensure a safe footing in wet weather. To obtain such finish, sidewalks shall be lightly broomed after the side edges are rounded. 
(5)  Expansion joints. Expansion joints shall consist of premolded material, one-half inch thick, and as wide as the depth of the sidewalk. Such expansion joints shall be placed at 50-foot intervals and wherever the sidewalk meets another walk, driveway, curb, light, standard, fireplug or other rigid object. Contraction joints shall be made with a double edger, at intervals of not less than five feet and not more than six feet. 
(Code 1959, § 17.33)  
Sec. 62-145. - Stamping. 
All cement sidewalks laid within the Village shall have stamped thereon the date of construction and the name of the builder. 
(Code 1959, § 17.34)  
Sec. 62-146. - Prerequisite to street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water main construction in subdivisions abutting County or State highways or State aid roads. 
No permit shall be issued for the construction of any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water main in any subdivision within the Village which abuts upon any County or State highway, or State aid road unless that portion of such subdivision which abuts upon any County or State highway, or State aid road shall be improved with a public sidewalk extending the full distance along that portion of the subdivision which so abuts, or the applicant, pursuant to all of the provisions of section 62-1, shall have deposited in escrow a sum of money equal to the cost of the construction of the sidewalk in accordance with the requirements established by section 62-144. 
(Code 1959, § 17.36)  
Secs. 62-147—62-490. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HOUSE NUMBERING 
 
Sec. 62-491. - Base lines; atlas. 
(a)  For the purpose of numbering the lots, tracts and parcels of land in the Village, the east boundary line of the Village, 132.89 feet east of the east line of LeClaire Avenue and projected northerly and southerly, shall be regarded as the starting point for east and west streets, and Simpson Road projected easterly and westerly shall be regarded as the starting for north and south streets. The numbers on the east and south frontages shall be odd numbers and the numbers on the west and north frontages shall be even numbers. The first numbers start at the westerly and southerly boundaries as described in this section by 00 on the west and north frontages and 01 on the east and south frontages, with the numbers graduating or progressing arithmetically, with a new number for every 25 feet on the residential frontages and 20 feet on the business frontages, and with 800 numbers assigned to each mile, and 100 numbers assigned to each one-eighth of a mile, meaning and intending that at each one-eighth of a mile a new series of numbers will start as at the beginning (i.e., the second one-eighth of a mile shall be 200 and 201, the third one-eighth of a mile shall be 300 and 301 and the fourth one-eighth of a mile shall be 400 and 401, etc.), progressively at the start of each one-eighth of a mile to the northerly and westerly limits of the Village. 
(b)  An atlas, entitled on its title page as: 
GLENVIEW, ILLINOIS 
ATLAS 
OF 
HOUSE NUMBERS 
which carries out, graphically, the import and intent of this article as to the proper numbering of each of the 20-foot and 25-foot frontages described in this section, and is hereby approved and adopted by the president and board of trustees, and such atlas, by reference, is made a part of this article, for all of the purposes of this article, and the atlas is to be numbered on its title page with the number of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and kept on file in the office of the clerk of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 17.37)  
Sec. 62-492. - Required; size and placement. 
It is hereby made the duty of the owner, agent or person in possession of each building in the Village to number the building in the same manner as provided for in this article and in the atlas referred to in section 62-491. Each of the figures or numbers shall be at least three inches in length, and marked so as to be easily and distinctly read. Such numbers shall be placed in a conspicuous place on or at the side of, or above, the front door of the building to which the numbers are attached. 
(Code 1959, § 17.38)  
Sec. 62-493. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person, being the owner or occupant of any building in the Village, who, for a period of 30 days, neglects or refuses to number the building in conformity with the ordinances of the Village in such case made and provided and in accordance with the atlas referred to in section 62-491, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-16, and shall be subject to a similar penalty for every 30 days thereafter that such person shall refuse or neglect to number such building, or such building shall be without its number, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 17.39)  
Secs. 62-494—62-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN VILLAGE RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 62-501. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village rights-of-way and the Village as a whole. 
(b)  Intent. In enacting this article, the Village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation: 
(1)  Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property; 
(4)  Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities; 
(5)  Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces; 
(6)  Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed; 
(7)  Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that characterize the Village's residential neighborhoods; 
(8)  Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and 
(9)  Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations. 
(c)  Facilities subject to this article. This article applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this article may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement. 
(d)  Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The Village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this article. 
(e)  Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. 
(1)  Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(2)  Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. 
(f)  Conflicts with other articles or ordinances. If any provision of this article is inconsistent with the provisions contained in any other article or ordinance set forth in the Code, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(g)  Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations. 
(h)  Sound engineering judgment. The Village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this article and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the Village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-502. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases in italic typeface, when used in this article VI, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section 62-502, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
AASHTO means the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
Applicant means a person applying for a permit under this article. 
ASTM means the American Society for Testing and Materials. 
Backfill means the methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit. 
Bore or boring means to excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor. 
Cable operator means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5). 
Cable service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6). 
Cable system means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7). 
Carrier pipe means the pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported. 
Casing means a structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices. 
Clear zone means the total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide. 
Coating means protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion. 
Code means the Municipal Code of the Village of Glenview. 
Conductor means the wire carrying electrical current. 
Conduit means a casing or encasement for wires or cables. 
Construction or construct means the installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities. 
Cover means the depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor. 
Crossing facility means a facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way. 
Director of development means the Village director of development or his/her designee. 
Director of public works means the Village director of public works or his or her designee. 
Disrupt the ROW. For the purposes of this article, any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway. 
Emergency means any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility. 
Encasement means provision of a protective casing. 
Engineer means the Village engineer or his/her designee. 
Equipment means the materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities. 
Excavation means the making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging. 
Extra heavy pipe means the pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation. 
Facility means all structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, communications and video cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this article, except those owned by the Village. For purposes of this article, the term facility shall not include any facility owned or operated by the Village. 
Freestanding facility means a facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station. 
Frontage road means roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway. 
Hazardous materials means any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or State law, statute or regulation. 
Highway Code means the Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
Highway means a specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. Highway includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic. 
Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
IDOT means the Illinois Department of Transportation. 
ICC means the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
Jacking means pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring. 
Jetting means pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe. 
Joint use means the use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or more utilities. 
J.U.L.I.E. means the Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility notification program. 
Major intersection means he intersection of two or more major arterial highways. 
Occupancy means the presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way. 
Parallel facility means a facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way. 
Parkway means any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk. 
Pavement cut means the removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility. 
Permittee means that entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 62-504 and 62-505 of this article. 
Practicable means that which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient. 
Pressure means the internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig). 
Petroleum products pipelines means pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry. 
Prompt means that which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days. 
Public entity means a legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, State or federal level. 
Restoration means the repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility. 
Right-of-way and/or ROW means any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for utility pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the Village. Right-of-way and/or ROW shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in the previous two sentences and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way. 
Roadway means that part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders. 
Sale of telecommunications at retail means the transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale. 
Security fund means that amount of security required pursuant to section 62-510. 
Shoulder means a width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement. 
Sound engineering judgment means a decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience. 
Telecommunications. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, or and any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, telecommunications shall also include wireless telecommunications as defined in the Illinois Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, 35 ILCS 635/1 et seq. Private line means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, and/or a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. Telecommunications shall not include value-added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. Telecommunications shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale. Telecommunications shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 47 C.F.R. § 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended. 
Telecommunications provider means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the public rights-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form. 
Telecommunications retailer means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein. 
Trench means a relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility. 
Utility means the individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this article. 
Vent means a pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing. 
Video service means that term as defined in section 21-201 (v) of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201 (v). 
Village means the Village of Glenview. 
Water lines means pipelines carrying raw or potable water. 
Wet boring means boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-503. - Annual registration required. 
Every utility that occupies ROW within the Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the director of development, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the ROW and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007; Ord. No. 6083, § 18, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-504. - Permit required; applications and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any Village ROW which (1) changes the location of the facility, (2) adds a new facility, (3) disrupts the ROW (as defined in this article), or (4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the ROW, without first filing an application with the director of development and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the ROW. 
(b)  Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. 
(c)  Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers; 
(2)  The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work; 
(3)  The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed; 
(5)  Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village: 
i)  A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and 
ii)  An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances are needed; 
(6)  Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations; 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 62-510 of this article; 
(9)  Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this article (See section 62-521); and 
(10)  Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village. 
(d)  Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities. In addition to the requirements of subsection c) of this section, the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application: 
(1)  In the case of the installation of a new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority; 
(2)  In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures; 
(3)  In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied; 
(4)  In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, have been satisfied; or 
(5)  In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed. 
(e)  Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the Village within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
(f)  Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $200.00, excepting sewer, water and sanitary utilities, which shall pay the application fee set forth in chapter 66, article I, section 66-9 of the Code. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act. 
(g)  Completion of permitted work. All construction work authorized by a permit within public streets or public ways, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance or as may be reasonably extended by the director of development. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007; Ord. No. 6083, § 19, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-505. - Action on permit applications. 
(a)  Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the director of development within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the director of development shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the director of development is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the director of development shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the director of development, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Additional Village review of applications of telecommunications retailers. 
(1)  Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it intends to commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The director of development shall specify the portion of the ROW upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed. 
(2)  In the event that the director of development fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either (i) ten days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or (ii) 25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this article. 
(3)  Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 62-504 of this article the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Additional Village review of applications of holders of State authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted upon by the Village, provided the holder has complied with applicable Village codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-506. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this article on Village rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Duration. No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. 
(c)  Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this article prior to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with such Village representatives in attendance as the Village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners. 
(d)  Meeting with affected residents. No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this article unless the permittee has held a meeting with affected residents, pursuant to chapter 74, article III, section 74-80 of the Code. 
(e)  Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the Village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-507. - Revised permit drawings. 
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within 90 days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with section 62-521 of this article. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-508. - Insurance. 
(a)  Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections (1) and (2) below: 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than: 
i)  $5,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death to each person; 
ii)  $5,000,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident; and 
iii)  $5,000,000.00 for all other types of liability; 
(2)  Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 for personal injury and property damage for each accident; 
(3)  Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and 
(4)  Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 per employee and per accident. 
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section. 
(b)  Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss. 
(c)  Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the Village within ten days following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village. 
(d)  Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
Within ten days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (a) of this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds under subsection (a), or the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (a) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self insurer" under the Workers Compensation Act. 
(f)  Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The legal liability of the utility to the Village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. 
(g)  Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-509. - Indemnification. 
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-510. - Security. 
(a)  Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for: 
(1)  The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this article; and 
(3)  The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this article including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is required by this article to perform that the Village must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to this article or any other applicable law. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Withdrawals. The Village, upon 14 days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount within the 14-day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee: 
(1)  Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder; 
(2)  Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid; 
(3)  Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee; or 
(4)  Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the Village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund. 
(e)  Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the Village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required in subsection (c) of this section. 
(g)  Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(h)  Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007; Ord. No. 6083, §§ 20, 21, 6-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-511. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Village right to revoke permit. The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application; 
(2)  Non-compliance with this article; 
(3)  Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(4)  Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans; 
(5)  Work exceeding the scope of the permit; or 
(6)  Work done in violation of any Village ordinance. 
(b)  Notice of revocation or suspension. The Village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this section 62-511. 
(c)  Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the Village, the permittee shall have the following options: 
(1)  Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension; 
(2)  Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the Village within five working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or 
(3)  Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Village providing written proof of such removal to the Village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of revocation. The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection. 
(d)  Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, the Village or its designee may, at the option of the Village: (1) correct the deficiencies; (2) upon not less than 20 days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or (3) after not less than 30 days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all costs of removal. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-512. - Change of ownership or owner's identity or legal status. 
(a)  Notification of change. A utility shall notify the Village no less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the ROW or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and facilities in the ROW. 
(b)  Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village's ROW. 
(c)  Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-513. - General construction standards. 
(a)  Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time: 
(1)  Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction; 
(2)  Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions; 
(3)  Highway Design Manual; 
(4)  Highway Standards Manual; 
(5)  Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items; 
(6)  Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code § 545); 
(7)  Village Engineering Guide; 
(8)  Village Tree Preservation Ordinance; 
(9)  Flagger's Handbook; and 
(10)  Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations. 
(b)  Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this article, the Village engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the Village engineer shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-514. - Traffic control. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. The Village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and this Code. 
(b)  Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work on the rights-of-way. 
(c)  Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 62-520 of this article, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances. 
(e)  Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-515. - Location of facilities. 
(a)  General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection. 
(1)  No interference with Village facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the director of public works determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the Village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the Village's utility facilities. No utility facilities shall be placed in swale areas, detention areas or overflow routes. 
(2)  Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way. 
(3)  No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way. 
(4)  No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way. 
(5)  Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application. 
(b)  Parallel facilities located within highways. 
(1)  Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
i)  Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit; 
ii)  Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb, where available; 
iii)  Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone; 
iv)  No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and 
v)  Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line. 
(2)  Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if: 
i)  The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line; 
ii)  A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and 
iii)  In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable. 
(c)  Facilities crossing highways. 
(1)  No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities. 
(2)  Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. 
(3)  90 degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable. 
(4)  Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
i)  It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305); 
ii)  Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and 
iii)  Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided. 
(5)  Underground power or communication facility. An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if: 
i)  The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and 
ii)  Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation. 
(6)  Markers. The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. § 192.707 (1989)). 
(d)  Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The Village may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways. 
(e)  Freestanding facilities. 
(1)  The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. 
(2)  The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view. 
(f)  Facilities installed above ground. Above-ground facilities may be installed only if: 
(1)  No other existing facilities in the area are located underground; 
(2)  New underground installation is not technically feasible; and 
(3)  The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged. 
(g)  Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures. 
(1)  Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted. 
(2)  A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations: 
i)  The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility; 
ii)  The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system; 
iii)  The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability; 
iv)  The proposed method of attachment; 
v)  The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility; 
vi)  The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting; 
vii)  The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and 
viii)  The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved. 
(h)  Appearance standards. 
(1)  The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality. 
(2)  A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-516. - Construction methods and materials. 
(a)  Standards and requirements for particular types of construction methods. 
(1)  Boring or jacking. 
i)  Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation. 
ii)  Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway. 
iii)  Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm). 
iv)  Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method. 
v)  Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree located on the ROW must be preserved or protected in accordance with the Village Tree Preservation Ordinance. 
(2)  Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." 
i)  Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the director of public works. 
ii)  Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where ROW width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location. 
iii)  Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved. 
(3)  Backfilling. 
i)  Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction." When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular material of CA-7 gradation shall be used. 
ii)  For a period of three years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the director of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the director of public works. 
(4)  Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection (4) is permitted under section 62-521, the following requirements shall apply: 
i)  Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the director of public works. 
ii)  Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village. 
iii)  All saw cuts shall be full depth. 
iv)  For all rights-of-way which have been resurfaced, reconstructed or rehabilitated within the past five years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate. 
(5)  Encasement. 
i)  Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the Village. 
ii)  The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (0.3 m) of the ROW line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway. 
iii)  In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method. 
iv)  In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be eliminated. 
v)  In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided; 
vi)  If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the ROW. 
(6)  Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum cover for the type of facility: 
TYPE OF FACILITY 	MINIMUM COVER 
Electric Lines 

Communication, Cable or Video Service Lines 	30 Inches (0.8 m) 

24 Inches (0.6 m) 
Gas or Petroleum Products 	30 Inches (0.8 m) 
Water Line 	Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection 
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or Drainage Line 	Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze Protection 
 
(b)  Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities. 
(1)  Electric power or communication lines. 
i)  Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety Code. 
ii)  Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility. No tree may be used to either temporarily or permanently anchor or support overhead power or communication facilities. 
iii)  Underground facilities. 
(1)  Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads. 
(2)  If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: 
(a)  The crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or 
(b)  The installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. 
(3)  Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code. 
iv)  Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after placement. 
(2)  Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by: 
i)  The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe; 
ii)  Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway; 
iii)  Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or 
iv)  Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means. 
(3)  Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 - Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR § 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
(4)  Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4). 
(5)  Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois." 
(6)  Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a ROW, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the director of development. With the approval of the director of development, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. 
(c)  Materials. 
(1)  General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry. 
(2)  Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the director of public works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the Village. 
(3)  Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities. 
(d)  Operational restrictions. 
(1)  Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property. 
(2)  These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services. 
(3)  Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction are those set forth in chapter 18, article II, section 18-44 of the Code. 
(4)  No steel plates shall be permitted on the roadways from November 1 to April 30, as outlined in Section IV, paragraph G(8) of the Village Engineering Guide. 
(e)  Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-517. - Vegetation control. 
(a)  Electric utilities — Compliance with state laws and regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control activities in the ROW in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement with the Village as permitted by law. 
(b)  Other utilities — Tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming must be done in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, and the Village Tree Preservation Ordinance. 
(1)  Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by a certified arborist, and competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished. 
(2)  Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition. 
(c)  Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The Village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means. 
(d)  Chemical use. 
(1)  Except as provided in the following subsection (2), no utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the Village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or disease. 
(2)  Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director of public works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-518. - Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility facilities. 
(a)  Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law; 
(2)  If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required; 
(3)  If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article; or 
(4)  If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise. 
(c)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The Village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility. 
(d)  Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way of the Village, the utility shall notify the Village within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the Village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the director of public works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the Village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the Village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-519. - Clean-up and restoration. 
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Village engineer. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the ROW to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the Village engineer for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-520. - Maintenance and emergency maintenance. 
(a)  General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense. 
(b)  Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit: 
(1)  If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available. 
(2)  In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately. 
(3)  In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(c)  Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the Village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-521. - Variances. 
(a)  Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the director of development as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted. 
(b)  Authority to grant variances. The director of development shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in the variance request on an individual basis. 
(c)  Conditions for granting of variance. The director of development may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that: 
(1)  One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and 
(2)  All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform to the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach. 
(d)  Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for authorizing a variance, the director of development director of development may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry out the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the director of development under the provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal to the Village board, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Village board shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The Village board shall timely decide the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-522. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-523. - Enforcement. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 62-524. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 5039, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Chapter 66 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Plat Act, 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Intent. 
The intent of this chapter is to protect the interests of the land owner or subdivider, the investor in land, the homeowner and the Village by providing reasonable rules and regulations in conformity with accepted engineering and public health standards and practices, to govern the location, width and course of streets, and control of floodwater runoff, with respect to any map, plat or subdivision of any block, lot or sublot, or any part thereof, or any piece or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the Village and within its jurisdictional area, which rules and regulations include reasonable requirements with respect to any map, plat or subdivision of any block, lot or sublot, or any part thereof, or any piece or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the Village and within its jurisdictional area, which rules and regulations include reasonable requirements with respect to water supply, sewerage collection, street drainage and other public improvements. The requirements for all new or existing public improvements shall extend and relate to off-site as well as on-site improvements, when deemed necessary by the plan commission and board of trustees. 
(Code 1959, § 18.2)  
Sec. 66-2. - Minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare. 
(Code 1959, § 18.10.3A)  
Sec. 66-3. - Overlapping or contradictory regulations. 
Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the use of land or buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter or any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive shall govern. 
(Code 1959, § 18.10.3B)  
Sec. 66-4. - Private agreements and legal relationships. 
This chapter is not intended to abrogate, annul or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or legal relationship; provided, however, that where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants or other private agreements or legal relationships, the regulations of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1959, § 18.10.3C)  
Sec. 66-5. - Construction and definitions. 
(a)  Construction. In the construction of this chapter, the following provisions and rules shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(1)  Terms used in the present tense shall include the future. 
(2)  Terms in the singular number include the plural number, and terms in the plural number include the singular number. 
(3)  The term "used for" shall include the terms "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for." 
(4)  The term "shall" is mandatory. 
(5)  The term "may" is permissive. 
(6)  The term "Village" means the Village of Glenview, Illinois. 
(7)  The term "commission" means the plan commission. 
(8)  Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a dedicated public right-of-way, other than a street, that affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Block means a tract of land bounded by streets or combinations of streets and public parks, forest preserves, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines, shorelines or waterways. 
Board of trustees means the president and board of trustees of the Village. 
Building means any covered structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. 
Cul-de-sac means a local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
Ditch means a long, narrow channel with side slopes steeper than 2.5 to one, dug into the earth as a trough for drainage. 
Easement means a plat of dedication by the property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose. 
Floodplain and areas subject to flooding mean the area which would be inundated by stormwater runoff equivalent to that which would occur with a rainfall of five-year frequency after total development of the watershed. 
Improvement, public, means any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage ditch, water main, street planting strip, sidewalk, pedestrian way, off-street parking area or other facility for which the Village may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation. 
Jurisdictional area means the area extending 1½ miles from the Village in the unincorporated County, except where the Village and other villages have mutually agreed to a division of overlapping jurisdictions, in which case the area of jurisdiction shall be shown by a line on the duly recorded comprehensive plan. 
Lots, double frontage, means lots, other than corner lots, platted on two streets, one of which is a thoroughfare. 
Lot of record means a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of the County. 
Lot width means the distance on a horizontal plane between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at the established front building line. 
Multiple-family dwelling means a residential building containing two or more dwelling units. 
Official map means parts of the official plan implemented by regulatory ordinance, including, but not necessarily limited to, chapter 98, zoning, this chapter and major street, sewer and water maps. 
Official plan means a comprehensive plan, not regulatory, for the present and future development and/or redevelopment of the Village and the jurisdictional area adjacent to the Village. 
Pavement width means the measurement perpendicular to the pavement centerline, extending from the back of curb to back of curb. 
Plan commission means a commission created under the authority of the Illinois Municipal Code, and by Ordinance No. 1267 of the Village. 
Professional engineer means a person licensed in the State as a professional engineer. 
Record plat means the map or plan of record of a subdivision, filed for public record in the office of the recorder of deeds of the County. 
Regulations means the subdivision regulations of the Village. 
Retention basin means a pond, lagoon, lake, depression in the earth's surface, underground structure or pipe that has been designed to provide storage for storm water runoff and a controlled release of such impounded water into water channels or pipes. 
Screening means structures, or evergreen or shrub vegetation maintained for the purpose of concealing from view the area behind such structure or plantings. 
Single-family dwelling means a residential building containing one dwelling unit. 
Street means a public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane or thoroughfare, or however designated, except driveways to buildings. 
Streets marginal access, means a minor street parallel and adjacent to a thoroughfare street, and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Street, section line, means a street which follows, or closely follows, section lines. 
Street, thoroughfare, means a street serving as an arterial trafficway with a high degree of continuity. 
Subdivider means a person, corporation or duly authorized agent who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined in this subsection (b). 
Subdivision means: 
(1)  The division or redivision of a parcel of land into two or more parts or parcels; 
(2)  The platting of a parcel or tract of land into a single numbered lot, without alteration of its boundaries; 
(3)  A planned development or planned unit development as defined in this chapter, chapter 98, zoning, or the zoning ordinance of the County; or 
(4)  The widening, extension, alteration, dedication or variation of a street, alley, public ground, railroad or waterway for the purpose of transfer of ownership, correction of a survey or building development. 
Such term includes resubdividing and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
Subdivision design standards means the basic land planning principles established as guides for the preparation of plans or plats, or plans for public improvement. 
Surveyor means any person licensed in the State as a land surveyor. 
Swale means a long, wide, shallow depression in the earth for drainage, with side slopes flatter than three to one. 
Thoroughfare means a street with a high degree of continuity and serving as an arterial trafficway. 
Village engineer means a licensed professional engineer employed or retained by the Village and designated as the Village engineer. 
Working drawings means an engineer's or architect's plans, details, sections and profiles, prepared for building or constructing a public improvement. 
(Code 1959, §§ 18.10.1, 18.10.2, 18.11) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-6. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions of land within the corporate limits of the Village and within its jurisdictional area. 
(Code 1959, § 18.3)  
Sec. 66-7. - Amendments; hearings. 
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare, the board of trustees may from time to time amend the regulations imposed by this chapter. The plan commission, at the direction of the board of trustees, shall hold public hearings on proposed amendments. 
(Code 1959, § 18.4.3)  
Sec. 66-8. - Procedure. 
Any owner of land desiring to subdivide property within the corporate limits of the Village, or within the jurisdictional area, shall submit the following: 
(1)  Application and preliminary plan. 
(2)  Final plan. 
(3)  Working drawings. 
(Code 1959, § 18.5.1)  
Sec. 66-9. - Application fee schedule. 
Every application to appear before the plan commission shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Each application for a one lot subdivision ..... $ 50.00 
Plus, per lot ..... 5.00 
(2)  Each application for a subdivision in excess of one lot ..... 100.00 
Plus, per lot ..... 5.00 
(3)  Recording fees for each plat of a subdivision, annexation, vacation or other plat ..... 103.00 
Plus, per lot, tract or parcel therein ..... 2.00 
(4)  Recording fees for annexation agreements and any other agreements, documents or instruments regarding property requiring development approval by the plan commission and/or Village Board, first two pages ..... 23.00 
Plus, for each additional page ..... 2.00 
provided, however, that the fee for any pages or exhibits which exceed 120 square inches in area shall be $2.00 for each 120 square inches thereof, but shall not exceed a maximum of $9.00 per page or exhibit. 
(5)  Each amendment to chapter 98, zoning ..... 200.00 
(6)  Each amendment to the zoning map (under five acres) ..... 250.00 
(7)  Each amendment to the zoning map (over five acres) ..... 250.00 
Plus, per acre ..... 100.00 
(8)  Each petition for annexation ..... 100.00 
(9)  Each application for a planned development of five acres or less ..... 500.00 
(10)  Each application for a planned development in excess of five acres ..... 500.00 
Plus, per acre ..... 100.00 
(11)  Each amendment to a planned development involving an accessory use as defined by section 98-4 ..... 250.00 
(12)  Each amendment to a planned development, other than an accessory use ..... 500.00 
(13)  Each application for a plat of vacation for a public street or alley ..... 200.00 
(14)  Each application for variation of chapter 98, zoning, in conjunction with a planned development or annexation agreement ..... 100.00 
(15)  Each official map application ..... 250.00 
(Code 1959, § 18.5.1A)  
Sec. 66-10. - Time limit for construction completion. 
If the subdivider fails to complete the construction in accordance with the requirements of this chapter within two years of the date of the cash deposit agreement, the cash deposit shall be forfeited and the Village shall use all or such part of such deposit as may be required to complete the project in accordance with the approved working drawings. The two-year time limit may be extended by the Village when such extension is in the public interest. In the event of such forfeiture, the subdivider shall only be entitled to the refund of that portion, if any, of the cash deposit that remains in escrow after completion of the project. 
(Code 1959, § 18.5.2D)  
Sec. 66-11. - Permit and approval required. 
No street pavement, sidewalk, sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water line shall be constructed until a permit has been obtained. No improvements shall be constructed in any area which is to be subdivided until the final plan and working drawings have been approved by the board of trustees of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 18.9.9)  
Sec. 66-12. - Disconnection of territory. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall supersede the disconnection provisions of section 7-3-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/7-3-6). 
(b)  The provisions of section 7-3-4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/7-3-6) shall be the exclusive disconnection provisions in the Village under article 7, division 3 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(Code 1959, § 18.14)  
Sec. 66-13. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 18.4.4)  
Secs. 66-14—66-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 66-41. - Organization. 
The offices concerned with administration of this chapter are as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 18.4.1)  
Sec. 66-42. - Plan commission. 
The plan commission is vested with the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Subject to the approval of the board of trustees, prepare and adopt such procedural rules and regulations as are required for the orderly and efficient conduct of its business, provided, such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with any provision of this chapter; and 
(2)  Review all preliminary and final subdivision plans and plats, making determinations and recommendations in the areas of design standards and engineering specifications, as specified and referred to in this chapter, and hold public hearings pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 18.4.1A)  
Sec. 66-43. - State department of public health. 
Plans and specifications for water supply shall be submitted to the State department of public health for approval after such plans and specifications have been approved by the plan commission. 
(Code 1959, § 18.4.1B)  
Sec. 66-44. - Metropolitan sanitary district. 
Plans and specifications for sanitary sewers shall be submitted to the metropolitan sanitary district for approval after such plans and specifications have been approved by the plan commission. 
(Code 1959, § 18.4.1C)  
Sec. 66-45. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall, in addition to its authority and powers as a home rule municipality, also exercise the authority granted by the Illinois Revised Statutes in regard to subdivision control, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Approval or disapproval of final plats and working drawings referred to the board of trustees by the plan commission. 
(2)  Approval or disapproval of all variations and exceptions recommended by the plan commission. 
(3)  Amendment of this chapter, when found necessary and desirable, as provided in this chapter. 
(4)  Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Approval or disapproval of intended dedication of land for public use. 
(6)  Vacation of a street, alley or other public place and fix compensation to the Village therefor. 
(b)  Requirements for new or existing public improvements shall extend and relate to off-site, as well as on-site, public improvements, when deemed necessary by the board of trustees to carry out the intent of this chapter, and enhance and preserve the public health, welfare and safety of the general public. 
(Code 1959, § 18.4.1D)  
Sec. 66-46. - Exceptions and waivers. 
(a)  Consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter, the plan commission may recommend, and the board of trustees may grant exceptions or waivers to this chapter, in any particular case where such action is in the public interest, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, and not inconsistent with the Village comprehensive plan, chapter 54 pertaining to site plan review, chapter 98 pertaining to zoning or other applicable codes and ordinances of the Village, provided, however, that the granting of the exception or waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or injurious to other property or improvements or to the neighborhood in which the property is located, and will not be in conflict with the objectives and requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Criteria for granting waivers of required improvements. The following criteria may be considered by the plan commission and the board of trustees in evaluating a request for waiver of the installation of required improvements listed in article V, division 1 of this chapter: 
(1)  The required improvement is not identified as a future public improvement in an adopted planning document of the Village, including, but not limited to, the Village comprehensive plan, bike and sidewalk master plan, the Milwaukee Avenue or the Waukegan Road Corridor Plan. 
(2)  The required improvement is not located within a Village right-of-way, but is in a right-of-way governed by a jurisdictional authority which does not require the improvement. 
(3)  The required sidewalk improvement does not lead to a school or park in the immediate neighborhood. 
(c)  The plan commission may recommend, and the board of trustees may grant, a waiver from the requirement to immediately install the required public improvement (temporary waiver) if any of the following circumstances apply: 
(1)  Installation of the required improvement is proposed as part of a Village project within one year from the date of final subdivision approval. 
(2)  The required improvement is identified as a future public improvement in an adopted planning document of the Village, including but not limited to the Village comprehensive plan, bike and sidewalk master plan, the Milwaukee Avenue or the Waukegan Road Corridor Plan. 
Where a temporary waiver is granted, the owner shall be required to execute an escrow agreement or a covenant agreement which: 
(1)  Shall obligate the current or future property owner to be responsible for installation of said required improvement in compliance with all Municipal Code requirements, when and if so, requested by the Village at the owner's sole expense; and 
(2)  Shall include language stating that the current or any future property owner will support a special service area created for the purpose of installing the improvements described in the covenant agreement, in which the undersigned owners shall be required to vote in favor of said special service area and shall not object to same. 
(Code 1959, § 18.4.2; Ord. No. 5372, § 2, 8-17-2010)  
Secs. 66-47—66-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLANS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 66-81—66-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY 
 
Sec. 66-101. - In general. 
(a)  A topographic and boundary survey, signed and sealed by a surveyor, shall be prepared before the preliminary plan is submitted. Such survey shall accurately show contours, at no more than one-foot intervals, and shall include the same contour information for surrounding property sufficient to establish the existing pattern of surface drainage. The survey shall be referenced to a Village datum benchmark, accurately located and described on the plan. 
(b)  The required number of copies of the completed application form and preliminary plan shall be filed with the secretary of the plan commission in accordance with the rules and procedures of the plan commission. 
(c)  The preliminary plan shall show pertinent information required by the subdivision design standards as approved by the Village Board as set forth in this Code or on file with the Village clerk, and the comprehensive plan of the Village. 
(d)  The plan commission, in the examination of the preliminary plan, will consider the requirements of the ordinances of the Village and the best use of the land proposed for subdivision. Consideration will be given to lot sizes and arrangement; width and location of streets; location of sanitary sewer and water systems as they relate to existing and future systems; locations of surface and underground stormwater drainage systems, retention basins, schools and parks, public utilities, existing easements and covenants; and other information pertinent to the property to be subdivided. The preliminary plan need not contain specifications for proposed improvements. 
(e)  The subdivider shall submit to the plan commission a preliminary plan for the entire tract; however, the subdivider may be permitted to submit a final plan for a portion of such tract and subsequently submit final plans for additional portions of the tract. The preliminary plan shall show provisions made for the satisfactory extension of storm and sanitary sewers, water systems, roadways and sidewalks. The plan commission shall request evidence from school district and park district authorities regarding future needs for schools and parks in the tract before recommending approval of a final plan or part of a tract. 
(f)  Evidence of ownership of the property, in the form of either a copy of a current guaranty policy issued by Chicago Title and Trust Company or a Torrens Certificate, shall be submitted. If the preliminary plan is filed by a person other than the owner of land to be subdivided, a letter of authorization from the owner also must be placed on file with the plan commission before the plan will be considered. 
(g)  The plan commission may require the preliminary plan to be modified and resubmitted before approval. 
(h)  Two copies of the preliminary plan shall be approved and signed by the chairman of the plan commission. If the preliminary plan is rejected, the reasons for rejection shall be stated on the plan and shall be signed by the chairman of the plan commission. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other copy shall be retained by the secretary of the plan commission. 
(i)  The plan commission shall approve or disapprove the application for preliminary approval within 90 days from the date of the application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent. 
(Code 1959, § 18.5.2A)  
Sec. 66-102. - Floodplain regulation required information and data. 
Accompanying the preliminary plans of each proposed subdivision which involves any portion of a base flood area as described by the official maps of the Village, the following information and data shall be furnished: 
(1)  Contour map. A topographic map, with two-foot interval contours, of the land to be subdivided and such adjoining land whose topography may affect the layout or drainage of the subdivision. On such a map, the following shall be shown: 
a.  The location of streams and other floodwater runoff channels, the extent of their floodplains at the established high water elevations and the limits of the floodway, all properly identified. 
b.  The normal shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps and detention basins, and the floodplains and lines of inflow and outflow thereof, if any. 
c.  The location of farm drains and the inlets and outlets thereof. 
d.  Storm, sanitary and combined sewers and any sewer outfalls. 
e.  Septic tank systems and outlets, if any. 
f.  Seeps, springs, and flowing and other wells. 
g.  Location of existing structures that will remain. 
h.  One hundred-year flood elevation and limits, including floodway data for that portion of a subdivision or development which is in the base flood area. 
(2)  Channel profiles. Profile drawings of each stream, channel, pond and basin, showing elevations of the following: 
a.  Streambed. 
b.  Channel banks, if any. 
c.  Waterway openings of existing culverts and bridges within and near the tract. 
d.  Size and elevation of sewer and drain outlets into the stream, channel or basin. 
e.  Base flood elevations established by this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 18.7.1)  
Secs. 66-103—66-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FINAL 
 
Sec. 66-121. - In general. 
(a)  The final plan to be recorded shall be prepared by a surveyor and shall conform to the requirements of record plats. Final plans shall be submitted to the plan commission for approval not more than one year after the approval of the preliminary plan, and only after the preliminary plan has been approved. If the final plan is not presented within the one-year period, the owner shall present the approved preliminary plan for review, correction and approval by the plan commission before the final plan is presented. 
(b)  The required number of copies of the final plan, the original tracing and the working drawings shall be submitted to the plan commission. 
(c)  The final plan will not be approved until the property has been staked, and field measurements agree with final plan measurements certified to on the final plan by the surveyor. 
(d)  The final plan will be approved only when working drawings acceptable to the plan commission have received approval from all agencies having jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, the metropolitan sanitary district, County or State highway departments, Environmental Protection Agency and North Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(e)  Working drawings shall be prepared under the supervision of and certified by a registered professional engineer. The working drawings shall be to an appropriate scale, legible and clear, and shall conform with the final plan and requirements for working drawings as described in section 66-232. 
(Code 1959, § 18.5.2B)  
Sec. 66-122. - Approval procedure. 
(a)  When all requirements of this chapter have been met, and the subdivider has deposited, for review of plans and specifications, a cash review fee of one percent of the estimated construction cost of required public improvements and of the estimated cost of rough and final grading as indicated in subsection (e) of this section, the secretary of the plan commission shall submit the final plan and working drawings to the Village engineer for examination. 
(b)  After review, the plan commission may refer the final plan and working drawings back to the subdivider for corrections, additions and changes. When recommended for approval, the secretary of the plan commission will deliver to the board of trustees the subdivider's application, documents and plans, signed by the chairman of the plan commission and Village engineer. When the subdivider has supplied all drawings, maps and other documents required by this chapter, and if all such material meets all of the requirements of this chapter, the corporate authorities shall approve the proposed plat within 60 days from the date of filing the last required document or other papers or within 60 days from the date of filing the first plat, whichever date is later. The subdivider and the corporate authorities may mutually agree to extend the 60-day period. 
(c)  After approval of the board of trustees, the secretary of the plan commission shall cause the final plan to be recorded in the recorder's office of the County; however, in the case of a subdivision in the jurisdictional area, the final plan will be transmitted to the plat officer of the County. 
(d)  If the plan commission recommends disapproval of a subdivision plat or working drawings, the subdivider, within 60 days after recommendation for disapproval, may request the board of trustees, in writing, to review the action of the plan commission. The board of trustees may uphold or reverse the recommendations of the plan commission or it may refer the request back to the plan commission for review. 
(e)  A performance bond, approved by the Village manager, shall be posted only in cash, sufficient to cover estimated construction expenditures of required public improvements and the estimated cost of rough and final grading in accordance with plans submitted to and approved by the Village engineer. The basis for calculating such performance bond shall be as follows: 
(1)  Public improvements. If a contract exists, the amount shall be 100 percent of the contract and ten percent for contingencies. In absence of a contract, the estimate of the subdivider's engineer shall be used, which shall include ten percent for contingencies. 
(2)  Rough and final grading. 
a.  A minimum amount of $500.00 for each 10,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, up to a maximum of $10,000.00 for any one subdivision, to cover the cost of rough and final grading in accordance with plans submitted to and approved by the Village engineer, except that in the case of one lot subdivisions where such subdivisions are surrounded by improved lots or properties and, in the opinion of the plan commission, no useful purpose would be served in the imposition of this requirement, the provisions of all or part of this subsection (e) may be waived. In addition to such amounts, the following percentage of estimated construction, including the amount posted for rough and final grading, to cover the cost of inspection services shall be included: 
1.  All sanitary sewer construction, shall be as provided in section 30-1. 
2.  All other construction costs up to $500,000.00, shall be as provided in Chapter 30-1.3. All other construction costs above $500,000.00, shall be as provided in Chapter 30-1. 
(f)  All public improvement plans, costs and estimates shall be checked and approved by the Village engineer, and all improvements shall be inspected by the Village engineer during and after completion of all construction. The subdivider's engineer, with the approval of the Village engineer, may make alterations and corrections, where required, to conform to existing field conditions. Changes from original plans shall only be approved when accompanied by an adjustment in the cash deposit. Changes, where made, shall be shown on the original working drawings as revisions, and noted "as-built," and signed and sealed by the subdivider's engineer. Before the completed improvements are accepted by the board of trustees, the subdivider shall file one copy of as-built working drawings, together with a duly executed bill of sale, in satisfactory form, granting, transferring and conveying to the Village, with a proper warranty free of any claims or encumbrances, good title to all public improvements, including utilities, street signs and street trees installed by or on behalf of the subdivider in such subdivisions. 
(g)  Payments from the cash escrow account shall be made periodically, upon the certification of the subdivider's engineer, to the contractor constructing the improvement. Upon final payment to the contractor, any remaining balance shall be refunded to the subdivider. 
(Code 1959, § 18.5.2C; Ord. No. 5159, § 2, 11-18-2008)  
Sec. 66-123. - Specifications. 
The final plan to be recorded should be clearly and legibly drawn upon tracing cloth, in black India ink. The final plan and accompanying application for approval shall contain the graphic and descriptive items enumerated in this division. The lack of information under any item specified in this article, or improper information supplied by the applicant, may be cited by the plan commission as cause for disapproval of a final plan. 
(Code 1959, § 18.8.1)  
Sec. 66-124. - Scale. 
The final plan of the subdivision which is to be recorded shall be accurately drawn to an engineering scale approved by the plan commission as being large enough to clearly show the necessary details, and shall include the items set forth in sections 66-125 and 66-126. 
(Code 1959, § 18.8.2A)  
Sec. 66-125. - Title. 
The title shall be neatly and conspicuously drafted, in the lower righthand corner of the sheet, when possible, and shall include the following information, as applicable in each case, in the following order: 
(1)  A list of all blocks, lots, parcels, etc., on the plat. 
(2)  Approved name of the subdivision, and section thereof. 
(3)  Scale and north point of the drawing, and date of completion. 
(4)  Name of the land surveyor who prepared the final plan for record. 
(Code 1959, § 18.8.2B)  
Sec. 66-126. - Required data. 
All boundaries, street lines and lot lines, plus any other lines pertinent to the plan, shall be neatly and clearly shown, together with sufficient data, accurately calculated, so that each line and property corner may be located and reproduced upon the ground. The plan shall show the following items, as applicable in each case: 
(1)  All property boundary lines necessary to identify the subdivision, with the conveyance, or part thereof, by which the owner acquired the property. Where a subdivision includes all or parts of two or more conveyances, the boundaries of such separate deed descriptions shall be indicated by light lines running through the subdivision, together with deed reference to each original tract or parcel. 
(2)  Exact locations, widths and names of all streets within the subdivision, and widths of alleys and walk easements, if any. 
(3)  All easements established or rights-of-way provided for public services or utilities in the subdivision, and any limitations on such easements. 
(4)  Accurate outlines of any areas to be reserved for common use by residents of the subdivision, or dedicated for general public use, or proposed to be acquired by a public body, with the purposes indicated thereon. 
(5)  Accurate bearings and lengths of all blocks and lot lines, together with the length of radii, arcs, tangents and chords, with chord bearings and central angles for all curves in the layout. A curve table containing such data and references to the curves shown on the drawing is required. 
(6)  Accurate location of all monuments, as required by law. 
(7)  Lots, numbered in numerical order. In tracts containing more than one block, the blocks shall be lettered in alphabetical order. If there is a resubdivision of lots in any block, such resubdivided lots shall be numbered consecutively, beginning with the number following the highest lot number in the original block subdivision and the original lot lines shall be dashed and the original lot numbers shall be dotted. 
(8)  Areas of each lot or parcel, shown on a copy of the plat. 
(9)  Front building lines, shown graphically with dimensions, and any other building restriction lines which may apply in a particular case. 
(10)  Tie connections as needed between the adjacent blocks and other subdivisions. 
(11)  Names and locations of adjoining subdivisions, with lot and block numbers immediately adjoining, together with plat references. 
(12)  Location of adjoining unsubdivided property. 
(13)  Key map, showing the location of the subdivision. In case of a large subdivision requiring multiple plats, the key map shall show the location of previously recorded plats within the subdivision, by section number. 
(14)  Surveyor's verification that field and plat measurements are not in conflict. 
(15)  The following signatures and stamps or seals, affixed to the tracing: 
a.  Surveyor's certificate and seal, indicating that plan and field measurements are in agreement. 
b.  Surveyor's certificate and seal regarding the distance from a watercourse serving 640 acres or more. 
c.  Owner, trustee or sponsor. 
d.  Notary. 
e.  County tax seal. 
f.  Recorder of deeds. 
g.  Chairman of the plan commission. 
h.  Village collector. 
i.  Village clerk. 
j.  Village president. 
(Code 1959, § 18.8.2C)  
Secs. 66-127—66-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 66-161. - Conformance. 
The subdivision design shall conform to criteria set forth in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(intro. ¶))  
Sec. 66-162. - Street arrangement, extent, width grade and location. 
The arrangement, extent, width, grade and location of streets shall conform to the official plan of the Village, as amended, and shall relate to existing and proposed streets, topography, public convenience and safety, and the appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(1)) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62.  
Sec. 66-163. - Street plan. 
(a)  Streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the subdivision, and connected to existing streets in adjoining subdivisions, or to points where it is proposed to extend the street at a later date. 
(b)  Nonconnecting streets shall end in a cul-de-sac with a maximum length of 500 feet and a minimum turnaround radius as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residential districts. Fifty-five feet, with an inner pavement radius of 23 feet, an outer pavement radius of 49 feet and a pavement width of 26 feet. 
(2)  Multiple-family residential districts. Sixty feet, with an inner pavement radius of 15 feet, an outer pavement radius of 51 feet and a pavement width of 36 feet. 
(3)  Business and industrial districts. Sixty-six feet, with an inner pavement radius of 15 feet, an outer pavement radius of 57 feet and a pavement width of 42 feet. 
(c)  For subdivisions bordering on railroads, a street parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall be laid out so that the intersection of its centerline with the centerline of a street which crosses the railroad shall not be less than 150 from the nearest railroad right-of-way line. 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(2)) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62.  
Sec. 66-164. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Provisions formerly found in § 66-164 have been moved and incorporated into § 34-312. Former § 66-164 pertained to street names and signs and derived from Code 1959, §§ 18.6.1A(3).  
Sec. 66-165. - Right-of-way dedication. 
Each lot in any subdivision shall front upon a public street. Where no such street right-of-way exists or where an existing right-of-way does not conform to the width required by this section, the subdivider shall dedicate right of way in accordance with the following table except for cul-de-sacs which shall be designed in accordance with section 66-163(b): 
Right-of-Way Location 	Required 
Dedication 
Village of Glenview rights-of-way, except as otherwise specified in this section. 	30.0 feet from the centerline. 
Jurisdictional rights-of-way, except as otherwise specified in this section. 	33.0 feet from the centerline. 
Property fronting upon: 
• Wagner Road north of Glenview Road 
• Washington Street south of Central Road 	40.0 feet from the centerline. 
Property fronting upon: 
• Central Road west of Harlem Avenue 
• Chestnut Avenue 
• Dearlove Road 
• East Lake Avenue 
• Glenview Road 
• Golf Road 
• Greenwood Avenue 
• Harlem Avenue 
• Harms Road 
• Landwehr Road 
• Lehigh Avenue 
• Milwaukee Avenue 
• Pfingsten Road north of East Lake Avenue 
• Sanders Road 
• Shermer Avenue 
• Sunset Ridge Road 
• Waukegan Road 
• West Lake Avenue west of Patriot Boulevard 
• Willow Road 
• Willow Road 
• Winnetka Road 	50.0 feet from the centerline. 
 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(4); Ord. No. 4542, §§ 2,3, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 5773, § 2, 3-4-2014)  
Sec. 66-166. - Marginal access streets. 
Where a residential or neighborhood business area abuts a major street, the plan commission may require marginal access streets, or double frontage lots with screen planting or screen fencing. 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(5))  
Sec. 66-167. - Private streets. 
Private streets shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(7))  
Sec. 66-168. - Half streets. 
Half streets shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(7))  
Sec. 66-169. - Alleys. 
Alleys shall only be provided in commercial, multiple-family and industrial districts for service access, off-street loading and unloading, and access to parking. The minimum width of the alley shall be 20 feet. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the end. 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(8))  
Sec. 66-170. - Easements. 
Easements not less than six feet wide in the Village and ten feet wide within the jurisdictional area shall be provided on all lots for any or all public utilities, and sewer and water lines. The easements shall be laid out to provide proper continuity for such utilities or surface water flow from block to block. If lands are dedicated or easements given for private use, the plat shall designate the beneficiaries of such use and the nature thereof. Pedestrian easements shall have a minimum width of ten feet and have a concrete sidewalk installed in compliance with the requirements of the Village specification standards for public improvements. 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(9))  
Sec. 66-171. - Blocks. 
Maximum residential block length shall be 1,320 feet. Blocks in commercial and industrial areas shall bear a reasonable relation to the use of the land as determined by the plan commission. 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(10))  
Sec. 66-172. - Lots. 
(a)  All lot lines shall be shown on the plat. All lots and blocks shall be numbered. Lots shall be designed so that the side lines of all lots are approximately perpendicular to the street line. No lot shall be platted with frontage on two parallel or converging streets, except corner lots, which shall be platted so required side yard provisions of chapter 98, zoning, may be observed. 
(b)  All lots shall have frontage on a public street, or private street if such private street is approved as a waiver to this chapter, and be oriented so as to be provided frontage on such street. The creation of lots oriented in a front to rear, front to side or rear to rear pattern (generally described as a flag lot or a lot with no street frontage) shall be prohibited. Lots which shall have access to a street solely across another property or through any portion of such property by means of an easement shall also be prohibited. However, the formal subdivision of parcels configured in the patterns otherwise prohibited by the requirements of this subsection shall be permitted if the ownership of such parcel has been held separately by another unrelated person or entity from that of any adjoining parcel at all times since the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(c)  Double frontage lots may be permitted where one such frontage would be on a major street or County thoroughfare. In such a development, access to the double frontage lot shall be by an interior street and shall not be permitted from the major thoroughfare. The subdivider of such a lot shall provide screening or fencing to prevent automobile access to the lot from the major thoroughfare. The screening or fencing shall consist of a fence of one color or a densely planted compact hedge, not less than four feet in height. 
(d)  All lots shall be rough and final graded to provide side lot line and rear lot line surface drainage with detrimental effect to property proposed for subdivision or property adjacent thereto. It shall be the subdivider's responsibility to establish and conform to such grades as shown and approved on the working drawings. 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(11))  
Sec. 66-173. - Lot areas. 
(a)  The plan commission will not consider a plat of a subdivision unless the lot areas conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which the development is located and to the area requirements of this section. 
(b)  The subdivider shall show the area of all lots in the development in square feet on one print of the final plat. Any existing building in the subdivision shall be shown on one copy of the plat, dimensioned as to size and location from lot lines and certified as to accuracy by a surveyor. 
(c)  Lots on curved streets of a radius of 200 or less shall have a minimum width at the street line of 40 feet. Lot areas, widths and frontages within the Village shall conform to chapter 98, zoning, as well as to the provisions of this section. Lot areas, widths and frontages in the jurisdictional area shall conform to the minimum requirements of the County zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Subdivisions in a multiple-family district shall have lots with a minimum area of 6,250 square feet and a maximum area of two acres. Each lot must abut a public right-of-way. 
(e)  Subdivisions in an industrial district shall have a minimum lot area of one acre and each lot shall abut a public right-of-way. 
(f)  Subdivisions in a commercial district shall have lots with a minimum width of 60 feet and a minimum depth of 100 feet. 
(Code 1959, § 18.6.1A(12))  
Secs. 66-174—66-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FLOODPLAINS 
 
Sec. 66-191. - In general. 
(a)  The rules set forth in this division shall govern the design of land improvements with respect to floods. 
(b)  All proposed subdivision and other developments within the base flood area shall be reviewed to assure that: 
(1)  The proposed developments are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided. 
(Code 1959, § 18.7.2(intro. ¶, (a))  
Sec. 66-192. - Location and layout of streets, blocks, depths of lots, parks and other public grounds. 
Streets, blocks, depths of lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams, channels and detention basins. Wherever possible, the larger streams and floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds. 
(Code 1959, § 18.7.2(b)) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62.  
Sec. 66-193. - Streets. 
Streets shall be designed so that the elevation of the finished surface at any point on the centerline of any new street constructed within a floodplain shall not be less than the flood base elevation for such floodplain. 
(Code 1959, § 18.7.2(c)) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62.  
Sec. 66-194. - Utilities. 
Underground utilities, such as stormwater sewers, sanitary sewers and water mains, shall be constructed in solid, compacted earth and located so as to minimize damage from a potential flood in the floodplain. The design and construction of such utilities are subject to the approval of the Village engineer in accordance with sound engineering practice. Sanitary manholes constructed within floodplain areas shall have rim elevations 12 inches above the flood base elevation or must be provided with watertight, lock-type covers. 
(Code 1959, § 18.7.2(d)) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82.  
Sec. 66-195. - Channel straightening. 
Sharply meandering streams or channels may be partially straightened and minor changes made in other channels, subject to the approval of the plan commission, provided that: 
(1)  The hydraulic capacity of the floodway is maintained; 
(2)  The volume of floodwater storage outside the floodway is not reduced; 
(3)  Provision is made to stabilize the banks of the modified channel to control erosion; and 
(4)  Any additional permits for the work that are required by the State department of transportation and the Corps of Engineers are obtained. 
(Code 1959, § 18.7.2(e))  
Sec. 66-196. - Lots in base flood area. 
Land lying wholly or partially in the base flood area may be laid out and platted as building lots or parcels, provided, a building site not lower than the base flood elevation, plus one foot: 
(1)  Exists on the high part of the lot or parcel; 
(2)  Will be built up during execution of the subdivision improvement plan through general excavation or filling; or 
(3)  Can be provided with excavation taken from within the area of the lot or parcel. 
(Code 1959, § 18.7.2(f))  
Sec. 66-197. - Compensatory filling. 
Such filling as may be required or permitted by this chapter for a building site or as may otherwise be done in a floodplain shall be compensated for and balanced by at least an equal volume of excavation taken from below the high water elevation. In the case of streams and channels, such excavation shall be made opposite or immediately adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied and shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. 
(Code 1959, § 18.7.2(g))  
Sec. 66-198. - Drainageways. 
Whenever the plans call for the passage and/or storage of surface runoff or excess stormwater on lots, the grading of all such lots shall be prescribed and established as part of the subdivision plat. The areas designated for the passage and/or storage of such waters shall not be obstructed. The limits of the high water levels resulting from the passage and/or storage of surface runoff or excess stormwater on lots shall be recorded on the plat of record and shall be covered by an easement. 
(Code 1959, § 18.7.2(h))  
Secs. 66-199—66-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 66-231. - Water supply and sanitary sewer systems located in the floodplain. 
The design of water supply and sanitary sewer systems to be located in the floodplain shall minimize or eliminate the discharges from the system into the floodwaters and infiltration of floodwaters into the system. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during or subsequent to flooding. 
(Code 1959, § 18.7.3) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82.  
Sec. 66-232. - Working drawings. 
The working drawing submission, conforming to specification standards adopted by the board of trustees in the Village engineering standards, shall include the items listed and described in sections 66-233—66-239. 
(Code 1959, § 18.9.14735, § 2, 1-4-2005)  
Sec. 66-233. - Sanitary sewer system. 
(a)  A sanitary sewer system shall be constructed throughout the entire subdivision in a manner to provide each lot with a separate connection and extended to the ends of platted streets, alleys or utility easements that contain sanitary sewers. All plans must be approved and a permit issued by the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Chicago after approval of the plans by the plan commission. 
(b)  Working drawings shall show surface and flow line grades of all new sewer lines, and an invert grade and size of the line to which connection is to be made. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer plans will not be approved unless it is shown that the existing sewer system has the capacity to meet the demands of the proposed increased flow to a point of discharge into a metropolitan sanitary district interceptor and it is sized and graded to serve areas beyond the subdivision that could be served by extension of the proposed system. A lift station must be provided by the subdivider if minimum flow velocity in the new sewer cannot be maintained. 
(d)  A stormwater sewer system shall be constructed for each development which is separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system. The specifics of the design of the stormwater sewer system are to be in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Village engineering standards. 
(e)  Drainage ditches used as an integral part of a development's stormwater conveyance system shall not be permitted in any subdivision. 
(f)  A stormwater retention basin, which has been sized in accordance with the metropolitan sanitary district (MSD) design requirements for stormwater retention, must be provided for all developments, redevelopments or improvements to existing facilities, regardless of the development's acreage. The metropolitan sanitary district design requirements are to be modified by specific basin design criteria as set forth in the Village engineering standards. 
(g)  Working drawings shall show final grades, including rear and side yard grades, designed to facilitate the flow of surface water toward a collector without detrimental effect to property proposed for subdivision or property adjacent thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 18.9.2; Ord. No. 4735, § 3, 1-4-2005) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82.  
Sec. 66-234. - Water distribution system. 
A water distribution system shall be constructed throughout the subdivision in such a manner as to provide each lot with a separate connection. Water mains shall extend to the extremities of streets, alleys or easements which are served by water mains. The system shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the requirements of the State department of public health and its regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 18.9.3)  
Sec. 66-235. - Street paving. 
(a)  Generally. All street paving, including concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks, shall be constructed throughout the subdivision. All public sidewalks shall be located on public rights-of-way not more than one foot from the abutting property line. Paved vehicular surfaces in streets may be bituminous or concrete. Curbs, alley surfaces and sidewalks shall be concrete. 
(b)  New paving. If a portion of a street in any block or an adjoining area is already improved with a type of paving superior to or of greater width than the minimum standards adopted by the board of trustees, the new paving shall be constructed in the same manner and to the same width as the portions already improved. 
(c)  Widths. 
(1)  Paving in residential streets shall have a minimum width of 26 feet. 
(2)  Paving in the multifamily districts shall have a paving width of not less than 42 feet. 
(3)  Paving in business or industrial districts shall have a paving width of not less than 42 feet. 
(d)  Concrete walks. Concrete walks shall have a width of five feet. 
(e)  Plans. Plans for all paving shall be shown on a separate sheet, with elevations indicated for the tops of the curb. The plans shall show the proposed top of foundation elevations of all main buildings. 
(f)  Alleys. When alleys are approved, they shall have a paving width of 18 feet. 
(g)  Driveways. 
(1)  Driveways shall be permitted to be constructed in accordance with specifications adopted by the development department. The maximum allowable width of a driveway shall be as follows: 
a.  Commercial. Forty-one feet at the curb line. 
b.  Residential. Thirty feet at the curb line. 
(2)  If the driveway is constructed with impermeable materials, the area of the driveway shall be included in any lot coverage calculations which are required by code. 
(3)  In single-family residential zoning districts, one driveway curb cut per lot shall be permitted; provided, however, that a second curb cut may be permitted under the following circumstances: 
a.  A minimum of a 75-foot lot line. 
b.  A minimum setback of 45 feet for the principal structure on the lot. 
c.  No second curb cut may be located within 20 feet of an intersection. 
(4)  Where a property owner requests a second curb cut, but does not meet the criteria listed in subsection (f)(3) of this section, a written appeal shall be filed with the plan commission. Within 30 days of the filing of such an appeal, the plan commission shall consider the request and may, with the concurring vote of four members, approve the request for a second curb cut. In so doing, the plan commission shall consider the impact of the proposed additional driveway on the impermeable surface area of the lot, the availability of off-site parking on the street, the proximity of other driveways on the street, the hardship, if any, necessitating the request for the driveway and other applicable safety factors or special circumstances. 
(5)  Where the plan commission denies the request for a second curb cut, the decision may be appealed to the board of trustees. 
(Code 1959, § 18.9.4) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62.  
Sec. 66-236. - Planting trees. 
(a)  Trees are required to be planted in the public parkways. Each subdivider shall deposit, in cash, only an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost of planting trees in the public parkways. 
(b)  A minimum of one tree per lot shall be planted in the parkway strips along both sides of all streets where a public parkway exists. Trees shall be planted not less than 30 feet apart, but not in excess of 60 feet apart. Trees shall be indicated on construction drawings by an appropriate note. 
(c)  The Director of Public Works shall annually establish a tree planting cost, which shall include a ten percent surcharge over the actual tree price for overhead costs. The actual tree price shall be calculated based on the anticipated cost in the year the trees are expected to be planted. The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for determining the species to be planted, the size and diameter of the trees and the spacing of the trees. The acquisition and planting of the trees shall be the responsibility of the public works department, and shall be paid by the cash deposit of the subdivider and shall occur within one year from the date on which a certificate of occupancy is issued. Funds in excess of the tree planting cost shall be returned to the subdivider following the planting of the trees. 
(d)  Application of this section may be waived by the Director of Public Works upon a showing by the subdivider that he plans to plant parkway trees which exceed the quality and number of trees which would be planted by the public works department. 
(Code 1959, § 18.9.5; Ord. No. 5883, § 2, 1-6-2015) 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 86.  
Sec. 66-237. - Profiles. 
Profiles shall be clearly drawn for all sewer lines, water lines and paving, and pertinent elevations from such profiles shall be shown on the respective plans. 
(Code 1959, § 18.9.6)  
Sec. 66-238. - Specifications. 
Specifications for all work shall be the specifications adopted by the board of trustees. 
(Code 1959, § 18.9.7)  
Sec. 66-239. - Electric service and telephone lines. 
Electric service and telephone lines shall be provided in all subdivisions. The subdivider shall provide for proper easements for such services and shall obtain approval, in writing, from the proper authorities. Where feasible, electric and telephone utilities shall be constructed belowground. 
(Code 1959, § 18.9.8)  
Secs. 66-240—66-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5158, adopted on Nov. 18, 2008 repealed division 2, §§ 66-261—66-272 in its entirety. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 66-273—66-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PARKS AND SCHOOLS 
 
Sec. 66-291. - Land dedication required. 
(a)  Condition of approval of a final plat of a subdivision or final plat of a planned development. As a condition of approval of a final plat of a subdivision of one or more lots or a final plat of a planned development or any other subdivision development of one or more lots or units, intended to be used entirely or in part for residential purposes, the applicant, as subdivider and/or developer thereof, shall be required to dedicate land for park and recreational purposes and land for school sites to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, or to provide payment of a cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication, or to provide a combination of both land and cash contributions, at the option of the Village Board of trustees in accordance with the criteria of this division. 
(b)  Timing. The actual dedication of lands for park and/or school purposes shall be made by the applicant as subdivider and/or developer to the Village upon final subdivision plat approval and recordation via a title transfer to the appropriate bodies and prior to any construction permit application or permit approvals for such subdivision in accordance with sections 66-303 and 66-304. In no case shall an occupancy permit be issued by the Village for the affected subdivision unless and until the land dedication is made. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.1; Ord. No. 4364, § 2, 2-5-2002) 
_____ 
Sec. 66-292. - Density formula. 
(a)  Population generation formula table. The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for park and school dedication and/or cash contributions in lieu thereof. The table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit, as set forth in the following table, shall be used as provided in this section to calculate the amount of required dedication of land acreage for park and recreational, and school site purposes and/or for cash contributions in lieu thereof, unless a written objection thereto is filed by the applicant with the Village manager or his designate pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. 
Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit 
Children Per Dwelling Unit 
Type of Unit 	Preschool 
0—4 Years 	Elementary 
Grades K—5 
5—10 Years 	Junior High 
Grades 6—8 
11-13 Years 	Total 
Grades K—8 
5—13 Years 	High School 
Grades 9—12 
14—17 Years 	Adults 
18 + Years 	Total Per Unit 
Single-Family Detached Dwellings 
2-bedroom 	0.113 	0.136 	0.048 	0.184 	0.020 	1.700 	2.017 
3-bedroom 	0.292 	0.369 	0.173 	0.542 	0.184 	1.881 	2.899 
4-bedroom 	0.418 	0.530 	0.298 	0.828 	0.360 	2.158 	3.764 
5-bedroom or more 	0.283 	0.345 	0.248 	0.593 	0.300 	2.594 	3.770 
Single-Family Attached Dwellings (i.e., townhouse dwellings and two-family dwellings) 
1-bedroom 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	1.193 	1.193 
2-bedroom 	0.064 	0.088 	0.048 	0.136 	0.038 	1.752 	1.990 
3-bedroom 	0.212 	0.234 	0.058 	0.292 	0.059 	1.829 	2.392 
4-bedroom or more 	0.323 	0.322 	0.154 	0.476 	0.173 	2.173 	3.145 
Multiple-Family Dwellings and Community Residences 
Efficiency 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	0.000 	1.294 	1.294 
1-bedroom 	0.000 	0.002 	0.001 	0.003 	0.001 	1.754 	1.758 
2-bedroom 	0.047 	0.086 	0.042 	0.128 	0.046 	1.693 	1.914 
3-bedroom or more 	0.052 	0.234 	0.123 	0.357 	0.118 	2.526 	3.053 
 
Source: Illinois School Consulting Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc., Copy, 1996 
Note: The determination of the number of bedrooms contained in a building shall be made by the Village manager. Rooms designated by an applicant as a den, library, study, sewing room, exercise room, etc., may be designated by the Village manager as bedrooms if they are suitable for such accommodations. 
_____
(b)  Provision of site data. The applicant shall provide consistent data on the number of residential units and bedrooms for the proposed subdivision during the final subdivision approval and permit application process. The applicant shall also submit as part of the subdivision application process, population projections, together with the resulting calculations for land dedication and/or cash contributions for the proposed subdivision. 
(c)  Objections. If the applicant files a written objection with the Village manager or his designate to the use of the population density formula in the table set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the applicant shall submit, at the applicant's sole expense, a comprehensive demographic study showing the estimated population to be generated by the proposed subdivision to the Village manager or his designate. The board of trustees shall make the final determination as to the density formula and estimated population that shall apply to the proposed subdivision. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.2)  
Sec. 66-293. - Park and recreational site land dedication requirements. 
(a)  Calculation of amount. The amount of land required to be dedicated for park and recreational purposes for a proposed subdivision shall be a direct function of the ultimate population density of the subdivision. The requirement shall be based on a standard of five acres of land per 1,000 ultimate population, computed in accordance with section 66-292. 
(b)  Location. The location of land to be dedicated for park and recreational purposes for the proposed subdivision shall be determined by the board of trustees, in cooperation with the Village park district board, and shall be located within the Village corporate limits. The Village comprehensive plan and the park district comprehensive plan shall both be used as guidelines for locating the park sites, the acreage of the park sites, as well as the type or classification of the park. Additional factors utilized to determine the suitability of park locations shall include, but not be limited to, the: 
(1)  Availability of land; 
(2)  Suitability of the land for park and recreational purposes; 
(3)  Location of the land relative to population concentrations; and 
(4)  Proximity of the land to other parks and recreational land. 
(c)  Minimum size. The minimum size of any land to be dedicated for park and recreational purposes shall be two acres (87,120 square feet), and no dimension shall be less than 100 feet; provided, however, that the board of trustees may approve dedications of a smaller size or dimension when required by the specific plans of the proposed subdivision and when the usefulness of the smaller area for park and recreational purposes is clearly demonstrated. 
(d)  Stormwater detention and retention areas. No stormwater detention or retention area shall qualify as land suitable for dedication for park and recreational purposes, unless the suitability of such land for park and recreational purposes as a secondary use is clearly demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board of trustees and the Village park district board. 
(e)  Private open space and recreational area credit. 
(1)  When applicants, as subdividers or developers, provide their own open space for recreation areas and facilities, it may have the effect of reducing the demand for local public recreational services. 
(2)  Depending on the size of the development, a portion of the park and recreation area in subdivisions or planned unit developments may, at the option of the Village Board, be provided in the form of private open space in lieu of dedicated public open space. The extent thereof shall be determined by the Village Board, based upon the needs of the projected residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land for the general area. 
(3)  In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation of recreational facilities, including equipment, by the developer as part of his obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the Village, and, before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or developer must guarantee that the private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal documents. Private swimming clubs are included in this provision. When an adjustment for private recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total park land dedication that would have been required from the subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the credit to be given. 
(Code 1959, § 18.3.3)  
Sec. 66-294. - School site land dedication. 
(a)  Calculation of amount. 
(1)  The amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites for a proposed subdivision shall be a direct function of the ultimate number of students to be generated by the subdivision. The school site land dedication requirement shall be determined in accordance with the following equation: 
The number of children from the proposed subdivision to be served in each school classification (computed in accordance with the table set forth in section 66-292. 
Divided by: 
The maximum number of students to be served in each such school classification (as stated in subsection (b) of this section) 
Multiplied by: 
The minimum number of acres for each school site for each such school classification (as stated in subsection (b) of this section) 
(2)  The product of such calculation shall be the minimum acreage of land necessary for school sites to serve the children in the proposed subdivision. 
_____
(b)  School classifications and required minimum size. School classifications and the required minimum size of new school sites within the Village shall be determined in accordance with the following criteria: 
School Classification by Grades 	Maximum Number of Students For Each School Classification 	Minimum Number of Acres of Land Per Site For Each Classification 
Elementary schools 
Grades K—6 	  600 	11 
Junior high schools 
Grades 7—8 	  900 	29 
High schools 
Grades 9—12 	2,300 	55 
 
(c)  Location. The location of each school site shall be determined by the board of trustees, in cooperation with the affected school district board, and shall be located within the Village corporate limits. The Village comprehensive plan and the standards adopted by the affected school district shall be used as guidelines in locating school sites. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.4) 
_____ 
Sec. 66-295. - Cash contribution in lieu of park and school land dedication. 
(a)  General qualification. If a proposed subdivision is small and the resulting required land dedication is too small, in the determination of the board of trustees, or when the board of trustees finds that the available land is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes or for a school site, then the Village shall have the authority to require the applicant to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the otherwise required land dedications, in accordance with the standards of this section. 
(b)  Fair market value determination. The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the proposed subdivision, as determined by the board of trustees based on the value of improved land in and surrounding the Village. The fair market value figure shall be set forth in the Village's annual fee ordinance and shall be used in making any calculation required by this section, unless the applicant or other affected party files an objection pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. The Village manager or his designate shall periodically, but no less frequently than annually, survey surrounding communities, conduct discussions with the applicable township assessor's office, affected school districts and other interested parties, and shall report findings of such surveys and communications to the board of trustees with respect to the continued adequacy and reasonableness of the Village's determination of fair market value as set forth in the annual fee ordinance. 
(c)  Improved land. For the purposes of this section, the term "improved land" means a parcel or lot which has prepared for development by grading, draining or installing public utilities or improvements, such as a sanitary sewer, drainage conveyance system, stormwater detention/retention or compensatory storage area, water main, street, parkway, parkway trees, sidewalk or other facility. Such improvements may be on-site or off-site. 
(d)  Objection to fair market value determination. If the applicant or any other affected person files a written objection with the Village manager or his designate to the fair market value as established pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, and as set forth in the annual fee ordinance, the applicant or other affected person shall submit, at their sole cost and expense, a certified appraisal, professionally prepared by a member of the Appraisal Institute of America (MAI). The appraisal shall show the fair market value of improved land in the area of the proposed subdivision. Upon receipt of such objection, the Village manager or his designate shall cause the objection to be delivered to the Village park district and/or the applicable school district, and the affected district shall have the right, but not the obligation, within 30 days after receipt of the objection by the Village manager or his designate, to make a recommendation regarding the disposition of such objection. The board of trustees shall make the final determination as to the fair market value of such improved land, which final determination shall be based on the appraisal or other information submitted by the applicant, the recommendations, if any, received from the Village park district and the applicable school district, and all other facts and circumstances relevant to the issue as determined and required by the board of trustees. All costs incurred by the Village in the consideration of the objection to the fair market value determination shall be paid by the applicant prior to the issuance of the first building permit of the subdivision. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as limiting or preventing the board of trustees from utilizing the fair market value as established in subsection (b) of this section for any proposed subdivision. 
(e)  Disposition. 
(1)  Cash contributions to benefit parks and schools in lieu of land dedication shall be made to the appropriate school district and/or the Village park district by the applicant at the time of the permit application for residential construction. In no case shall any occupancy permits be issued for the affected subdivision/planned development plat unless or until the cash contribution is made and proof thereof is provided to the Village. 
(2)  Cash contributions in lieu of park land dedication shall be used by the Village park district solely for use in the acquisition, expansion or development of park and recreational land and facilities in the Village park district neighborhood, community or urban parks, to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of the proposed subdivision, and shall not be used for general capital improvements to such district. 
(3)  Cash contributions in lieu of school site land dedications shall be used by the applicable school district solely for use in the acquisition of land for a school site to serve the immediate or future needs of students from the proposed subdivision or the improvement or expansion to any existing school site already serving such needs and shall not be used for general capital improvements to such district. 
(f)  Refunds. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of a park land dedication or a cash contribution in lieu of a school site land dedication, as the case may be, is not expended for the purposes set forth in this section within ten years after the date of receipt of such contribution by the appropriate school or park district, then the cash contribution shall be refunded to the applicant who made such contribution, or the applicant's successor or assign. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.5)  
Sec. 66-296. - Combination of land dedication and cash contribution in lieu of land dedication. 
A combination of land dedication and cash contribution in lieu of land dedication may be required, when appropriate, as determined by the board of trustees, including, without limitation, when: 
(1)  Inadequate land. The proposed subdivision has some, but not enough, adequate land to meet the dedication requirements of this division. The portion of the land within the proposed subdivision that is adequate for park land or a school site shall be dedicated as provided in this division, and a cash contribution shall be required for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to this division. 
(2)  Previous acquisition. A major part of the local park or recreational site, or school site already has been acquired and only a small parcel of land is needed from the proposed subdivision to complete the site. Such parcel shall be acquired by dedication, and a cash contribution shall be required for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.6)  
Sec. 66-297. - Reservation of additional land. 
When the Village comprehensive plan or other applicable standard of the Village requires a larger amount of park and recreational land or a larger school site in a particular subdivision than the applicant is otherwise required to dedicate pursuant to the terms of this division, the land needed in excess of the otherwise required dedication shall then be reserved by the applicant for subsequent purchase by the Village or applicable other public body, provided that such acquisition is started within one year after the date of approval of the final plat for the proposed subdivision. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.7)  
Sec. 66-298. - Combining with adjoining subdivisions. 
For proposed subdivisions of 40 acres or less, the otherwise applicable park and recreational land dedication or school site land dedication may be combined, where practical, as determined by the board of trustees, with dedications for the same purposes from adjoining subdivisions or developments to produce usable parks or recreational areas, or school sites. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.8)  
Sec. 66-299. - Topography and grading. 
The slope, topography and geology of a site to be dedicated pursuant to the requirements of this division, as well as its surroundings, shall be suitable for the intended purpose of the site. Grading on dedicated land shall not differ greatly from surrounding land. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.9)  
Sec. 66-300. - Improved sites. 
All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of electrical, telecommunications, gas, water, sewer and streets, including curb and gutter, and enclosed drainage, as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provisions shall be made therefor. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.10)  
Sec. 66-301. - Condition of annexation. 
Unless waived by the board of trustees, in its sole and absolute discretion, the dedication of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof, required by this division, also shall be required as a condition of the annexation of any land to the Village for residential purposes. However, such dedications or payments shall not be required as a condition of an amendment to an annexation agreement unless the board of trustees finds, from a consideration of the purposes of this division, that such dedications or payments should be required because of increased burdens to be placed on schools and the park system over and above those covered by the dedications and cash contributions made or provided for in connection with the original annexation agreement. If the board of trustees makes such finding, then additional dedications or cash contributions shall be required, but only to the extent necessary to cover the shortage resulting from such increased burdens. Dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof as specified in any annexation agreement that substantially complies with the requirements of this division shall be deemed to have fulfilled the dedication requirements of this division. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.11)  
Sec. 66-302. - Dedication as condition of approval of final plat. 
Approval of any final plat of a subdivision or planned development plat shall be conditioned on the dedication of land or cash contribution in lieu thereof, as required by this division. When a subdivision is to be developed over a period of years, dedication of required land may be made after completion of a portion of the subdivision, provided that an escrow fund, satisfactory to the Village, has been established to guarantee the conveyance of land after completion of such portion of the subdivision. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.12)  
Sec. 66-303. - Title to dedicated park land and school sites. 
(a)  General requirement. All sites to be dedicated pursuant to this division shall be conveyed to the Village either by warranty or trustee's deed, or such form of conveyance as the Village shall require. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance, including any agricultural rollback taxes that might be extended or levied against such sites. In the discretion of the Village, a commitment for title insurance, issued by a company authorized to do business in the State, will be required as evidence of clear title. 
(b)  Park land. Conveyance of park land dedications shall occur only after or simultaneously with the passage of an ordinance or resolution by the Village park district, or by the Village if the subdivision is not located within the Village park district, in which it indicates that the land will be accepted by the park district or the Village, as the case may be, for park purposes. If the land is in the park district, then immediately after the adoption of the park district resolution or ordinance, the Village shall convey the land to the park district. 
(c)  School sites. Conveyance of school sites shall occur only after or simultaneously with the passage of an ordinance or resolution by the school district in which the subdivision is located, in which the district indicates that the site will be accepted by the district for school purposes. Immediately thereafter, the Village shall convey the site to the district. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.13)  
Sec. 66-304. - Intergovernmental agreement. 
The Village park district and the affected school districts shall be required, as a condition of receiving the dedications or donations under this division, to enter into a binding, written intergovernmental agreement with the Village, acceptable in form and content by the Village attorney, providing for the indemnification and holding harmless of the Village from any loss, claim and cause of action of every kind that may be incurred by the Village as a result, either directly or indirectly, of the enactment of the ordinance from which this division is derived, or the administration or enforcement thereof, including any loss, claim or cause of action incurred as a result of a lawsuit brought or threatened against the Village park district or the affected school district. The intergovernmental agreement shall provide that if the Village is sued by any applicant, subdivider or developer as a result, directly or indirectly, of the enactment of the ordinance from which this division is derived, the Village may, at its option, undertake the defense, and the Village's costs and expenses related thereto, including attorneys' fees, shall be immediately reimbursed by the Village park district and/or affected school district, as the case may be. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.14)  
Sec. 66-305. - Waiver of requirement. 
The dedication of land or cash contribution in lieu thereof as required by this division shall be applicable unless the board of trustees determines either that such new subdivision will not in itself have an impact upon or create a need for new school and/or park facilities and that any such need is not uniquely attributable to such new subdivision. The determination by the Village Board shall be binding upon all of the parties involved. 
(Code 1959, § 18.13.15)  
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL INFILL CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 66-306. - Purpose and scope; definitions. 
(a)  The purpose of these Infill Construction regulations is to provide minimum standards to insure the public health, safety, and welfare in so far as they are affected by Infill Construction projects and shall be in addition to, and not a substitute for, any and all other applicable regulations contained in The Building Code. These Infill Construction regulations shall control all matters concerning construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, and excavation activities on Infill Construction Sites. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Infill Construction shall mean shall mean any construction that will cause, or result in, a change in the grade, or an increase in the impervious surface coverage, of an area that is either (i) located within a Residential Zoning District or (ii) located adjacent to a lot or parcel of land that is either (a) within a Residential Zoning District or (b) lawfully used for residential purposes. 
(2)  Infill Construction Site shall mean any lot or parcel of land, or portion thereof, upon which Infill Construction is to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 5094, § 2, 4-15-2008)  
Sec. 66-307. - Drainage and grading of lots; earth moving. 
(a)  No person shall, by changing the natural or existing grade of any lot, tract or parcel of land, alter or obstruct, partially or otherwise, the flow of natural drainage in a manner which wholly or partially obstructs the natural or usual flow of surface or subsurface waters, or which causes or contributes, or tends to contribute to temporary or permanent pooling, ponding or collection of waters upon the property of another, or which concentrates or intensifies the discharge of surface water upon the property of another; provided, however, that changes in the natural grade which would otherwise have the effect prohibited hereinabove, may be permitted if the person making such change shall drain said waters by drain pipe to a connection with a Village storm sewer or in any other manner as may be approved by the Village engineer or their designee. 
(1)  Existing drainage nuisance: Any surface or roof drainage which creates a structural or health hazard, or any other nuisance, to the owners or occupants of adjoining premises, or to the public thoroughfare, shall be abated by the owner of the improperly drained area. Drainage shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the Village engineer or their designee. 
(b)  The applicant for a building permit (the "applicant") involving new construction shall certify to the director of development or their designee on a form provided by the director or designee that the landscape plan for the new construction was developed with cognizance and in consideration of drainage and grading regulations of the Village. The certification shall also apply to persons involved in major landscaping (any landscaping which would require application for and issuance of a grading permit). If the design of the proposed landscaping improvements leads to a change in the grade of a lot, approved drainage must be provided by way of the installation of drain pipe, or other appropriate means. 
(c)  Earth moving. It shall be unlawful to move earth by creating any excavations, cuts, filling, or otherwise, which, singly or in combination: 
(1)  Cumulatively, alters the existing natural grade by more than four inches in vertical height; or 
(2)  Alters any storm water conveyance system; or 
(3)  Cumulatively, covers more than 400 square feet in area, without first filing with the development department an application in writing and obtaining a grading permit therefore from said department. 
(d)  Required plans. No permit for earth moving shall be issued unless and until an application therefore shall be submitted to the development department and approved by the Village engineer. An application for a grading permit shall contain the following: 
(1)  Grading plan. A grading plan drawn to scale, with all dimensions figured, showing accurately the size and exact location of any contemplated excavation, cut or fill, including topographic detail to a level satisfactory to the Village engineer. 
(2)  Drainage plan. A drainage plan showing methods and facilities for the control and discharge of storm water, in such detail as determined satisfactory to the Village engineer. 
(3)  Least natural disruption. Facts demonstrating that the proposed earth moving plan, when compared to possible alternative plans which would serve the same function, shall result in the most natural appearance and the least possible disruption of natural terrain and water courses, to a level satisfactory to the Village engineer. 
(e)  The property owner or permit applicant for any building addition where the net impervious surface increases more than a net 400 square feet or any new single family residence, shall engage the design civil engineer to visit the site after the completion of construction, and prepare and submit to the Village an as-built plan showing the features listed in subsections 66-307(d)(1) and (2) of this chapter as they were actually constructed. The final certificate of occupancy for any building addition where the net impervious surface increases more than a net 400 square feet or any new single family home shall not be approved until the as-built plan is received and approved. 
(f)  Environmental and safety precautions. All persons performing any earth work under a grading permit shall put into effect all necessary safety precautions to minimize erosion, protect any watercourses and other natural features including trees, protect the health and welfare of all persons, and protect private and public property from damage of any kind, per the Engineering Standards Manual, latest revision. 
(g)  Conditions on permit. The director of development or their designee and/or the Village engineer may place such conditions on the time limits, drainage controls, safety measures, and necessary site restoration associated with a grading permit as will ensure compliance with paragraph (e) above. 
(h)  Persons responsible. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section, and any owner of the property upon which violations occur who has suffered or permitted such violations, shall be liable therefore, and shall be held subject to the remedies and penalties provided for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5094, § 2, 4-15-2008; Ord. No. 5468, § 2, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 66-308. - Infill construction storm water management. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements set forth in section 66-307 of this chapter, no work requiring a permit under the Building Code shall be issued for any infill construction on any Infill Construction Site without the applicant first submitting an Infill Construction Site grading and drainage plan for review and approval by the director of development or their designee. 
(b)  The grading and drainage plan submitted pursuant to subsection 66-308(a) of this chapter shall provide sufficient detail and information for storm water management on the Infill Construction Site based upon the following standards: 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection 66-308(b)(5), where the cumulative net increase in impervious surface on the Infill Construction Site is less than 400 square feet in area, the applicant shall construct and install, or cause to be constructed and installed, downspouts, yard drains, and driveway drains with unobstructed pathways to an existing storm water conveyance system located in the immediate vicinity of the Infill Construction Site. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection 66-308(b)(5), where the cumulative net increase in impervious surface on the Infill Construction Site is more than 400 square feet in area, and, in the determination of the Village engineer, an existing storm water conveyance system with available capacity is located in the immediate vicinity of the Infill Construction Site, the applicant shall construct and install, or cause to be constructed and installed, storm water drainage pipes and all related appurtenances on the Infill Construction Site and directly connect such pipes and appurtenances, including existing sump pump discharges altered as a result of the proposed improvements, to the storm water conveyance system, as required by subsection 66-308(c). 
(3)  Where the cumulative net increase in impervious surface on the Infill Construction Site is more than 400 square feet in area, and, in the determination of the Village engineer, no storm water conveyance system with available capacity is located in the immediate vicinity of the Infill Construction Site, the applicant shall construct and install, or cause to be constructed and installed, all necessary storm water management systems on the Infill Construction Site, including, without limitation, construction to off-site storm water conveyance and/or detention facilities and all related appurtenances, as required by subsection 66-308(c). No off-site improvements exceeding 200 feet from any property line shall be required. 
(4)  Any applicant required to construct and install off-site storm water management systems pursuant to subparagraph 66-308(b)(3) may apply for recapture fees related to the construction and installation of such off-site storm water management systems upon review and approval by the Village Board. 
(5)  The construction and installation requirements in subsections 66-308(b)(1) and (b)(2) shall not apply to infill construction that consists solely of the repair or expansion of an existing, or installation of a new, sidewalk, patio or driveway that will cause, or result in, a net cumulative increase in impervious surface on the Infill Construction Site of less than 400 square feet in area, provided that there are, or will be upon completion of construction, unobstructed pathways to an existing storm water conveyance system that is located in the immediate vicinity of the Infill Construction Site. 
(c)  Any and all construction and connections required pursuant to subsection 66-308(b) that are located on public property, will become public property, or will connect to off-site public infrastructure shall be approved in advance by, and performed to the satisfaction of, the Village engineer. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section 66-308, in no event shall the grade of an Infill Construction Site be increased without first obtaining a determination from the director of development or their designee, in their sole and absolute discretion, that the increased grade either: 
(1)  Is necessary for the protection of the building or structure to be constructed, altered, or repaired on such Infill Construction Site; or 
(2)  Will have a beneficial impact on the lots and parcels of land located adjacent to the Infill Construction Site. 
(e)  Any work within or adjacent to the floodplain, or regulatory floodway, shall comply with the Village's flood control ordinance, latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 5094, § 2, 4-15-2008; Ord. No. 5468, § 2, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 66-309. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  Prior to the commencement of any Infill Construction on any Infill Construction Site that contemplates a net cumulative increase in impervious surface of more than 400 square feet in area, the applicant shall provide written notice of his or her filing of an application for a permit to the owners or occupants of all lots or parcels of land that abut the Infill Construction Site and to any other persons or entities that the director of development or their designee determines appropriate. Such notice shall be in a form provided by the Village and shall be given by regular first class U.S. Mail. For purposes of this subsection, a notice addressed to the name and address on the most recent Cook County tax records shall be deemed a satisfaction of the notice requirement. Furthermore, for purposes of this subsection, a lot or parcel of land shall be deemed to "abut" an Infill Construction Site if the lot or parcel of land shares a common boundary or point with the Infill Construction Site, or is separated from the Infill Construction Site by only a public or private right-of-way. The applicant shall file with the Village, within 14 days after the filing of the permit application; written certification that such notice has been properly delivered. Such certification shall be in a form provided by the Village. The Village shall not process, and shall return to the applicant, any permit application for which such notice was not given or for which such certification was not filed as provided in this subsection 66-309(a)(1). Nothing in this subparagraph shall be deemed as prohibiting the director of development or their designee from providing notice of contemplated Infill Construction work that is not specifically covered or required by this subparagraph. 
(b)  In the event that written notice has been provided pursuant to subsection 66-309(a) and the applicant desires to make any changes that significantly alter the amount of Impervious Surface on the approved final engineering plan or the approved grading and drainage plan submitted pursuant to subsection 66-309(a) of this chapter, which changes are necessitated by on-site conditions not reasonably anticipated when the final engineering plan was submitted for review and approval by the Village engineer, the applicant shall provide written notice of such changes in a manner conforming with subsection 66-309(a). 
(c)  Prior to the commencement of any Infill Construction on any Infill Construction Site that contemplates a net cumulative increase in impervious surface of less than 400 square feet in area, if determined by the director of development or their designee to be in an area of known drainage issues, the applicant shall provide written notice of his or her filing of an application for a permit in the same manner as provided in subsection 66-309(a) to the owners or occupants of all lots or parcels of land that abut the Infill Construction Site and to any other persons or entities that the director of development or their designee determines appropriate. Nothing in this subparagraph shall be deemed as prohibiting the director of development or their designee from providing notice of contemplated Infill Construction work that is not specifically covered or required by this subparagraph. 
(Ord. No. 5094, § 2, 4-15-2008; Ord. No. 5468, § 2, 6-21-2011)  
Sec. 66-310. - Construction traffic and parking. 
The applicant shall submit for review and approval by the director of development or their designee, a construction traffic routing and parking plan that shall designate certain prescribed routes of access to the Infill Construction Site for all construction traffic and the designated areas for the parking of construction vehicles, which shall provide for the protection of pedestrians and shall minimize disruption of traffic and damage to paved street surfaces. At all times during work on the Infill Construction Site, the applicant shall keep all routes used for construction traffic to be free and clear of mud, dirt, debris, obstructions, and hazards and shall repair any damage caused by such construction traffic. 
(Ord. No. 5094, § 2, 4-15-2008)  
Sec. 66-311. - Appeal process. 
Any person directly impacted by the issuance or the denial of a building permit by the director of development shall have the right to appeal such action, but only pursuant to and in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section 66-311. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  An application for appeal shall be in writing and on the form provided by the office of the Village engineer. 
(2)  An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code, or the rules legally adopted under this Code, have been incorrectly interpreted, or that the provisions of this Code do not fully apply. 
(b)  Appeal to Village Management Team. All appeals pursuant to this section shall be filed in the office of the Village engineer within 30 days after the date of the issuance or the denial of the building permit by the director of development. Within ten days after the Village engineer's receipt of a properly filed appeal, the Village engineer shall deliver all records and findings regarding the appeal to the Village Management Team, which shall consist of the Village manager, the director of development and the Village engineer. The Village Management Team shall consider and decide the appeal within 30 days after receipt of the properly filed appeal. The Village Management Team may: 
(1)  Affirm the decision of the director of development; or 
(2)  Overrule or modify the decision of the director of development and direct the issuance, or the revocation of a previously issued, building permit. 
At the expiration of the 30 day period, if the Village Management Team has not rendered a decision on the appeal, it shall be deemed that the Village Management Team has affirmed the decision of the director of development. 
(c)  Appeal to Village Board of Trustees. The decision of the Village Management Team may be appealed to the Village Board of Trustees (the "board"). The appeal shall be filed in the office of the Village manager and shall be on a form provided by the Office of the Village manager. Such appeal shall be submitted in writing within 30 days after the date on which the Village Management Team's decision is made, or is deemed to have been made. Within ten days after the board's receipt of a properly filed appeal, the Village manager shall deliver all records and findings regarding the appeal to the board. The board shall consider and decide such appeal at a regular or special meeting of the board within 45 days after receipt by the Village manager of the properly filed appeal. The board may: 
(1)  Affirm the decision of the Village Management Team; or 
(2)  Overrule or modify the decision of the Village Management Team and direct the issuance, or the revocation of a previously issued, building permit. 
At the expiration of the 45 day period, if the board has not rendered a decision on the appeal, it shall be deemed that the board has affirmed the decision of the Village Management Team. 
(d)  Successive Appeals. If (1) an appeal is not properly or timely filed, or (2) an appeal is filed and a final decision has been rendered by the Village Management Team or the board, then no new appeal shall be allowed to be filed, and no permit application shall be allowed to be resubmitted for a period of one year after the date of the director of development's decision or, if applicable, the Village Management Team or board's decision, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the director of development. 
(e)  Judicial Review. Any final decision of the board pursuant to this section shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101, et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 5094, § 2, 4-15-2008)  
Chapter 70 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 22. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Imposition of tax on gas gross receipts. 
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling of gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the Village, and not for resale, at five percent of the gross receipts therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 1980, § 1, 4-19-1976; Ord. No. 4248, § 1, 12-19-2000)  
Secs. 70-2—70-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 70-31. - License fee. 
All corporations, companies and associations not incorporated under the laws of the State, and which are engaged in effecting fire insurance in the Village, shall annually pay to the Foreign Fire Insurance Board of the Village, at the time of filing the reports as set forth in this article, as a tax or license fee, a sum equal to two percent of the gross receipts for premiums received by such corporations, companies or associations, or their agency or agents respectively, for business effected, or agreed to be effected, for fire insurance on property situated within the Village for the year ending July 1 preceding. 
(Code 1959, § 6.51; Ord. No. 5445, § 7, 4-21-2011)  
Sec. 70-32. - Reports. 
(a)  Every person who shall act as agent or otherwise for or on behalf of any such corporation, company or association shall, on or before July 15 of each and every year, render to and file with the Village clerk, a full, true and just report, verified by his oath, of all premiums which, during the year ending on every July 1 preceding such report, shall have been received by him or any other person for him on behalf of such corporation, company or association, and shall fully and specifically set out in such report the amounts received as premiums for fire insurance. 
(b)  If the report required by subsection (a) of this section shall not be filed on or before July 15, or if the amount of rates for the tax or license fee shall remain unpaid after such date, it shall be unlawful for any such corporation, company or association to transact any business of fire insurance in the Village until the requirements of this article have been fully complied with; provided, however, that this subsection shall not relieve any such corporation, company or association from the payment of any loss upon any risk that may be taken in violation thereof. 
(c)  If any such corporation, company or association referred to in this article shall fail to file the report required by subsection (a) of this section by July 15, or if the amount of rates as set forth in section 70-31 shall remain unpaid after July 15 in each year, every such corporation, company or association shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16 upon conviction for each and every offense. In addition to such penalty, the Village shall recover, in an action in its name and for its use against such corporation, company or association so failing to make such report or pay such rates, the full amount of such rates which may be due under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, §§ 6.52—6.54)  
Sec. 70-33. - Disposition of fund. 
Any and all sums received under the provisions of this article shall be used as set forth in chapter 2, [article V,] division 5 of the Municipal Code, Village of Glenview, Illinois. 
(Code 1959, § 6.55; Ord. No. 5445, § 8, 4-21-2011)  
Secs. 70-34—70-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 70-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hotel and motel include every building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where lodging, or lodging and food, or apartments, suites or other accommodations are offered for a consideration, on a daily, weekly or monthly basis, to guests. 
Person means any natural person, trustee, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever the term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term, as applied to associations, shall mean the owners or part owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 6.99) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-62. - Imposed; rate; responsibility. 
(a)  A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of renting, leasing or letting of rooms in a motel or hotel in the Village at the rate of six percent of the gross room sale (rental) revenues from such rental, leasing or letting, exclusive of revenues received from food, beverage and other sales. For purposes of this section, the term "room sale (rental) revenues" shall include only the basic room charge, exclusive of meals, beverages and other package items; provided, however, a tax shall not be levied and imposed upon any person who works and lives in the same hotel or motel; and further provided, that the tax shall not be levied upon rooms rented or used by directors, officers, agents or employees of the owner of the hotel or motel when renting or using such rooms for, or in connection with, the transaction of business. 
(b)  The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of such tax shall be borne by the users, lessees or tenants of such rooms. The tax levied in this section shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. 
(Code 1959, § 6.98; Ord. No. 5080, § 2, 2-19-2008)  
Sec. 70-63. - Payment and collection. 
The owner, manager or operator of each hotel or motel shall bear, jointly and severally, the duty to collect the tax from each user, lessee or tenant of rooms in such hotel or motel. Every person required to collect the tax levied by this article shall secure such tax from the user, lessee or tenant of a room at the time that he collects the price, charge or rent to which the tax applies. Every user, lessee or tenant shall be given a bill, invoice, receipt or other statement or memorandum of the price, charge or rent payable, upon which the tax imposed in this article is computed, and the amount of the tax shall be stated, charged and shown separately thereon. The tax shall be paid to the person required to collect the tax as trustee for and on behalf of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 6.100)  
Sec. 70-64. - Enforcement officer of tax. 
(a)  The finance director of the Village hereby is designated as the administration and enforcement officer of the tax hereby imposed on behalf of the Village. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the finance director to collect all amounts due the Village from the owners, managers and operators of motels and hotels in the Village. 
(b)  A sworn monthly hotel and occupancy tax return, on a calendar month basis, shall be filed with the finance director by each owner, manager or operator of each hotel or motel in the Village, on forms prescribed by the finance director, showing all receipts from each renting, leasing or letting of rooms during the preceding month. Such returns are to be filed within 15 days after the end of the month covered by such return, with the tax imposed in this article due and owing as of the first day of the month following the month covered by such return. Each return shall be accompanied by payment to the Village of all taxes due and owing for the month covered by the return. 
(c)  During the normal business working hours of any such hotel or motel, the finance director or any person certified by him as his deputy or representative may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for the purpose of inspection and examination of the hotel's or motel's books and records for the proper administration of this article, and for the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed by this article. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or interfere with the finance director or his duly authorized deputy or representative in the discharge of his duties under this subsection. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of every owner, manager or operator to keep accurate and complete books and records containing all information necessary for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, to which the finance director or his duly authorized deputy or representative shall have full access at all times. Such records shall include a daily sheet showing the number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the 24-hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel or motel room when such occurs, and the actual hotel or motel room tax receipts collected for the date in question. If the inspection and examination by the financial director discloses a discrepancy in excess of five percent from the information furnished by the hotel owner, operator or manager, the cost of such inspection and examination shall be borne by the hotel owner, operator or manager. 
(Code 1959, § 6.101) 
Cross reference— Director of finance, § 2-521.  
Sec. 70-65. - Failure to pay or collect. 
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax provided for in this article, or when any owner, manager or operator of a hotel or motel in the Village shall fail to collect the tax imposed by this article from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the tax, the Village attorney shall, upon request of the Village manager, bring, or cause to be brought, an action to enforce the payment of such tax on behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction. If the Village president, after a hearing held by or for him, shall find that any hotel or motel owner, manager or operator has willfully evaded his responsibility to collect the tax imposed by this article, he may suspend or revoke all Village licenses, including, but not limited to, any liquor license issued under this Code, held by such person. Such person shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, to be held not less than five days after notice is given of the time and place thereof, addressed to him at his last known place of business. Pending notice, hearing and finding, any license which such person may possess may be temporarily suspended by the Village president. Any suspension or conviction resulting from such hearing shall not relieve or discharge any civil liability for nonpayment of the tax due. 
(Code 1959, § 6.102)  
Sec. 70-66. - Interest and penalties. 
In the event of failure by any hotel or motel owner, manager or operator to collect and pay to the finance director the tax required under this article within ten days after the tax shall be due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon such tax at the rate of one percent per month, commencing on the first day of the month following the month for which the tax was to have been collected. In addition, a penalty of ten percent of the tax and interest due shall be assessed and collected against any hotel or motel owner, manager or operator who shall fail to collect and remit the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1959, § 6.103)  
Sec. 70-67. - Proceeds. 
All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the Village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 6.104)  
Sec. 70-68. - Violations; penalties. 
In addition to the other provisions of this article, any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of, any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 6.105)  
Secs. 70-69—70-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AMUSEMENT TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Authority, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 70-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Admission fee or charge means any fee or charge made or received for admission to any amusement, whether or not represented by a ticket or admission stub or receipt of any kind. An admission fee or charge includes, but is not limited to, all fees or charges for seats, chairs, tables, benches, space to stand or sit, special seating area, tent, structure, booth or other similar accommodations made as described in this definition, for which there is a fee or charge. 
Amusement means any event, exhibition, performance, presentation or show for entertainment purposes which is exhibited or staged in the Village, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any comedic, theatrical, dramatic, musical, opera or spectator performance or production, or similar live or recorded entertainment; 
(2)  Any show, motion picture show, antique or flower show, speech or lecture; 
(3)  Any exhibition of art, handicrafts or products; 
(4)  Any poultry or animal show, animal act, circus or rodeo; 
(5)  Any athletic contest, sport, game or similar exhibition, such as boxing, wrestling, skating, dancing, swimming, racing or riding on animals or vehicles, baseball, basketball, softball, football, tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games, bowling or billiard and pool games. 
Amusement patron means any person: 
(1)  Admitted to any amusement in the Village for which an admission fee or charge is imposed. 
(2)  Who purchases or otherwise acquires a ticket or pass of any kind from a place other than the location where such ticket or pass is purchased or acquired for admission to any amusement within the Village. 
Owner means: 
(1)  With respect to the owner of a place where an amusement is being held, any person with an ownership or leasehold interest in a building, structure, vehicle, boat, area or other place, who presents, conducts or operates an amusement in such place or who allows, by agreement or otherwise, another person to present, conduct or operate an amusement in such place; 
(2)  With respect to the owner of an amusement, any person who has an ownership or leasehold interest in such amusement or any person who has a proprietary interest in the amusement so as to entitle such person to all or a portion of the proceeds from the operation, conduct or presentation of such amusement, excluding proceeds from nonamusement services and sales of tangible personal property. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, society, foundation, institution, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation, receiver, executor, trustee or other representative appointed by the order of any court, or any other entity recognized by law. 
Special seating area means an enclosed or substantially enclosed apartment-style room, containing or making available amenities for the exclusive use of the patrons thereof, whether denominated as luxury or super suites, or skyboxes, or by other similar terms. Such amenities may include, but are not necessarily limited to, a television (including closed-circuit capacity), bathroom, refrigerator, telephone service, storage sink, living room or lounge furniture, special spectator seating, food, heat, air conditioning and parking. 
(Code 1959, ch. 10, art. XV) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-102. - Imposed. 
A tax of four percent on the admission fee or charge is imposed upon every amusement patron for the privilege of admission to any amusement in the Village; provided, however, that the amusement tax shall not apply to the following and; provided, however, that the entities described in the following subsections (1)—(6) are not-for-profit institutions, organizations, groups or societies, where no part of the net earnings inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or person: 
(1)  Governmental or public agencies or institutions; 
(2)  Religious, educational and charitable institutions, societies or organizations; 
(3)  Societies or organizations for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals; 
(4)  Societies or organizations conducted for the sole purpose of maintaining symphony orchestras, opera performances and artistic presentations, including, but not limited to, musical presentations that receive substantial support from voluntary contributions; 
(5)  Societies or organizations conducted and maintained for the purpose of civic improvements; 
(6)  Fraternal organizations, legion posts, and social and political groups which conduct amusements, sponsored occasionally, but not more often than twice yearly, for periods of not longer than ten days; 
(7)  Organizations or persons in the armed services of the United States, or National Guard organizations, reserve officers' associations, or organizations or posts of war veterans, or auxiliary units or societies of such posts or organizations, if such posts, organizations, units or societies are organized in the State, and if no part of the proceeds of the amusement inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or person; 
(8)  Organizations or associations created and maintained for the purpose of benefiting the members, or dependents or heirs of members, of the police or fire departments of any political subdivision of the State, and if no part of the proceeds of the amusement inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or person; 
(9)  Initiation fees and membership dues paid to a health club, racquetball club, tennis club or a similar club or organization, when such club or organization is organized and operated on a membership basis and for the recreational purposes of its members and its members' guests. This exemption shall not be construed to apply to any fees paid or based upon, in any way whatsoever, a per event or per admission basis; 
(10)  Live performances or closed circuit sporting events which are conducted in an auditorium that has a maximum seating capacity of no more than 400 persons, as on file with the Village fire department, or in a restaurant, lounge or other place of business that has a maximum seating capacity of no more than 400 persons, as on file with the Village fire department; 
(11)  Fees or other charges paid by a patron for the privilege of witnessing or viewing an amusement, solely within the confines of such patron's home. For purposes of this exemption, the term "home" means the permanent dwelling residence of the patron. For patrons who live in condominium buildings, apartment buildings or other multiple-unit structures, the individual dwelling unit the patron occupies shall be considered as the patron's home; 
(12)  Eighty percent of the admission fees or other charges, including, but not limited to, the gross lease or rental amount, paid for the privilege of using special seating areas, tents, structures or other similar accommodations to witness or view an amusement. 
(Code 1959, ch. 10, art. XV)  
Sec. 70-103. - Computation. 
For the purpose of determining the amount of the amusement tax due under this article, admission fees or charges shall be computed exclusive of the amusement tax, any federal or State taxes imposed upon the amusement patron and any separately stated charges for nonamusement services or sales of tangible personal property. 
(Code 1959, ch. 10, art. XV)  
Sec. 70-104. - Collection, payment and accounting. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner, manager or operator of an amusement or a place where an amusement is being held to secure from each patron the tax imposed by this article and to remit the tax to the finance department of the Village not later than the last day of each calendar month for all admission fees or other charges received during the immediately preceding calendar month. A verified statement of admission fees or charges, in a form prescribed by the finance director, shall accompany each remittance. Acceptance by the Village of any amount tendered in payment of the tax shall be without prejudice to any claim, demand or right on account of any deficiency. 
(b)  Canceled admission tickets, stubs, receipts, and complete and accurate records, books and accounts, in detail, of all receipts shall be kept at the place of amusement or such other place in the Village as may be designated, in writing, by the person liable for collection of the tax, and addressed to the finance director. All such books, records and accounts shall be open to inspection by the finance director, or his designee, at all reasonable times during regular business hours. 
(c)  Every owner, manager or operator who is required to collect the tax imposed by this article shall be considered a tax collector for the Village. All amusement taxes collected shall be held by such tax collector as trustee for and on behalf of the Village. The failure of the tax collector to collect the tax shall not excuse or release the patron from the obligation to pay the tax. 
(d)  In order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the Village, no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, the tax imposed by this article unless the person files a claim for a refund or credit within one year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the finance department of the Village. 
(Code 1959, ch. 10, art. XV)  
Sec. 70-105. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to produce, present or conduct any amusement, without collection of the amusement tax, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(b)  If the person required to collect the amusement tax fails to remit amusement to the finance department of the Village within ten days after such remittance is due, a penalty of ten percent of the amusement taxes due shall be assessed against such person. Additionally, interest shall be due upon any such unpaid amusement taxes at a rate of one percent per month, commencing on the first day of the month immediately following the month in which such amusement taxes were required to be remitted to the finance department of the Village. 
(c)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-16. Each fee or charge paid by a person for admission to an amusement without payment of the tax shall constitute a separate offense. All fines shall be in addition to the unpaid amusement taxes, plus interest and penalties. The payment of a fine shall not relieve the person fined from liability for the tax provided for in this article. 
(Code 1959, ch. 10, art. XV)  
Secs. 70-106—70-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5917, § 2, adopted June 2, 2015, amended the title of art. V to read as set out herein. Previously art. V was titled Utility Taxes. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 82. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5917, § 2, adopted June 2, 2015, amended div. 1, §§ 70-121—70-128, in its entirety, and enacted a new § 70-129 to read as set out herein. Former div. 1 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 1980, §§ 1—4, 6—9, adopted April 19, 1976; Ord. No. 2428, § 1, adopted December 21, 1981 and Ord. No. 2437, § 1, adopted January 18, 1982. 
 
Sec. 70-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts means the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. Gross receipts shall not include amounts added to customers' bills under Section 9-221 of the Public Utilities Act. 
Municipal utility tax means any tax authorized under Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, as amended (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2). 
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this State, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Taxpayer means those persons described in section 70-122 upon whom the tax authorized by that section is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 5917, § 2, 6-2-2015; Ord. No. 6009, § 1, 8-16-2016) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 70-122—70-129. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6009, § 2, adopted August 16, 2016, repealed §§ 70-122—70-129, in their entirety. Former §§ 70-122—70-129 pertained to "Imposed," "Exemptions," "Payment of services; maintenance and use of public places; equipment installation," "Tax return period; payment and report of total billings and gross receipts," "Payment made in error; credit against tax due," "Recovery of tax," "Failure to make return," and "Books and records," respectively, and were derived from Ord. No. 5917, § 2, adopted June 2, 2015.  
Secs. 70-130—70-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL CONSUMPTION 
 
Sec. 70-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation, the State or any political subdivision thereof, and State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court or by operation of law. 
Person maintaining a place of business in this State means any person having or maintaining within the State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other representative operating within the State under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in the State permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this State. 
Purchase at retail means any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of electricity by a public utility as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2, directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity. 
Purchaser means any person who uses or consumers, within the corporate limits of the Village electricity acquired in a purchase at retail. 
Tax collector means the person delivering electricity to the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 3985, § 5, 8-18-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-142. - Tax on purchase. 
A tax is hereby imposed on the purchase of electricity, in the manner and form provided for in this division. 
(Ord. No. 3985, § 4, 8-18-1998)  
Sec. 70-143. - Applicability of tax. 
The tax imposed under division 1 of this article shall not apply with respect to gross receipts pertaining to customer bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the electricity is subject to the tax imposed under section 70-142. 
(Ord. No. 3985, § 2, 8-18-1998)  
Sec. 70-144. - Tax obligation; application of credit under section 70-142. 
If a taxpayer obligated under division 1 to pay the tax provided therein for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity is unable to use a credit as otherwise allowed under section 70-126 solely because such tax has been replaced by the tax imposed under section 70-142, then the taxpayer concerned shall be entitled to apply such credit against any tax due under section 70-142. 
(Ord. No. 3985, § 3, 8-18-1998)  
Sec. 70-145. - Use or consumption; rates; customer billing. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2) and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the Village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser: 
(1)  For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month, $0.54 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(2)  For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month, $0.355 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(3)  For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month, $0.336 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(4)  For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month, $0.335 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(5)  For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month, $0.330 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(6)  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month, $0.328 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(7)  For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month, $0.285 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(8)  For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month, $0.200 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(9)  For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month, $0.140 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(10)  For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month, $0.080 cents per kilowatt-hour. 
(b)  The tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the Village, the United States of America, the State or any other political subdivision of the State. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the tax provided for herein shall not be imposed if and to the extent that the imposition or collection of the tax would violate the Constitution or laws of the United States of America, or the constitution of the State. 
(d)  The tax provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after September 1, 1998; and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the Illinois Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 6/16-104), or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance shall occur sooner. 
(Ord. No. 3985, § 6, 8-18-1998)  
Sec. 70-146. - Collection. 
(a)  The tax imposed under section 70-145 shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in the State who delivers the electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity. 
(b)  Any tax required to be collected by this division, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt due and owing to the Village by the person delivering the electricity, provided that the person delivering the electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectable after reasonable collection efforts have been made, and provided further that if such charges are thereafter collected, the person delivering the electricity shall be obligated to remit such tax to the Village. 
(c)  Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent of the tax they collect to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax, and supplying data to the Village upon request. Any partial payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity. 
(Ord. No. 3985, § 7, 8-18-1998)  
Sec. 70-147. - Tax remittance and return. 
(a)  Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in a form prescribed by the finance director. The return and the accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or is required to be collected. 
(b)  If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax; then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the finance director and pay the tax directly to the Village on or before the last day of the month during which the electricity is used or consumed. 
(Ord. No. 3985, § 8, 8-18-1998)  
Sec. 70-148. - Resales of electricity. 
(a)  Electricity that is delivered to a person in the Village shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless such person receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the finance director and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certified to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for resale. 
(b)  If a person who receives electricity in the Village claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the finance director for a resale number. The applicant shall state in such application facts showing why he is not liable for the tax imposed by section 70-145 on any purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the finance director may reasonably require. 
(c)  Upon approval of the application, the finance director shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant. 
(d)  The finance director may cancel the resale number of any person if: 
(1)  That person fails to pay any tax payable under section 70-145 for electricity used or consumed by that person; 
(2)  The resale number was obtained through misrepresentation; or 
(3)  The resale number is no longer necessary because the person having obtained the number has discontinued making resales. 
(e)  If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this division directly to the Village on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect and remit the tax to the Village for the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser. 
(f)  Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the finance director the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the finance director may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 3985, § 9, 8-18-1998)  
Sec. 70-149. - Books and records. 
Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this division shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this division. These books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection by the Village at all times during business hours of the day. 
(Ord. No. 3985, § 10, 8-18-1998)  
Sec. 70-150. - Credits and refunds. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the Village, no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, any tax imposed under this division unless that person shall have filed with the finance director a written claim for such refund or credit no later than one year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the Village. 
(Ord. No. 3985, § 11, 8-18-1998)  
Division 3. - Municipal Gas Use Tax 
 
Sec. 70-151. - Short title. 
The tax imposed by this division shall be known as the "Municipal Gas Use Tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village of Glenview, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 5154, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 70-152. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
Person means any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
Public utility means a public utility as defined in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. 
Public Utilities Act means the Public Utilities Act as amended, (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.). 
Retail purchaser means any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail. 
Sale at retail means any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas. 
(Ord. No. 5154, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 70-153. - Tax. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this division, a tax is imposed on the privilege of using or consuming gas in the Village that is purchased in a sale at retail at the rate of 4.50 cent(s) per therm ($0.0450). 
(b)  The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on the retail purchaser, and nothing in this division shall be construed to impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or transporting gas. 
(c)  The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated to collect the tax pursuant to section 70-154 of this division on or before the payment due date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the Village Finance Department on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to section 70-154, or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility so designated. 
(d)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to impose a tax upon any person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the Village. 
(e)  A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the tax imposed by this division with respect to the use or consumption of the gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed. 
(f)  The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after November 1, 2008. 
(g)  If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this division, whether as a result of mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be (i) credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this division from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment or (ii) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited or refunded. 
(h)  No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this division shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such amount. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 5154, § 2, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 6009, § 3, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 70-154. - Collection of tax by public utility. 
The president, Village Manager and Village Chief Financial Officer are each authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the tax imposed by this division with any public utility providing gas service in the Village. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the following provisions: 
(1)  The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an independent contractor; 
(2)  The public utility will remit collected taxes to the Village Treasurer no more often than once each month; 
(3)  The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee equal to three percent of the amounts collected and timely remitted to the Village Treasurer; 
(4)  The public utility shall not be responsible to the Village for any tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and 
(5)  such additional terms as the parties may agree upon. 
(Ord. No. 5154, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Sec. 70-155. - Books and records. 
Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this division. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5154, § 2, 10-21-2008)  
Secs. 70-156—70-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OCCUPATION TAXES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 70-181. - Collection and administration. 
The taxes hereby imposed in this article and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto shall be collected and enforced by the department of revenue of the State. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4606, § 3, 12-2-2003)  
Sec. 70-182. - Tax on retailer. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail ("retailer") within the corporate boundaries of the Village of Glenview, at the rate of three-fourths of one percent (0.75%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this ordinance is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1, and all amendments of or to such section. 
(Ord. No. 4606, § 1, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 5062, § 2, 12-3-2007)  
Sec. 70-183. - Tax on services. 
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of making sales of services ("servicer") within the corporate boundaries of the Village of Glenview, at the rate of three-fourths of one percent (0.75%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicer either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5, and all amendments of or to such section. 
(Ord. No. 4606, § 2, 12-2-2003; Ord. No. 5062, § 2, 12-3-2007)  
Secs. 70-184—70-310. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5916, § 2, adopted June 2, 2015, repealed art. VII, §§ 70-311—70-321, in its entirety; and § 3 enacted a new art. VII, to read as set out herein. Former art. VII pertained to municipal telecommunications tax, and was derived from Ord. No. 4248, §§ 3(30.1)—(30.8), 3(30.10), 3(30.11), adopted December 19, 2000. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; telecommunications (other than wireless), ch. 74; telecommunications (wireless services), ch. 78. 
 
Sec. 70-311. - Definitions. 
The following, words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act, 35 ILCS 636/5-1, et seq., as amended from time to time. 
Amount paid means the amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the Village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid. 
Department means the Illinois Department of Revenue. 
Gross charge means the amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the Village and for all services and equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel termination point within the Village and charges for the portion of the inter-office channels provided within the Village. Charges for that portion of the inter-office channel connecting two or more channel termination points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village, shall be determined by the retailer by multiplying an amount equal to the total charge for the inter-office channel by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of channel termination points that are located within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village and the denominator of which is the total number of channel termination points connected by the inter-office channel. However, "gross charge" shall not include: 
(1)  Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made pursuant to: 
a.  The tax imposed by this article; 
b.  The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act; 
c.  The tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code; 
d.  911 surcharges; or 
e.  Charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act; 
(2)  Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the Village; 
(3)  Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement; 
(4)  Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges; 
(5)  Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under Section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity; 
(6)  Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this article has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service; 
(7)  "Bad debts," meaning any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable Federal Income Tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made; 
(8)  Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication devices; 
(9)  Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act; or 
(10)  Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if (a) those charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are taxable, (b) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or invoice, and (c) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges on the retailer's books and records kept in the regular course of business. If the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the retailer of the telecommunications. 
Interstate telecommunications means all telecommunications that either originate or terminate outside this State. 
Intrastate telecommunications means all telecommunications that originate and terminate within this State. 
Person means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court, the Federal and State governments, including State universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political subdivision of this State. 
Purchase at retail means the acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications through a sale at retail. 
Retailer means and includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as defined in this section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the satisfaction of the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this State in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this State. The permit may be revoked by the Department at its discretion. 
Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State, or any like term, means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State. 
Sale at retail means the transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the Federal and State governments, and State universities created by statute and other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale. 
Service address means the location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. For air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in this State where bills are sent. 
State means the State of Illinois. 
Taxpayer means a person who individually or through his or her agents, employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in the Village and who incurs a liability for the tax imposed by this article. 
Telecommunications, in addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this article, "private line" means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered "telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this article. For purposes of this section, "prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in Section 2-27 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act. 
Village means the Village of Glenview. 
(Ord. No. 5916, § 3, 6-2-2015)  
Sec. 70-312. - Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed. 
(a)  A tax is hereby imposed upon the act or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in the Village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other municipal tax. 
(b)  A tax is hereby imposed upon the act or privilege of originating in the Village or receiving in the Village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of six percent of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state or multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or municipality in this State on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state or such tax properly due and paid in a municipality in this State which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in this State. 
(c)  The tax imposed by this article is not imposed on the foregoing acts or privileges to the extent such acts or privileges may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5916, § 3, 6-2-2015)  
Sec. 70-313. - Collection of tax by retailers. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall be collected from the taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this State and shall be remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this article and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax imposed by this article shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the manner provided by the Department. 
(b)  Whenever possible, the tax imposed by this article shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross charge for telecommunications. 
(Ord. No. 5916, § 3, 6-2-2015)  
Sec. 70-314. - Returns to department. 
For the tax imposed under this article, every retailer maintaining a place of business in this State shall, on or before the last day each month, make a return to the Department for the preceding month, stating the information required by Section 5-50 of the Act, and shall make payments to the Department in accordance with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 5916, § 3, 6-2-2015)  
Sec. 70-315. - Resellers. 
(a)  If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall State facts which will show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax imposed by this article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional information as the Department may reasonably require. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's having discontinued the making of resales. 
(c)  Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in this State shall not be made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale. 
(Ord. No. 5916, § 3, 6-2-2015)  
Secs. 70-316—70-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - LOCAL MOTOR FUEL TAX 
 
Sec. 70-401. - Short title. 
The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the "Local Motor Fuel Tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village of Glenview or the State of Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 11-3-2009)  
Sec. 70-402. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning: 
Department means the Administrative Services Department of the Village of Glenview. 
Person means any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver, trustee, conservator, legal representative, or other legally recognized entity. 
Retail vehicle fuel dealer means any person who is engaged in the business of selling vehicle fuel in the Village to a purchaser for the purchaser's use or consumption, and not for resale in any form. 
Sale, resale, or purchase means any transfer of ownership or title or both, any exchange or any barter, whether conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for consideration. 
Sale at retail means any sale to a person for that person's use or consumption and not for resale to another. 
Use means the exercise of any right to or power over vehicle fuel incident to the ownership thereof, including, but not limited to, the receipt of vehicle fuel by any person into a fuel supply tank of a vehicle or appropriate containers. 
Vehicle means any machine or device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a rail, street, road highway or otherwise upon land, in or upon water, or through the air. "Vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, trains, motorcycles, boats, and aircraft. 
Vehicle fuel means any volatile and inflammable liquid or gas produced, blended or compounded for the purpose of or which is suitable for operating a vehicle, or which is used in propelling a vehicle. "Vehicle fuel" includes, but is not limited to, gasoline, gasohol, diesel oil, ethanol, motor benzol, motor benzene, propane gas fuel, kerosene and "special fuel" as defined in the Illinois Motor Fuel Tax Law, as amended [ILCS Ch. 35, Act 505 § 1.13], and blends thereof. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 11-3-2009)  
Sec. 70-403. - Local motor fuel tax imposed. 
(a)  A local motor fuel tax is hereby imposed on the privilege of purchasing or using, in the Village, vehicle fuel purchased in a sale at retail, commencing on January 1, 2017. The local motor fuel tax shall be at a rate of four cents per gallon of vehicle fuel. The ultimate liability for payment of the local motor fuel tax shall be upon the purchaser or user of the vehicle fuel. This article shall not be construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of selling or distributing vehicle fuel. It shall be a violation of this article for any retail vehicle fuel dealer to fail to add this tax to the retail price of vehicle fuel or to absorb the local motor fuel tax. The local motor fuel tax shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. 
(b)  For purposes of this article and sections thereof, "using, in the Village" shall be deemed to occur only at the locations in the Village, where the vehicle fuel is transferred into a vehicle or an appropriate container by which it is to be consumed or otherwise used. To the extent that a person has paid the local motor fuel tax imposed herein on the retail purchase of vehicle fuel, such person shall be exempt from the payment of and liability for said local motor fuel tax on the use of such fuel. 
(c)  It shall be presumed that all sales and uses of vehicle fuel in the Village are subject to the local motor fuel tax until the contrary is established, by clear and convincing evidence. The burden of proving that a sale or use is not taxable under this article shall be upon the retail fuel dealer, purchaser or user so claiming. 
(d)  The local motor fuel tax imposed by this article shall not be applicable to the privilege of purchasing or using vehicle fuel when such fuel is purchased or used, as the case may be, by the federal government, or any of its instrumentalities. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 11-3-2009; Ord. No. 6023, § 2, 11-15-2016)  
Sec. 70-404. - Collection and remittance of local motor fuel tax. 
(a)  The local motor fuel tax shall be collected by each retail vehicle fuel dealer, who shall have the duty to collect the local motor fuel tax in turn from the purchaser of the vehicle fuel, and thereafter remit such local motor fuel tax to the Village. 
(b)  If any retail vehicle fuel dealer fails to collect the local motor fuel tax, such retail vehicle fuel dealer shall remain liable for the local fuel tax not collected and shall pay the amount of the local motor fuel tax due to the Village in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Any purchaser or user who receives or uses vehicle fuel, for which the local motor fuel tax has not been collected, shall pay the local motor fuel tax directly to the Village by the last day of the month following the month in which such purchaser or user made the taxable purchase or use of the vehicle fuel. 
(d)  Any person who collects the local motor fuel tax shall do so as a trustee for and on account of the Village. 
(e)  Any local motor fuel tax remittance, due and owing the Village, shall be made to the department and shall be accompanied by any return form(s) as required by the department with supporting documentation. Such documentation shall include, but will not limited to, forms filed with the Illinois Department of Revenue (Form ST-1 and Worksheet ST-1, or such similar filing as now or hereafter required by the Illinois Department of Revenue) for the period being reported. Any retail vehicle fuel dealer, purchaser or user who is required to remit the local motor fuel tax directly to the village on a recurring basis shall register with the department in the manner provided in this article. 
(f)  The local motor fuel tax return and remittance shall be submitted to the department on the 20th day of each month. 
(g)  Failure by the retail vehicle fuel dealer to file sales and use tax returns with the Illinois Department of Revenue shall not relieve the retail vehicle fuel dealer from the responsibility to pay the local motor fuel tax to the Village. 
(h)  Late payments of the local motor fuel tax shall be subject to such interest and penalties as may be provided in section 70-407. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 11-3-2009)  
Sec. 70-405. - Registration of retail dealers. 
Each retail vehicle fuel dealer, doing business in the Village shall register with the department of the Village prior to commencement of business as a retail vehicle fuel dealer using such registration form as shall be issued by the department. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 11-3-2009; Ord. No. 6023, § 3, 11-15-2016)  
Sec. 70-406. - Recordkeeping; inspection of records; audits. 
Every retail vehicle fuel dealer shall keep accurate books and records of the retail vehicle fuel dealer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books and records shall be kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the Village. 
(a)  Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this article. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information: 
1.  The tax; 
2.  The time period of the audit; and 
3.  A brief description of the books and records to be made for the auditor. 
(b)  Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and, if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the retail vehicle fuel dealer, another date and time may be requested by the retail vehicle fuel dealer within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours. 
(c)  The retail vehicle fuel dealer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days and not more than 30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the retail vehicle fuel dealer and the local tax administrator agree to some other convenient time. If the retail vehicle fuel dealer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the retail vehicle fuel dealer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing that is convenient to the retail vehicle fuel dealer and the local tax administrator. 
(d)  If the retail vehicle fuel dealer or tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the retail vehicle fuel dealer's tax liability. 
(e)  If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the retail vehicle fuel dealer within 45 days of the Village's determination of the amount of overpayment. 
(f)  If a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 11-3-2009)  
Sec. 70-407. - Penalties. 
In addition to any interest, penalty, lien or other remedy available to the Village as provided in section 1-16, or otherwise available at law or in equity, any person who violates the provisions of this section, or who submits false information to the Village concerning the local motor fuel tax, shall be subject the penalties provided for in section 1-16. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 11-3-2009)  
Sec. 70-408. - Severability. 
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, section or subsection of this article, since the same would have been enacted by the Village without the incorporation of any such invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 11-3-2009)  
Secs. 70-409—70-420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 70-421. - Title. 
This article shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 1, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-422. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to the Village's procedures in connection with all of the Village's locally imposed and administered taxes. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 2, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-423. - Definitions. 
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows: 
Act means the "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act." 
Corporate authorities means the Village's president and board of trustees. 
Locally imposed and administered tax or tax means each tax imposed by the Village that is collected or administered by the Village not an agency or department of the State. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the Village other than infrastructure maintenance fees. 
Local tax administrator, the Village's finance director, is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this article to give full effect to this article. The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this article and the Act. 
Village means the Village of Glenview, Illinois. 
Notice means each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the Village's locally imposed and administered taxes. 
Tax ordinance means each ordinance adopted by the Village that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax. 
Taxpayer means any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the Village. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 3, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-424. - Notices. 
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing and mailed not less than seven calendar days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as follows: 
(1)  First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or 
(2)  Personal service or delivery. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 4, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-425. - Late payment. 
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the Village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is (a) physically received by the Village on or before the due date, or (b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the Village, with adequate postage prepaid. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 5, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-426. - Payment. 
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: (1) first to the tax due for the applicable period; (2) second to the interest due for the applicable period; and (3) third to the penalty for the applicable period. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 6, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-427. - Certain credits and refunds. 
(a)  The Village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress. 
(b)  The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The Village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly to the Village. 
(c)  The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows: 
(1)  The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying: 
a.  The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim; 
b.  The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim; 
c.  The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the cancelled check or receipt for the payment; 
d.  The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and 
e.  A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the Village. 
(2)  Within 20 days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either: 
a.  Grant the claim; or 
b.  Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial. 
(3)  In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear interest at the rate of four percent per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 7, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-428. - Audit procedure. 
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this article. 
(1)  Each notice of audit shall contain the following information: 
a.  The tax; 
b.  The time period of the audit; and 
c.  A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor. 
(2)  Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours. 
(3)  The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more than 30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator. 
(4)  Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the Village. 
(5)  It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the Village. If the taxpayer fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability. 
(6)  If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the Village's determination of the amount of overpayment. 
(7)  In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 8, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-429. - Appeal. 
(a)  The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  The reason for the assessment; 
(2)  The amount of the tax liability proposed; 
(3)  The procedure for appealing the assessment; and 
(4)  The obligations of the Village during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process. 
(b)  A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment. 
(c)  If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties. 
(d)  If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the 45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing without further notice. 
(e)  Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 9, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-430. - Hearing. 
(a)  Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under section 70-429, above, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal. 
(b)  No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed 14 days. 
(c)  At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 10, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-431. - Interest and penalties. 
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time frame otherwise indicated. 
(1)  Interest. The Village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be five percent per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed. 
(2)  Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of five percent of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the Village issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to 25 percent of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 11, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-432. - Abatement. 
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 12, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-433. - Installment contracts. 
The Village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 13, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-434. - Statute of limitations. 
The Village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and owing. 
(1)  No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later. 
(2)  If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the Village, the tax paid was less than 75 percent of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed. 
(3)  No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 14, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-435. - Voluntary disclosure. 
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four years before the date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 15, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-436. - Publication of tax ordinances. 
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 16, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-437. - Internal review procedure. 
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall: 
(1)  Timely remove the lien at the Village's expense; 
(2)  Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and 
(3)  Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 17, 12-19-2000)  
Sec. 70-438. - Application. 
This article shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the Village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this article, this article shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 4264, § 18, 12-19-2000)  
Chapter 74 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS (OTHER THAN WIRELESS)[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; simplified municipal telecommunications tax, § 70-311 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to: 
(1)  Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and services; 
(2)  Establish clear local guidelines, standards and timeframes for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of telecommunications providers and services; 
(3)  Promote competition in telecommunications; 
(4)  Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications carriers and providers; 
(5)  Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications service on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and residents of the Village; 
(6)  Permit and manage reasonable access to the public way and other ways, for telecommunication purposes, on a competitively neutral basis; 
(7)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public way held in public trust by the Village; 
(8)  Ensure that the Village's current and ongoing regulatory costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public way and other ways are fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs; 
(9)  Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the Village for permitting private use of the public way; 
(10)  Assure that all telecommunications carriers and providers providing facilities or services within the Village comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village; 
(11)  Ensure that the Village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(12)  Enable the Village to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and State regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development; 
(13)  Ensure that the Village is made aware of and has the opportunity to review plans for the private use of the public way and other ways in order to regulate such private use for the protection and benefit of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1959, § 29.1.1)  
Sec. 74-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affiliate means a person that, directly or indirectly, owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person. 
Cable act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 USC 532 et seq., as amended. 
Cable operator means a telecommunications carrier providing or offering to provide "cable service" within the Village, as such term is defined in the cable act. 
Cable service has the same meaning provided by the cable act. 
Corporate authorities means the Village president and Village Board of the trustees. 
Excess capacity means the volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public way that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities. 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) means the State administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers in the State. 
Illinois Commerce Commission (ICC) means the State administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers in the State. 
Other ways means the highways, streets, alleys, utility easements, parkways or other rights-of-way within the Village, under the jurisdiction of a governmental entity other than the Village. 
Overhead facilities means utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities. 
Person means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and individuals, and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers. 
Public street means any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way under the jurisdiction and control of the Village, which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes. 
Public way means and includes any public street, utility easement or parkway owned, controlled or maintained by the Village. 
Surplus space means that portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission, to allow its use by a telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment. 
Telecommunications carrier means and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages a plant, equipment or property within the Village, used or to be used for the purpose of offering telecommunications service. 
Telecommunications facilities means, either individually or collectively, as the case may be, the plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennae, electronics and other appurtenances used, or to be used, to transmit, receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services. 
Telecommunications provider means and includes every person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities without any ownership or management control of the facilities. 
Telecommunications service means the providing or offering for rent, sale or lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic and video programming information, between or among points, by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities, with or without the benefit of any closed transmission medium. 
Telecommunications system. See the definition of the term Telecommunications facilities . 
Underground facilities means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for overhead facilities. 
Usable space means the total distance between the top of a utility pole and the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
Utility easement means any easement owned by the Village and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities. 
Utility facilities means the plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the public way of the Village and used, or to be used, for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services. 
Village property means and includes all real property owned by the Village, other than "public streets" and "utility easements," as such terms are defined in this section, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the Village, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 29.1.2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-3. - Registration. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all telecommunications carriers and providers engaged in the business of transmitting, supplying or furnishing telecommunications service originating, terminating or passing through the Village shall register with the Village pursuant to article II and otherwise comply with all applicable terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 29.1.3)  
Sec. 74-4. - License. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any telecommunications carrier or provider that desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way or other ways for the purpose of providing telecommunications service to persons or areas outside the Village shall first obtain a license from the Village granting the use of such public way or other ways pursuant to article III. A telecommunications carrier or provider that obtains a license shall be referred to as a "licensee." 
(Code 1959, § 29.1.4)  
Sec. 74-5. - Franchise. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any telecommunications carrier or provider that desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any public way or other ways for the purpose of providing telecommunications service to persons or areas within the Village shall first obtain a franchise from the Village granting the use of such public way or other ways pursuant to article IV. A telecommunications carrier or provider that obtains a franchise shall be referred to as a "franchisee." 
(Code 1959, § 29.1.5)  
Sec. 74-6. - Cable television franchise. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any telecommunications carrier or provider that desires to construct, install, operate, maintain or locate telecommunications facilities in any public way or other ways for the purpose of providing cable service to persons within the Village shall first obtain a cable franchise from the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 29.1.6)  
Sec. 74-7. - Application to existing franchise ordinances and agreements. 
This chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or agreement until: 
(1)  The expiration of such franchise ordinance or agreement; 
(2)  An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific date not later than the present expiration date. 
(Code 1959, § 29.1.7)  
Sec. 74-8. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100.00, nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1959, § 29.1.8)  
Sec. 74-9. - Other remedies. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the Village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 29.1.9)  
Secs. 74-10—74-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION OF CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS 
 
Sec. 74-41. - Required. 
All telecommunications carriers or providers that offer or provide any telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within the Village or outside the corporate limits of the Village, from telecommunications facilities within or that pass through the Village, shall register with the Village pursuant to this article, on forms to be provided by the Village. The information on the registration form shall include the following: 
(1)  Identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement. 
(3)  A description of the registrant's existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the Village. 
(4)  A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within or outside the Village from telecommunications facilities that are either located within or pass through the Village. 
(5)  Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to licensing or franchising under this chapter. 
(6)  Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications service provided, or to be provided, by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation tax imposed by the Village. 
(7)  Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois Commerce Commission, the State department of transportation or the County highway department, as the case may be, to provide telecommunications service or facilities within or that pass through the Village. 
(8)  Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications service or facilities within the Village. 
(9)  Such other information as the Village manager may reasonably require. 
(Code 1959, § 29.2.1)  
Sec. 74-42. - Fee. 
Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier or provider shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00. 
(Code 1959, § 29.2.2)  
Sec. 74-43. - Purpose. 
The purpose of registration under this article is to: 
(1)  Provide the Village with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide telecommunications services, or own or operate telecommunications facilities within the Village; 
(2)  Assist the Village in enforcement of this chapter; 
(3)  Assist the Village in the collection and enforcement of any municipal taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the Village; 
(4)  Assist the Village in monitoring compliance with local, State and federal laws. 
(Code 1959, § 29.2.3)  
Secs. 74-44—74-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 74-71. - Required. 
A telecommunications license shall be required of any telecommunications carrier or provider that desires to occupy a public way or other ways for the purpose of providing telecommunications service to persons or areas outside the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.1)  
Sec. 74-72. - Application. 
Any person that desires a telecommunications license pursuant to this article shall file an application with the Village, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant. 
(2)  A description of the telecommunications service that is or will be offered or provided by the applicant via its telecommunications facilities. 
(3)  A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the applicant to offer or provide such telecommunications service. 
(4)  Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to identify the: 
a.  Location and route requested for the applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities. 
b.  Location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way or other ways along the proposed route. 
c.  Locations, if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers or providers within the Village. 
d.  Specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate. 
(5)  If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route. 
(6)  If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public way or other ways, information, in sufficient detail to identify the: 
a.  Excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities; 
b.  Excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities. 
(7)  If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public way or other ways, the: 
a.  Location proposed for the new ducts or conduits; 
b.  Excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities. 
(8)  A preliminary construction schedule and completion date. 
(9)  A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the State department of transportation's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(10)  Financial statements, prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities. 
(11)  Information, in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities and services described in the application. 
(12)  Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide telecommunications service. 
(13)  Payment of all fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(14)  Such other and further information as may be required by the Village manager. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.2)  
Sec. 74-73. - Standards for determination. 
Within 120 days after receiving a complete application under section 74-72, the corporate authorities, through their designated representatives, shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application, in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. 
(1)  Financial and technical ability of the applicant. 
(2)  Legal status of the applicant. 
(3)  Capacity of the public way to accommodate the applicant's proposed facility. 
(4)  Capacity of the public way or other ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the license is granted. 
(5)  Damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted. 
(6)  Public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public way or other ways. 
(7)  Effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the license is granted. 
(8)  Availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities. 
(9)  Applicable federal and State telecommunications laws, regulations and policies. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.3)  
Sec. 74-74. - Agreement. 
No license granted under this article shall be effective until the applicant and the Village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions pursuant to which the license to occupy and use the public way or other ways will be granted. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.4)  
Sec. 74-75. - Nonexclusivity. 
No license granted under this article shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use any public way or other ways for delivery of telecommunications service or any other purpose. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.5)  
Sec. 74-76. - Rights granted. 
No license granted under this article shall convey any right, title or interest in the public way or other ways, but shall be deemed a license only to use and occupy the public way or other ways for the limited purpose and term stated in the license, and no license shall be construed as any warranty of title. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.6)  
Sec. 74-77. - Term. 
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a license granted under this article shall be in effect for a term of five years from the date of issuance. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.7)  
Sec. 74-78. - Route. 
A telecommunications license granted under this article shall be limited to a grant of a specific public way or other ways and defined portions thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.8)  
Sec. 74-79. - Construction, installation and location of facilities. 
Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit, whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility. 
(2)  A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available. 
(3)  Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way or other ways within the Village, a licensee with permission to occupy the same public way or other ways must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground. 
(4)  Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way or other ways within the Village, a licensee that currently occupies the same public way or other ways shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the license term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship, as determined by the Village engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public way or other ways. 
(5)  Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public way, public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the licensee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future telecommunications carriers. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.9)  
Sec. 74-80. - Construction permits. 
(a)  All licensees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in articles VI and VIII; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall prohibit the Village and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a license agreement, provided, such alternative procedures contain substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. 
(b)  As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit that seeks to place an additional freestanding facility in the right-of-way, all licensees are required to send written notification via certified mail, to all residents of properties abutting or adjacent to the area (the "affected residents") where the proposed work is to be commenced. Said notification shall be sent not less than two weeks prior to the licensee submits an application for such permit to the Village. Said notification shall set forth the name of the entity seeking the permit, the scope of the proposed work, and the time frame in which said work is to be completed. Said notification shall include a drawing of the proposed site, which shall be based upon a site review previously undertaken by representatives of the Village and the licensee, and a picture and the dimensions of the proposed additional freestanding facility. The notification shall provide a telephone number for the affected residents to contact the licensee with questions and an offer to meet with the affected residents at the site within seven days. If a site meeting is requested, the licensee shall participate in said meeting in good faith, and shall attempt to address all reasonable concerns of the affected residents. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.10; Ord. No. 5008, § 2, 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 5241, § 2, 8-4-2009)  
Sec. 74-81. - Service to Village users. 
A licensee may be permitted to offer or provide telecommunications services to persons or areas within the Village upon submitting an application for approval pursuant to article IV. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.11)  
Sec. 74-82. - Additional license. 
(a)  A new license application shall be required of any telecommunications carrier or provider that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in a public way or other ways which are not included in a license previously granted under this article. 
(b)  If a telecommunications carrier or provider is ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in a public way or other ways not included in a previous license, the Village shall grant a license amendment without further application. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.12)  
Sec. 74-83. - Renewal applications. 
A licensee that desires to renew its license under this article shall, not more than 180 days, nor less than 90 days before expiration of the current license, file an application with the Village for renewal of its license, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  The information required pursuant to section 74-72. 
(2)  Any other information required pursuant to the license agreement between the Village and the licensee. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.13)  
Sec. 74-84. - Renewal determinations. 
Within 90 days after receiving a complete renewal application under section 74-83, the corporate authorities or their designated representatives shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application, in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal. 
(1)  Financial and technical ability of the applicant. 
(2)  Legal ability of the applicant. 
(3)  Continuing capacity of the public way to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities. 
(4)  Applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the license agreement. 
(5)  Applicable federal, State and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.14)  
Sec. 74-85. - Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal. 
No license shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the licensee's performance pursuant to the terms of the license agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the licensee has been approved by the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 29.3.15)  
Secs. 74-86—74-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 74-121. - Required. 
A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier or provider that desires to occupy a public way or other ways for the purpose of providing telecommunications service to persons or areas within the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.1)  
Sec. 74-122. - Application. 
Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise pursuant to this article shall file an application with the Village, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant. 
(2)  A description of the telecommunications service that is or will be offered or provided by the applicant via its telecommunications facilities. 
(3)  A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the applicant to offer or provide such telecommunications service. 
(4)  Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to identify the: 
a.  Location and route requested for the applicant's proposed telecommunications facilities. 
b.  Location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public way or other ways along the proposed route. 
c.  Locations, if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers or providers within the Village. 
d.  Specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate. 
(5)  If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route. 
(6)  If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public way or other ways, information, in sufficient detail to identify the: 
a.  Excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities; 
b.  Excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities. 
(7)  If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public way or other ways, the: 
a.  Location proposed for the new ducts or conduits; 
b.  Excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities. 
(8)  A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates. 
(9)  A preliminary traffic control plan in accordance with the State department of transportation's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(10)  Financial statements, prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities. 
(11)  Information, in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities and services described in the application. 
(12)  Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide telecommunications service. 
(13)  Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial tone service or other video programming service, and sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising. 
(14)  An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the Village that the applicant intends to use or lease. 
(15)  A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the Village and other public, educational and governmental institutions. 
(16)  A description of the applicant's access and line extension policies. 
(17)  Areas of the Village the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out of the entire franchise area. 
(18)  Payment of all fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(19)  Such other and further information as may be requested by the Village manager. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.2)  
Sec. 74-123. - Standards for determination. 
Within 150 days after receiving a complete application under section 74-122, the corporate authorities, through their designated representatives, shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application, in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. 
(1)  Financial and technical ability of the applicant. 
(2)  Legal status of the applicant. 
(3)  Capacity of the public way to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities. 
(4)  Capacity of the public way or other ways to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted. 
(5)  Damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted. 
(6)  Public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public way or other ways. 
(7)  Service that the applicant will provide to the Village. 
(8)  Effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise is granted. 
(9)  Availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities. 
(10)  Applicable federal and State telecommunications laws, regulations and policies. 
(11)  Such other factors as may demonstrate that the issuance of a franchise to use the public way or other ways will serve the interests of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.3)  
Sec. 74-124. - Agreement. 
No franchise shall be granted under this article unless the applicant and the Village have executed a written agreement setting forth the particular terms and provisions pursuant to which the franchise to occupy and use the public way or other ways will be granted. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.4)  
Sec. 74-125. - Nonexclusivity. 
No franchise granted under this article shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, franchise or franchise to occupy or use any public way or other ways for delivery of telecommunications service or any other purpose. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.5)  
Sec. 74-126. - Rights granted. 
No franchise granted under this article shall convey any right, title or interest in the public way or other ways, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and occupy the public way or other ways for the limited purpose and term stated in the franchise, and no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.6)  
Sec. 74-127. - Term. 
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted under this article shall be valid for a term of ten years from the date of agreement. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.7)  
Sec. 74-128. - Territory. 
A telecommunications franchise granted under this article shall be limited to a grant of a specific geographic area of the Village to be served by the franchisee, and the specific public way or other ways necessary to serve such areas. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.8)  
Sec. 74-129. - Construction, installation and location of facilities. 
Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit, whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility. 
(2)  A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available. 
(3)  Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way or other ways within the Village, a franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way or other ways must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground. 
(4)  Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way or other ways, a franchisee that currently occupies the same public way or other ways shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the franchise term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship, as determined by the Village engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public way or other ways. 
(5)  Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public way, public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the franchisee shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future telecommunications carriers. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.9)  
Sec. 74-130. - Construction permits. 
All franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in articles VI and VIII; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall prohibit the Village and a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and construction procedures in a franchise agreement, provided, such alternative procedures contain substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.10)  
Sec. 74-131. - Compensation to Village. 
Each franchise granted under this article is subject to the Village's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the franchise granted to the franchisee, provided, nothing in this article shall prohibit the Village and a franchisee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.11)  
Sec. 74-132. - Nondiscrimination. 
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for the franchisee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall prohibit a franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.12)  
Sec. 74-133. - Service to Village users. 
A franchisee shall make its telecommunications service available to the Village at its most favorable rate for similarly situated users. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.13)  
Sec. 74-134. - Additional franchise. 
(a)  A new franchise application shall be required of any telecommunications carrier or provider that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in a public way or other ways which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this article. 
(b)  If a telecommunications carrier or provider is ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in a public way or other ways not included in a previous franchise, the Village shall grant a franchise amendment without further application. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.14)  
Sec. 74-135. - Renewal applications. 
A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this article shall, not more than 240 days, nor less than 150 days before expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the Village for renewal of its franchise, which shall include the following information: 
(1)  The information required pursuant to section 74-72. 
(2)  Any other information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the Village and the grantee. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.15)  
Sec. 74-136. - Renewal determinations. 
Within 150 days after receiving a complete renewal application under section 74-135, the corporate authorities or their designated representatives shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application, in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal. 
(1)  Financial and technical ability of the applicant. 
(2)  Legal ability of the applicant. 
(3)  Continuing capacity of the public way or other ways to accommodate the applicant's existing facilities. 
(4)  Applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(5)  Applicable federal, State and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies. 
(6)  Such other factors as may demonstrate that renewal of the franchise to use the public way or other ways will serve the interests of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.16)  
Sec. 74-137. - Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal. 
No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the franchisee's performance pursuant to the terms of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the franchisee has been approved by the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 29.4.17)  
Secs. 74-138—74-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FEES, COSTS AND EXPENSES 
 
Sec. 74-171. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to provide for the payment and recovery of all direct and indirect regulatory fees, costs and expenses of the Village related to the enforcement and administration of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 29.6.1)  
Sec. 74-172. - Application and processing review fee. 
(a)  In addition to the registration fee as provided in section 74-42, any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to article III or IV shall pay an application and processing review fee of $1,500.00. 
(b)  The application and processing fee shall be paid to the Village as part of the application filed either pursuant to article III or IV, as the case may be. 
(c)  An applicant whose license or franchise application has been withdrawn or abandoned shall, within 60 days after such withdrawal or abandonment, make written demand upon the Village for a refund of the balance of its application and processing review fee deposited under this section, less: 
(1)  Five hundred dollars as the nonrefundable portion of the application and processing review fee; and 
(2)  All ascertainable costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the processing of the application. 
(Code 1959, § 29.6.2)  
Sec. 74-173. - Reimbursement of Village costs and expenses. 
All licensees or franchisees shall, simultaneously with a modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of any license or franchise agreement, reimburse the Village for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with such modification, amendment, renewal or transfer, within 30 days of receiving a bill therefor from the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 29.6.3)  
Sec. 74-174. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5241, § 4, adopted Aug. 4, 2009, deleted § 74-174. Former § 74-174 pertained to construction permit fee and derived from Code 1959, § 29.6.4.  
Sec. 74-175. - Annual regulatory fee. 
Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise agreement, each licensee or franchisee shall pay an annual regulatory fee to the Village that is equal to the greater of $1,000.00 or $0.25 per lineal foot for aerial cable or cable in duct or conduit and/or $0.50 per lineal foot for direct burial cable as reimbursement for the Village's costs in connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy of the public way or other ways on behalf of the public and existing or future users of the public way. 
(Code 1959, § 29.6.5)  
Sec. 74-176. - Cable fees. 
Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the franchise fees, payments and costs provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 29.6.6)  
Sec. 74-177. - Regulatory fees and compensation are in addition to other taxes. 
The regulatory fees, costs and expenses provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for use of the public way as provided in article IV, or as otherwise provided for in this chapter, are separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, State, local and Village taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier or provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications services. 
(Code 1959, § 29.6.7)  
Secs. 74-178—74-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CONDITIONS OF GRANT 
 
Sec. 74-211. - Location of facilities. 
All facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a license or franchise agreement: 
(1)  A licensee or franchisee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit, whenever excess capacity exists within such utility facility. 
(2)  A licensee or franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available. 
(3)  Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way or other ways, a licensee or franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way or other ways must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground. 
(4)  Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public way or other ways within the Village, a licensee or franchisee that currently occupies the same public way or other ways shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship, as determined by the Village engineer, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption of the public way or other ways. 
(5)  Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the capacity of a public way, public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the licensee or franchisee, as the case may be, shall provide additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory access to future carriers. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.1)  
Sec. 74-212. - Compliance with JULIE. 
All licensees or franchisees shall, before commencing any construction in the public way or other ways, comply with all regulations of JULIE (Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators), as may be applicable. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.2)  
Sec. 74-213. - Construction permits. 
All licensees or franchisees are required to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in article VII; however, nothing in this article shall prohibit the Village and a licensee or franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review or permit and construction procedures in a license or franchise agreement, provided, such alternative procedures contain substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible construction practices. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.3)  
Sec. 74-214. - Interference with the public way or other ways. 
No licensee or franchisee shall locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public way or other ways by the Village, the general public or other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public way or other ways. All such facilities referred to in this section shall be relocated and/or removed by the licensee or franchisee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the Village engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.4)  
Sec. 74-215. - Damage to property. 
No licensee or franchisee, nor any person acting on a licensee's or franchisee's behalf, shall take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair or damage any Village property, public way or other ways, or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.5)  
Sec. 74-216. - Nonemergency work. 
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no licensee or franchisee, nor any person acting on the licensee's or franchisee's behalf, shall commence any nonemergency work in or about the public way or other ways without ten working days prior written notice to the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.6)  
Sec. 74-217. - Repair and emergency work. 
In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a licensee or franchisee may commence repair and emergency response work as required under the circumstances, provided, the licensee or franchisee shall notify the Village, as promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work, or as soon thereafter as possible if advance notice is not practicable. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.7)  
Sec. 74-218. - Maintenance of facilities. 
Each licensee or franchisee shall maintain its facilities in a good and safe condition and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, State and local laws and requirements. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.8)  
Sec. 74-219. - Relocation or removal of facilities. 
Within 30 days following written notice from the Village, a licensee or franchisee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public way whenever the Village engineer shall determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the: 
(1)  Construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Village or other public improvement in or upon the public way. 
(2)  Operations of the Village or other governmental entity in or upon the public way. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.9)  
Sec. 74-220. - Removal of unauthorized systems and facilities. 
Within 30 days following written notice from the Village, any franchisee, licensee, telecommunications carrier or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the public way or other ways shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public way or other ways. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Upon expiration or termination of the franchisee's or licensee's telecommunications license or franchise. 
(2)  Upon abandonment of a facility within the public way or other ways. 
(3)  If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a telecommunications license or franchise. 
(4)  If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit. 
(5)  If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the telecommunications carrier's or provider's license or franchise. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.10)  
Sec. 74-221. - Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. 
The Village retains the right and privilege to cut, relocate or move any telecommunications facilities located within the public way, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.11)  
Sec. 74-222. - Damage to franchisee's or licensee's facilities. 
Unless directly and proximately caused by the willful, intentional or malicious acts of the Village, the Village shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public way or other ways of the Village as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling or work of any kind in the public way or other ways by or on behalf of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.12)  
Sec. 74-223. - Restoration of public way, other ways and Village property. 
(a)  When a licensee or franchisee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public way, other ways or Village property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the Village. 
(b)  If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section, the franchisee or licensee shall temporarily restore the affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the licensee's or franchisee's sole expense and the licensee or franchisee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. 
(c)  A licensee or franchisee, or other person acting in its behalf, shall use suitable barricades, flags, flaggers, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such ways or property. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.13)  
Sec. 74-224. - Facilities maps. 
Each licensee or franchisee shall provide the Village with an accurate map certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within the public way or other ways. Each licensee or franchisee shall annually provide updated maps. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.14)  
Sec. 74-225. - Duty to provide information. 
(a)  Within ten days of a written request from the Village manager, each licensee or franchisee shall furnish the Village with information sufficient to demonstrate that: 
(1)  The licensee or franchisee has complied with all requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  All municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes due the Village in connection with the telecommunications services and facilities provided by the licensee or franchisee have been properly collected and paid by the licensee or franchisee. 
(b)  All books, records, maps and other documents maintained by the licensee or franchisee with respect to its facilities within the public way or other ways shall be made available for inspection by the Village at reasonable times and intervals. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.15)  
Sec. 74-226. - Leased capacity. 
A licensee or franchisee shall have the right, without prior Village approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided, however, that the: 
(1)  Licensee or franchisee shall furnish the Village with a copy of any such lease or agreement; and 
(2)  Customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with the requirements of this chapter, if the customer or lessee would otherwise be considered a licensee or franchisee under the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.16)  
Sec. 74-227. - Licensee or franchisee insurance. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, each licensee or franchisee shall, as a condition of the license or franchise, secure and maintain the following insurance policies insuring the licensee or franchisee and the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees, as coinsureds: 
(1)  Comprehensive general liability insurance, with a deductible not to exceed $500.00, and with limits not less than: 
a.  Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person; 
b.  Five millions dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident; and 
c.  Five million dollars for all other types of liability. 
(2)  Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles, with a deductible not to exceed $500.00, and with a limit of $3,000,000.00 for each person and $3,000,000.00 for each accident. 
(3)  Worker's compensation within statutory limits, and employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.00. 
(4)  Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than $3,000,000.00. 
(b)  The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by the licensee or franchisee throughout the term of the telecommunications license or franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise or license under this chapter, or is engaged in the removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled, nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Village manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(c)  Within 60 days after receipt by the Village of such notice, and in no event later than 30 days prior to such cancellation, the licensee or franchisee shall obtain and furnish to the Village replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.17)  
Sec. 74-228. - General indemnification. 
Each license or franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, the licensee's or franchisee's express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and appointed officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of or resulting from, or alleged to arise out of or result from, the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a license or franchise agreement made or entered into pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.18)  
Sec. 74-229. - Performance and construction surety. 
Before a license or franchise agreement issued or entered into pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as may be necessary thereafter, the licensee or franchisee shall provide and deposit such cash monies or letters of credit, in a form and substance acceptable to the Village, as may be required by this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.19)  
Sec. 74-230. - Security fund. 
(a)  Each licensee or franchisee shall establish a permanent security fund with the Village by depositing the amount of $50,000.00 with the Village, in cash or by way of an unconditional standby letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the Village, which cash or letter of credit shall be maintained at the sole expense of the licensee or franchisee as long as any of the licensee's or franchisee's telecommunications facilities are located within any public way or other ways. 
(b)  The cash or letter of credit shall serve as security for the full and complete performance of this chapter, including any cost, expense, damage or loss the Village incurs or becomes responsible for because of any failure attributable to the licensee or franchisee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the Village. 
(c)  Before any sums are withdrawn from the cash account or letter of credit, the Village shall give written notice to the licensee or franchisee: 
(1)  Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the damages, costs or expenses which the Village has incurred by reason of the licensee's or franchisee's act or default; 
(2)  Providing not more than 14 days for the licensee or franchisee to remedy the existing or ongoing default or failure, as may be applicable; 
(3)  Providing not more than 14 days for the licensee or franchisee to pay any monies due the Village before the Village withdraws the amount thereof from the cash account or the letter of credit, as may be applicable. 
(d)  A licensee or franchisee shall replenish the cash account or letter of credit, as the case may be, within 14 days after written notice from the Village that there is a deficiency in the amount of the cash account or letter of credit, as may be applicable. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.20)  
Sec. 74-231. - Letter of credit. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, a letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the Village, equal to at least 110 percent of the estimated cost of constructing the licensee's or franchisee's telecommunications facilities within the public way or other ways, shall be deposited before construction is commenced. 
(b)  The cash shall remain on deposit with the Village or the letter of credit shall remain in force until 75 days after substantial completion of the work, as determined by the Village engineer, including restoration of the public way or other ways, or other Village property as may be affected by the construction. 
(c)  The cash or letter of credit, as the case may be, shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the Village: 
(1)  Timely completion of construction; 
(2)  Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, and technical codes and standards; 
(3)  Proper location of the facilities, as specified by the Village; 
(4)  Restoration of the public way or other ways, or other Village property as may be affected by the construction; 
(5)  Submission of as-built drawings after completion of the work as required by this chapter; 
(6)  Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.21)  
Sec. 74-232. - Coordination of construction activities. 
(a)  All licensees or franchisees are required to cooperate with the Village and each other with regard to coordination of construction activities. 
(b)  By February 1 of each year, the licensees or franchisees shall provide the Village with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may affect the public way or other ways. 
(c)  Each licensee or franchisee shall meet with the Village, other licensees or franchisees and users of the public way or other ways annually or as determined by the Village to schedule and coordinate construction in the public way or other ways. 
(d)  All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the Village engineer, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damage. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.22)  
Sec. 74-233. - Assignments or transfers. 
(a)  Ownership or control of a telecommunications system, license or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the licensee or franchisee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior written consent of the Village, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, as expressed by ordinance, and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed therein. 
(b)  No license or franchise shall be assigned or transferred in any manner within 12 months after the initial grant of the license or franchise, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement. 
(c)  Absent extraordinary and unforeseeable circumstances, no license or franchise, system or integral part of a system shall be assigned or transferred before construction of the telecommunications system has been completed. 
(d)  A licensee or franchisee, and the proposed assignee or transferee of a franchise or license, or system shall provide and certify the following information to the Village not less than 150 days prior to the proposed date of transfer: 
(1)  Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and conditions of the proposed transfer or assignment; 
(2)  All information required of a telecommunications license or franchise applicant pursuant to article III or IV with respect to the proposed transferee or assignee, as the case may be; 
(3)  Any other information reasonably required by the Village. 
(e)  No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this chapter. 
(f)  Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, the licensee or franchisee shall reimburse the Village for all direct and indirect fees, costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, reasonably incurred by the Village in considering a request to transfer or assign a telecommunications license or franchise. 
(g)  Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications franchise or license, system or integral part of a system, without prior approval of the Village under this section or pursuant to a license or franchise agreement, shall be void and is cause for revocation of the license or franchise. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.23)  
Sec. 74-234. - Transactions affecting control of a franchise or license. 
Any transaction which singularly or collectively results in a change of ten percent or more of the ownership or working control of a license or franchise, of the ownership or working control of affiliated entities having ownership or working control of a license or franchise, or of a telecommunications system, or of control of the capacity or bandwidth of a licensee's or franchisee's telecommunication system or facilities, or substantial parts thereof, shall be considered an assignment or transfer requiring Village approval pursuant to section 74-233. Transactions between affiliated entities are not exempt from Village approval. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.24)  
Sec. 74-235. - Revocation or termination of license or franchise. 
A license or franchise granted by the Village to use or occupy a public way or other ways may be revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  Construction or operation in the Village or in the public way or other ways without a license or franchise. 
(2)  Construction or operation at an unauthorized location. 
(3)  Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the license or franchise. 
(4)  Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise. 
(5)  Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of a franchisee's or licensee's assets, or a substantial interest therein. 
(6)  Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a licensee or franchisee in any application to the Village. 
(7)  Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public way or other ways. 
(8)  Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this chapter. 
(9)  Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the Village. 
(10)  Insolvency or bankruptcy of the licensee or franchisee. 
(11)  Violation of material provisions of this chapter. 
(12)  Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement. 
(Code 1959, § 29.7.25)  
Sec. 74-236. - Violation or noncompliance. 
(a)  If the Village manager believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, he shall give the licensee or franchisee written notice of the violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the licensee or franchisee not less than ten days to furnish evidence that: 
(1)  Corrective action has been, or is being, actively and expeditiously pursued to remedy the violation or noncompliance. 
(2)  Rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance. 
(3)  It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation. 
(b)  If a licensee or franchisee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the Village manager as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the Village manager shall refer the violation or noncompliance to the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall provide the licensee or franchisee with a notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter. 
(c)  If the corporate authorities determine that a licensee or franchisee has violated or failed to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or a franchise or license agreement, the corporate authorities shall determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the misconduct was egregious. 
(2)  Whether substantial harm resulted. 
(3)  Whether the violation was intentional. 
(4)  Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements. 
(5)  Whether there is a history of overall compliance. 
(6)  Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. 
(Code 1959, §§ 29.7.26—29.7.28)  
Secs. 74-237—74-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 74-271. - Generally. 
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within the Village, except as provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 8.1)  
Sec. 74-272. - Compliance required. 
Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, State and local codes, rules and regulations, including the National Electrical Safety Code. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.2)  
Sec. 74-273. - Permit required. 
No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within the Village without first obtaining a construction permit; provided, however: 
(1)  No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within the Village unless the telecommunications carrier or provider has filed a registration statement with the Village pursuant to article II and has otherwise complied with the provisions of this chapter, as may be applicable. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities in the public way or other ways unless the telecommunications carrier or provider has applied for and received a license or franchise pursuant to articles III, IV and V. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities without prior payment of all regulatory fees, costs, expenses or compensation, as the case may be, or other payments as may be required pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.3)  
Sec. 74-274. - Permit applications. 
Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the Village and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications, in sufficient detail to demonstrate the: 
(1)  Facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable local, federal and State codes, rules and regulations, as may be applicable. 
(2)  Location and route of all facilities to be installed on existing utility poles. 
(3)  Location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public way or other ways. 
(4)  Location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public way or other ways along the underground route proposed by the applicant. 
(5)  Construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures and facilities within or adjacent to the public way or other ways. 
(6)  Location, dimensions and types of all trees within or adjacent to the public way or other ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together with a landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.4)  
Sec. 74-275. - Engineer's certification. 
All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable local, federal or State technical codes, rules and regulations, as may be applicable. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.5)  
Sec. 74-276. - Traffic control plan. 
All permit applications which involve work on, in, under, across or along any public way or other ways shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.6)  
Sec. 74-277. - Issuance of permit. 
Within 45 days after submission of all plans and documents required of the applicant and payment of all fees and costs required by this chapter, the Village engineer, if satisfied that the applications, plans and documents comply with all requirements of this chapter, shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as the Village engineer, in his sole discretion, may deem necessary or appropriate. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.7)  
Sec. 74-278. - Construction schedule. 
The permittee shall submit a written construction schedule to the Village engineer ten working days before commencing any work in or about the public way or other ways. The permittee shall further notify the Village engineer not less than two working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public way or other ways. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.8)  
Sec. 74-279. - Compliance with permit. 
All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The Village engineer and his representatives shall be provided access to the work and such further information and/or documentation as may be required to ensure compliance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.9)  
Sec. 74-280. - Display of permit. 
The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be displayed and made available for inspection by the Village engineer or his authorized representatives at all times when construction work is occurring. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.10)  
Sec. 74-281. - Underground facilities survey. 
If the construction permit specifies the location of facilities by depth, line, grade, proximity to other facilities or other standard, the permittee shall cause the location of such facilities to be verified by a registered State land surveyor. The permittee shall relocate any facilities which are not located in compliance with permit requirements. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.11)  
Sec. 74-282. - Noncomplying work. 
Upon order of the Village engineer, in his sole discretion, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work or the requirements of this chapter shall be removed. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.12)  
Sec. 74-283. - Completion of construction. 
The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the public way or other ways and other public and private property. All construction work authorized by a permit within a public way or other ways, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the permit for such work. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.13)  
Sec. 74-284. - As-built drawings. 
Within 60 days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the Village with two complete sets of plans, drawn to scale and certified to the Village as accurately depicting the location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.14)  
Sec. 74-285. - Restoration of improvements. 
Upon completion of any construction work, the permittee shall promptly repair all public ways or other ways and provide property improvements, fixtures, structures and facilities otherwise damaged during the course of construction, and restoring them as nearly as practicable to their condition before the start of construction. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.15)  
Sec. 74-286. - Landscape restoration. 
(a)  All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a franchise, license or permit, shall be replaced or restored as nearly as may be practicable to the condition existing prior to the performance of the work. 
(b)  All restoration work within the public way or other ways shall be done in accordance with landscape plans approved by the Village forester. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.16)  
Sec. 74-287. - Letter of credit required. 
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the permittee shall provide a letter of credit, as provided in section 74-231. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.17)  
Sec. 74-288. - Applicability. 
Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, all telecommunications carriers and providers are subject to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.18)  
Sec. 74-289. - Responsibility for compliance. 
The owner of the facilities to be constructed and, if different, the licensee or franchisee, is responsible for performance of and compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 29.8.19)  
Secs. 74-290—74-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE 
 
Sec. 74-301. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Cable service means that term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6). 
Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission. 
Gross revenues means all consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within the Village. 
(1)  Gross revenues shall include the following: 
(i)  Recurring charges for cable or video service. 
(ii)  Event-based charges for cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges. 
(iii)  Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service equipment. 
(iv)  Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to activation, installation, and repair charges. 
(v)  Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or video service, including but not limited to service order and service termination charges. 
(vi)  Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments. 
(vii)  A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the Village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the Village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement. 
(viii)  Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection (ix). 
(ix)  In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business. 
(x)  The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b). 
(2)  Gross revenues do not include any of the following: 
(i)  Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi). 
(ii)  Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the State-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable service or video service. 
(iii)  Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video service, including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to non-cable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders. 
(iv)  The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the Village and pay the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service. 
(v)  Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, State, federal, or any other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the State-issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes. 
(vi)  Security deposits collected from subscribers. 
(vii)  Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable service or video service. 
(3)  Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service. 
(d)  Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
(e)  PEG means public, education and governmental. 
(f)  PEG access support fee means the amount paid under this article and 220 ILCS 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the Village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
(g)  Service means the provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401. 
(h)  Service provider fee means the amount paid under this article and 220 ILCS 5/21- 801 by the holder to a Village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction. 
(i)  Video service means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public Internet. 
(Ord. No. 5040, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 74-302. - Cable/video service provider fee imposed. 
(a)  Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the Village. 
(b)  Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent of the holder's gross revenues. 
(c)  Notice to the Village. The holder shall notify the Village at least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the Village. 
(d)  Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the Village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this article by the holder. The ordinance adopting this article shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the Village. 
(e)  Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(f)  Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the Village in which a fee is paid. 
(g)  Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 5040, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 74-303. - PEG access support fee imposed. 
(a)  PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the Village in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to section 74-302. 
(b)  Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the Village or its designee for PEG access support in the Village. 
(c)  Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the Village or to the entity designated by the Village to manage PEG access. The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection 74-302(d). 
(d)  Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee. 
(e)  Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 5040, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 74-304. - Applicable principles. 
All determinations and calculations under this article shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles. 
(Ord. No. 5040, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 74-305. - No impact on other taxes due from holder. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the Village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the Village's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. 
(Ord. No. 5040, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 74-306. - Audits of cable/video service provider. 
(a)  Audit requirement. The Village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the Village imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the Village. If all local franchises between the Village and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the Village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct. 
(b)  Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within 30 days after the Village's submission of an invoice for the sum. 
(Ord. No. 5040, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 74-307. - Late fees/payments. 
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by this Village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq. of Glenview, Cook County, Illinois. 
(Ord. No. 5040, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Secs. 74-308—74-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW 
 
Sec. 74-321. - Customer service and privacy protection law. 
(a)  Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/70-501 are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering services within the Village's boundaries. 
(b)  Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this article shall be incorporated into this article by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this article by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5041, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 74-322. - Enforcement. 
The Village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5041, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 74-323. - Penalties. 
The Village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed $750.00 for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000.00 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. 
(a)  Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law. 
(b)  The Village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. 
(c)  A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 5041, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 74-324. - Customer credits. 
The Village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. 
(Ord. No. 5041, § 2, 10-16-2007)  
Chapter 78 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS (WIRELESS SERVICES)[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5444, § 2, adopted Apr. 21, 2011, deleted ch. 78, §§ 78-1—78-7, and enacted a new ch. 78 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 78 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1959, §§ 24.19.1—24.19.7. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; simplified municipal telecommunications tax, § 70-311 et seq.; utilities, ch. 82. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purposes of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of TCSF to limit the adverse visual impacts and reduce the construction of new TCSF by encouraging co-use. 
(2)  Maximize and encourage the use of disguised support structures so as to ensure the architectural integrity of all areas within the Village in which TCSF are located or are to be located. 
(3)  Encourage the location of TCSF in nonresidential areas and on sites owned, leased, licensed or otherwise controlled by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5444, § 2, 4-21-2011)  
Sec. 78-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except as otherwise stated or where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antenna means any device or array that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic signals for voice, data or video communication purposes, including, but not limited to, television, AM/FM radio, microwave, cellular telephone and similar forms of communications, but excluding satellite earth stations less than six feet in diameter, any receive-only home television antennas and any antenna supported by a structure not greater than 72 feet in height, which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC. 
Antenna support structure means any structure designed and constructed for the support of antennas, including any tower or disguised support structure, but excluding support structures not greater than 72 feet in height, owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC. Such term shall also include any related and necessary cabinet or shelter. 
Appearance commission means the Village Appearance Commission as established in the Village of Glenview Municipal Code. 
Applicant means any person, entity, association, partnership, corporation, trust or titleholder (as defined in this section) making application to the Village for the siting, construction, installation or modification of telecommunication service facilities. Such term shall include the telecommunication service provider and the titleholder of the property which is the subject of the application. 
Building means a structure, other than a single-family residence, not constructed primarily for the support of antennas, but which may be utilized for such purpose in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Cabinet means a casing or console, not including a shelter, used for the protection and security of communications equipment associated with one or more antennas, where direct access to equipment is provided from the exterior and do not exceed height of seven feet. 
Co-use means the location and use of two or more antennas on a single antenna support structure. 
Director means the director of development of the Village or his or her authorized designee. 
Disguised support structure means any freestanding, manmade structure, designed for the support of one or more antenna, the presence of which is camouflaged or concealed as an architectural or natural feature. Such structures may include, but are not limited to, clock towers, campaniles, observation towers, artificial trees, light standards or similar alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of TCSF. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Freestanding tower means a tower designed and constructed to stand alone on its own foundation, free of architectural or other supporting frames, or attachments, including, but not limited to, self-supporting (lattice) towers and monopoles. 
Governing authority means the corporate authorities of the Village. 
Guyed tower means a tower that has tensioned cables attached to the tower and anchored at a distance from the structure's base. 
Height means the vertical distance measured from the lowest existing grade at the base of a TCSF, structure, or fence to its highest point, including all attachments thereto. 
IDOL means Illinois Department of Labor. 
IEPA means the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
Outdoor advertising structures means all signs which advertise products, services or businesses, including billboards, detached pole signs, wall signs and signs otherwise attached to buildings and/or supported by uprights or braces on the ground. 
Plan commission means the Village of Glenview Plan Commission as established in the Village of Glenview Municipal Code. 
Shelter means a structure for the protection and security of communications equipment associated with one or more antennas, where access to equipment is gained from the interior of the structure. 
TCSF means telecommunication service facilities, as well as the collective use of the terms "antenna," "antenna support structure," "cabinet," "disguised support structure," "freestanding tower," "shelter" and "tower" to describe telecommunication service facilities. 
Titleholder means the entity holding title to the property upon which the TCSF is located, the beneficial owner of such trust, the person with the power of direction over such trust, or any other person or entity holding title to the property upon which the TCSF is located or their designated representative or agent. 
Tower means a structure designed for the support of one or more antennas, including self-supporting (lattice) towers, monopoles, or other freestanding towers, but not disguised support structures, or buildings. 
(Ord. No. 5444, § 2, 4-21-2011)  
Secs. 78-3—78-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 78-41. - TCSF exemption. 
(a)  TCSF located on property owned, leased, licensed, or otherwise controlled by the Village shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter; except for subsections 78-45(1), 78-45(2), 78-45(10)(j) and 78-45(10)(k) hereof; provided, however, that a lease, construction documents, and building permit authorizing the siting, construction, installation or modification of such TCSF on property owned, leased, licensed, or otherwise controlled by the Village shall have been first approved and signed by the governing authority and the lessee. Wherever practical the Village will endeavor to comply with this chapter in its entirety. 
(b)  Temporary TCSF installed in conjunction with structural or cosmetic maintenance work per subsection 78-45(10)(k) on property owned, leased, licensed, or otherwise controlled by the Village resulting in the removal of tenants equipment provided, however, that such temporary TCSF is installed no more than 30 days prior to the commencement of maintenance work and is removed no longer than 30 days after work is completed provided, however, that the governing authority has approved the temporary site, construction documents, and a building permit authorizing the siting, construction, installation or modification of such temporary TCSF has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 5444, § 2, 4-21-2011)  
Sec. 78-42. - TCSF permitted administratively. 
Subject to being located in one of the zoning districts listed in subsection 98-50(a)(12) and the issuance of a building permit, the following are permitted uses: 
(1)  The attachment of additional antennas to any TCSF existing on the original effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (April 15, 1997) or subsequently approved in accordance with this chapter, provided that the existing TCSF is not modified, either to extend the height thereof or to expand the screened and landscaped areas at the base of the TCSF. 
(2)  The mounting of antennas on any existing building or building roof, provided that the property has a conditional use per subsection 98-50(a)(12), the antennas do not exceed the maximum permissible height, as allowed in subsection 78-45(8)(c), and provided further, that each such antenna is concealed by architectural elements or camouflaged by painting the antenna a color matching the surface to which it is attached. 
(3)  Installation of cabinets, generators, or other minor communications equipment on rooftops of buildings provided they are less than seven feet in height, screened per the approved design set forth in subsection 78-45(6)(e) and comply with location and setback requirements of subsection 78-45(7)(h). 
(4)  Installation of cabinets, generators, or other minor communications equipment within a building. 
(5)  Installation of underground TCSF. 
(Ord. No. 5444, § 2, 4-21-2011)  
Sec. 78-43. - TCSF permitted only as a conditional uses. 
(a)  TCSF uses not permitted administratively under section 78-42 shall be allowed only as a conditional use, in zoning districts listed in subsection 98-50(a)(12) except as otherwise excluded by this chapter. In addition to the requirements of this chapter the applicant shall follow the procedures and adhere to the standards as contained in section 98-50 of the Village's Municipal Code. 
(b)  Any disguised support structure located on residentially zoned properties that have a conditional use for buildings primarily devoted to religious worship per subsection 98-50(a)(1) shall be subject to approval of the plan commission in accordance with the final site plan review and conditional use process. 
(c)  Before the plan commission can make a recommendation to the governing authority regarding a conditional use, the applicant shall prove to the plan commission that the proposal complies with all the requirements in chapter 78, chapter 98, and the following standards, based upon the evidence submitted: 
(1)  Whether the applicant 's existing TCSF or buildings are located within the geographic network area necessary to meet the applicant 's system engineering requirements. 
(2)  Whether the applicant's existing TCSF or buildings are of sufficient height to meet system engineering requirements. 
(3)  Whether the applicant's existing TCSF or buildings have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antennas. 
(4)  Whether the applicant's existing TCSF or buildings could be altered or modified to meet system engineering requirements or to support the applicant's proposed TCSF. 
(5)  Whether the proposed TCSF will experience or cause signal interference with antennas on the applicant's existing TCSF or buildings within the applicant's geographic area. 
(6)  Whether there are limiting conditions that render the applicant's existing TCSF or buildings within the applicant's geographic area unsuitable. 
(Ord. No. 5444, § 2, 4-21-2011)  
Sec. 78-44. - Waivers from the requirements of this chapter. 
The governing authority may approve a waiver of the requirements of this chapter based upon a recommendation from the plan commission for the following subsections; 78-45(7)(e), 78-45(7)(f), 78-45(7)(g), 78-45(7)(h), 78-45(8)(a), and 78-45(8)(b). 
(Ord. No. 5444, § 2, 4-21-2011)  
Sec. 78-45. - General criteria and preferences. 
(a)  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of TCSF, the titleholder or operator thereof shall ensure they are maintained in compliance with the standards contained in all applicable Village codes, including, but not limited to, the building code, State codes, federal codes, and the applicable standards for TCSF that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. The more stringent of the codes shall apply. If, upon inspection, the director concludes that a TCSF fails to comply with any one or more of such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon notice being provided to the owner or operator of the TCSF and the titleholder of the property upon which the TCSF is located, the owner, operator, or titleholder shall have 30 days to bring such TCSF into compliance with such standards. If the owner, operator, or titleholder fails to bring such TCSF into compliance within such 30-day period, the governing authority may cause such TCSF to be removed, at the expense of the owner, operator, or titleholder, as the case may be. 
(b)  Regulatory compliance. All TCSF must meet the current applicable standards and regulations of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency ("IEPA"), the Federal Aviation Administration ("FAA"), the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") the Illinois Department of Labor ("IDOL")and any other agency of the State or Federal government with the authority to regulate TCSF. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners or operators of the TCSF governed by this chapter shall bring such TCSF into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within 120 days of the effective date of such change in standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. Failure to bring TCSF into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the TCSF, at the expense of the owner, operator, or titleholder, as the case may be. All applicants for installation of TCSF must provide the Village development department with a certificate of compliance from each agency, federal or otherwise, having jurisdiction over the owner or operator for the siting, construction, installation, or modification of the TCSF that the TCSF meets current standards and regulations of the IEPA, if applicable, the FAA, FCC, IDOL, or any other agency of the State or federal government with authority to regulate TCSF. 
(c)  Security. All TCSF shall be protected from unauthorized access by appropriate security devices. A description of proposed security measures shall be provided as part of any application to site, construct, install or modify TCSF. Additional measures may be required as a condition of the issuance of any building permit, as deemed necessary by the director. 
(d)  Lighting. TCSF shall not be lighted unless required by the FAA or other federal or State agency with authority to regulate TCSF, in which case, a description of the required lighting scheme must be made a part of the application for the siting, construction, installation or modification of TCSF. 
(e)  Outdoor advertising structures. Siting, construction or installation of TCSF on outdoor advertising structures are prohibited. 
(f)  Design. 
(1)  TCSF, shall be painted a neutral color or designed consistent with the natural or built environment of the area surrounding the site. 
(2)  Shelters, cabinets, and generators must be architecturally and visually (color, bulk, size) compatible with surrounding existing buildings, structures, vegetation, and/or uses in the area or those likely to exist under the regulations of the underlying zoning district. 
(3)  Antennas, cables, or other equipment shall be of a color identical to or closely compatible with the surface to which they are mounted or attached and must be made to appear as unobtrusive as possible to the natural or built environment. 
(4)  TCSF and any related equipment shall be enclosed by a solid wood, faux wood, wrought iron, or faux wrought iron fence at a minimum height of six feet and maximum height of seven feet with landscape planted four feet on center around the exterior perimeter of the fence which will provide a year round visual barrier to a minimum height of six feet. Such enclosures shall be sized appropriately to accommodate all current and future TCSF and temporary onsite parking. 
(5)  Rooftop equipment shall be screened from public view with architectural materials that are painted or designed consistent with the built environment. 
(6)  Disguised support structures shall be subject to approval of the appearance commission, in accordance with the appearance code. 
(g)  Location and setback. 
(1)  Sites owned, leased, licensed, or otherwise controlled by the Village are preferred. 
(2)  No TCSF shall be allowed in any residential zoning district. 
Exception: Any disguised support structure located on residentially zoned properties that have a conditional use for buildings primarily devoted to religiousworship per subsection 98-50(a)(1). 
(3)  Locations where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings, or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening are preferred for the siting of TCSF. 
(4)  TCSF must be located to minimize any adverse effect they may have on neighboring property values. 
(5)  No TCSF shall be located within one-half-mile of another pre-existing TCSF, with the distance being measured, as determined by the Village, from the closest point of the existing TCSF to the closest point of the proposed TCSF. 
Exception: Any disguised support structure located on residentially zoned properties that have a conditional use for buildings primarily devoted to religious worship per subsection 98-50(a)(1). 
(6)  No TCSF shall be closer than 1,000 feet to any parcel of property used for residential, park, playground, school, library, hospital, church, historic district, landmark, nature preserve, or an area on the National Register of Historic Places. 
Exception: Any disguised support structure located on residentially zoned properties that have a conditional use for buildings primarily devoted to religious worship per subsection 98-50(a)(1). 
(7)  The minimum setback of TCSF from all adjoining property lines shall be that required for principal structures in the applicable zoning district, plus one additional foot for every one foot of height of the TCSF. 
(8)  Antennas mounted on building roofs must be located as close to the center of the building as possible but not closer than ten feet from any edge of the building. 
(9)  Preservation of view corridors of surrounding residential areas must be considered. 
(h)  Height. 
(1)  Disguised support structures located on residential zoned properties that have a conditional use for buildings primarily devoted to religious worship per subsection 98-50(a)(1) shall not exceed a height of 15 feet above the maximum permissible height, as prescribed in chapter 98, of the zoning district in which they are located. 
(2)  Height in zoning districts other than residential districts shall not exceed 150 feet. 
Exception: TCSF may be constructed or modified to exceed height limitations to accommodate co-use; provided however, that the applicant may request an extension of 20 additional feet per co-user, up to a limit of 40 additional feet, regardless of whether a co-user is actual or anticipated. In such instances the height shall not exceed 190 feet. 
(3)  Building mounted antennas must not extend more than 20 feet above the top of the structure, unless the antenna complies with the maximum permissible height, as prescribed in chapter 98, of the zoning district in which they are located. 
(i)  Co-use. 
(1)  All applications for the siting, construction, installation, or modification of TCSF shall: 
a.  Include a sworn statement from the TCSF owner agreeing to make the proposed TCSF available for use by other telecommunications providers, subject to reasonable technical limitations. 
b.  Include a sworn statement from the applicant that verifies sites owned, leased, licensed, or otherwise controlled by the Village will not be acceptable for the proposed TCSF. 
c.  Provide a written inventory of all co-users existing on the TCSF, contact person for all co-users, phone number for contact persons, owner of TCSF, and property TCSF is located upon. 
(2)  The willful and knowing failure of an applicant to agree to co-use or tonegotiate in good faith with potential co-users may be cause for either the denial of a pending application, the revocation of an existing conditional use, and/or the withholding of future permits. 
(j)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  Vehicle or outdoor storage on the site of any TCSF is prohibited. 
(2)  Temporary on-site parking for periodic maintenance and service shall be provided at all locations of TCSF. 
(3)  Any TCSF no longer used for its original purpose shall be removed, at the expense of the owner, operator, or titleholder. The owner or operator and applicable co-users, if any, shall provide the Village with a copy of any notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations and shall have 90 days from the date of ceasing operations to remove the TCSF and any related facilities. Any TCSF not in use for a period exceeding 90 days shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be removed by the Village, at the expense of the owner, operator, or titleholder. 
(4)  Upon the request of the Village, each owner or operator of a TCSF shall provide within 30 days the Village development department with a certificate of continuing compliance from each agency, federal or otherwise, having jurisdiction over the owner or operator for the continued operation of the TCSF stating that the TCSF meets the standards and regulations of the IEPA, if applicable, the FAA, FCC, IDOL, or any other agency of the State or federal government with authority to regulate TCSF. 
(5)  If the owner or operator either refuses to obtain a certificate of compliance in accordance with the provisions of subsection (10)(d) of this section or the certificating agency is unable to issue a certificate because of noncompliance, the owner or operator shall immediately cease provision of services until compliance is achieved. 
(6)  If the owner or operator is not able to achieve compliance as described in subsection (j)(4) of this section within 120 days from the date a certificate of continuing compliance is due, then and in such event, the owner, operator, or titleholder shall cause the TCSF to be removed, at its expense, from the siting location within 30 days thereafter. If the TCSF is not removed, the Village shall have the option to remove the TCSF. 
(7)  If the owner or operator does not file a certificate of continuing compliance within 30 days from the date of request in subsection (j)(4) of this section, it shall be conclusively presumed that the owner or operator is not in compliance with the standards and regulations of the IEPA, if applicable, the FAA, FCC, IDOL, or any other agency of the State or federal government with authority to regulate TCSF. 
(8)  Guyed towers are prohibited. 
(9)  Human occupancy in a shelter for office or other uses or for storage of materials and equipment not in direct support of TCSF is prohibited. 
(10)  The Village reserves the right to perform maintenance on any site that is owned, leased, licensed, or otherwise controlled by the Village, both structural and cosmetic (paint), at whatever intervals may be required to assure the integrity and longevity of the site. The Village shall make best efforts to provide tenant with six months notification of the intended work and to temporarily relocate and continue to operate its antennas, or otherwise to secure the antennas or the TCSF generally, to protect them from damage. Tenant will be permitted to install a temporary facility necessary to keep its TCSF operational at a location approved by the governing authority, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld or conditioned. Upon said notification, tenant shall remove all of its antennas and associated cables attached to the support structure, no less than 48 hours before maintenance is to begin, at tenant's sole cost and expense. Upon completion of maintenance to the support structure by the owner, tenant shall reinstall all of its antennas and associated cables, at its' sole cost and expense. Further, any maintenance will be conducted by owner as diligently and expeditiously as possible. Tenant shall have the obligation to paint its equipment, including antennas and associated cables, when first installed, the same color and quality of paint, as the support structure. Also, the parties understand that from time to time the Village will paint the support structure on which tenant's facilities are installed. When the Village paints the support structure, upon notice to tenant, it may paint tenant's equipment at the same time, excluding it's antennas and cables, to insure a uniform appearance of the support structure. Tenant agrees to reimburse the Village for owner's reasonable costs for such painting directly related to the presence of tenant's facility on the site. 
(11)  Access to Village sites is subject to check-in requirements promulgated by the Village. 
(Ord. No. 5444, § 2, 4-21-2011)  
Secs. 78-46—78-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 78-81. - Application procedure. 
The application will be reviewed by the director to determine if all required documents are submitted and those documents are in compliance with all applicable standards established in this chapter. The director may request additional information from the applicant consistent with such standards and shall transmit the application for review and comment to other Village departments and public agencies which may be affected by the proposed TCSF. The application shall not be deemed to be complete until all information and documentation requested is received and processed by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 5444, § 2, 4-21-2011)  
Sec. 78-82. - Denial procedure. 
(a)  Appeals for the denial of an application by the director due to the requirements of this chapter shall be presented to the plan commission, for a recommendation to the governing authority, in accordance with procedures provided in this chapter and in section 98-50 of the Village Municipal Code. A decision by the plan commission to affirm the director's denial shall be made in writing based upon the evidence adduced and contain specific findings of fact consistent with the criteria, preferences and considerations established in this chapter and chapter 98 as may be applicable. 
(b)  Appeals for the denial of an application by the plan commission shall be presented to the governing authority within 30 days and as otherwise provided in chapter 98 of the Glenview Municipal Code. A decision by the governing authority to affirm the plan commission denial shall be made in writing based upon the evidence adduced and contain specific findings of fact consistent with the criteria, preferences, and considerations established in this chapter and chapter 98 as may be applicable. 
(c)  Administrative review of the governing authority's denial of an application shall be made to the Circuit Court of Cook County, or any court or agency as specifically vested with such authority. 
(Ord. No. 5444, § 2, 4-21-2011)  
Secs. 78-83—78-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6160, § 2, adopted May 15, 2018, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 78-90 and 78-91, pertained to small cell wireless facilities, and derived from Ord. No. 6104, § 2, adopted Sept. 9, 2017. 
 
Sec. 78-90. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish regulations, standards, and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent the Act, as defined herein. 
(b)  Conflicts with other ordinances. This article supersedes all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. 
(c)  Conflicts with State and Federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 6160, § 2, 5-15-2018)  
Sec. 78-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except as otherwise stated or where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, P.A. 100-585. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
Applicable codes means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including, without limitation, the National Electric Safety Code. 
Authority means a unit of local government that has jurisdiction and control for use of public rights-of-way as provided by the Illinois Highway Code for placements within public rights-of-way or has zoning or land use control for placements not within public rights-of-way. Authority specifically includes, without limitation, the Village. 
Authority utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by an authority. 
Applicant means any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider. 
Application means a request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application. 
Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. 
Communications service means cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service. 
Communications service provider means a cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission of the United States. 
Fee means a one-time charge. 
Historic district or historic landmark means a building, property, or site, or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the authority pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending. 
Micro wireless facility means a small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
Permit means a written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project. 
Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization. 
Public safety agency means the functional division of the federal government, the State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents. 
Rate means a recurring charge. 
Right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use, Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines. 
Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
Utility pole means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar function. 
Village means Village of Glenview. 
Village utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public rights-of-way. 
Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna. 
Wireless infrastructure provider means any person authorized to provide telecommunications services in the State that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the application submitted to the Village. 
Wireless provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services means any services provided to the general public, including a particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities. 
Wireless services provider means a person who provides wireless services. 
Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 6160, § 2, 5-15-2018)  
Sec. 78-92. - Requirements and regulations. 
(a)  Permitted use. Small wireless facilities are permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in paragraph 78-92(b)(5) of this Code regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use. 
(b)  Permit required. An applicant is required to obtain one or more permits from the Village to collocate a small wireless facility. The Village shall receive and process applications, and issue permits, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Public safety space reservation. The Village may reserve space on authority utility poles for future public safety uses or for the Village's electric utility uses. Such reservation of space may preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility if the Village reasonably determines that the authority utility pole cannot accommodate both uses. 
(2)  Application form. An applicant shall submit an application, to include all required accompanying information and application fee(s), on a form created and amended from time to time, as needed and in accordance with this article and the Act, by the Village's Community Development Director or his designee(s). 
(3)  Application requirements. A wireless provider shall be required to provide the following information with its application when seeking a permit to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure: 
a.  Site specific structural integrity and, for an authority utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989; 
b.  The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or structures would be installed; 
c.  Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed; 
d.  The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility; 
e.  A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and 
f.  Certification that the collocation complies with the requirements set forth in Section 78-92(b)(6) of this Code, to the best of the applicant's knowledge. 
(4)  Alternate placements. With respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant. 
The Village may require the applicant to provide a written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this subsection. 
(5)  Height limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility is ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated. 
Subject to any applicable waiver, zoning, or other process that addresses wireless provider requests for an exception or variance and does not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances, the height of new or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated is limited to the higher of: 
a.  Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within 300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such facility; or 
b.  Forty-five feet above ground level. 
(6)  Requirements. 
a.  The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications. 
b.  A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications equipment. 
c.  Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. 
d.  If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the interference, including, but not limited to, powering down the small wireless facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent testing, if necessary. 
e.  The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on the interference described in this Section 78-92(b)(6) if the wireless provider is not making a good faith effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. 
f.  The wireless provider shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way. 
g.  The wireless provider shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the requirements include a waiver, zoning, or other process that addresses wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances. 
h.  The wireless provider shall comply with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a waiver, zoning, or other process that addresses requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the replacement of utility poles. 
i.  The wireless provider shall comply with generally applicable standards that are consistent with the Act and adopted by an authority for construction and public safety in the rights-of-way, including, but not limited to, reasonable and nondiscriminatory wiring and cabling requirements, grounding requirements, utility pole extension requirements, and signage limitations; and shall comply with reasonable and nondiscriminatory requirements that are consistent with the Act and adopted by an authority regulating the location, size, surface area and height of small wireless facilities, or the abandonment and removal of small wireless facilities. 
j.  The wireless provider shall not co-locate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole. 
1.  However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole. 
2.  For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. 
k.  The wireless provider shall comply with the applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety. 
l.  The wireless provider shall comply with the following stealth, concealment, and aesthetic requirements as concerning the small wireless facilities: all materials shall be colors that blend with the surroundings of the utility pole on which the facilities are mounted; the use of reflective materials is prohibited; small wireless facility component materials must blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and structures; and any wiring must be covered with appropriate covers or cable shields meeting the aforementioned coloring requirements. 
m.  Subject to Section 78-92(a) of this Code, and except for facilities excluded from evaluation for effects on historic properties under 47 CFR 1.1307(a)(4), the applicant shall undertake reasonable, technically feasible and non-discriminatory design or concealment measures in a historic district or historic landmark, as follows: 
1.  Such design and concealment measures shall not be considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes of the size restrictions of a small wireless facility. 
2.  This subsection shall not be construed to limit an authority's enforcement of historic preservation in conformance with the requirements adopted pursuant to the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation Act or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 54 U.S.C. 300101 et seq., and the regulations adopted to implement those laws. 
(7)  Completeness of application. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant accordingly. If an application is determined to be incomplete, the Village shall specifically identify the missing information. Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information. 
(8)  Application process. The Village shall process applications as follows: 
a.  An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and approved or denied within 90 days, subject to tolling provisions herein. 
b.  An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and approved or denied within 120 days, subject to tolling provisions herein. 
c.  If the Village determines that applicable codes, local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety, or the requirements of Section 78-92(b)(6) of this Code require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval may be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the provider. 
d.  The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial was based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies an application. 
e.  The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application. 
f.  Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application cure does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. 
(9)  Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by: 
a.  The express agreement in writing by both the applicant and the Village; or 
b.  A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes the delay. 
(10)  Consolidated applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities entirely within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. 
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application. 
(11)  Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for an authority utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant. 
(12)  Duration of permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period of five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable codes or local code provisions or regulations in subsections 78-92(b)(6) and (8) of this Code. 
If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 of the Act, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable Village Code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal. 
(13)  Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit applications, all supporting materials and applicable fee(s), and notices by personal delivery at the Village Hall, addressed to the attention of the Village's Community Development Director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 6160, § 2, 5-15-2018)  
Sec. 78-93. - Application fees. 
The following application fees are imposed: 
(1)  For applications that do not include new utility poles, the application fees are as follows: $650.00 for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure and $350.00 for each small wireless facility addressed in an application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures. 
(2)  For applications that include the installation of a new utility pole, the application fee is $1,000.00 for each small wireless facility addressed in such application. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance, applications pursuant to this article must be accompanied by the required application fee or the application will be deemed incomplete. 
(4)  No application, approval, permit, fees or other charges shall be required from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way for: 
a.  Routine maintenance; 
b.  The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider notifies the Village at least ten days prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment consistent with the requirements of Section 78-92(b)(3) of this Code; or 
c.  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes. 
d.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, permit to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane closures shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 6160, § 2, 5-15-2018)  
Sec. 78-94. - Exceptions to applicability. 
Nothing in this article authorizes a person to collocate small wireless facilities on: 
(1)  Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner; 
(2)  Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation, or conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this article do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed, and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act. 
(3)  For the purposes of this section, "public utility" has the meaning given to that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement (a) to obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service or (b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject to this article. 
(Ord. No. 6160, § 2, 5-15-2018)  
Sec. 78-95. - Annual recurring rate. 
(a)  An annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals (i) $200.00 per year, or (ii) the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility pole, is hereby imposed. 
(b)  Rates for collocation on Village utility poles located outside of a right-of-way are not subject to these limitations. 
(Ord. No. 6160, § 2, 5-15-2018)  
Sec. 78-96. - Aerial facilities. 
For Village utility poles that support aerial facilities used to provide communications services or electric service, wireless providers shall comply with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C. 224 and its implementing regulations. 
(Ord. No. 6160, § 2, 5-15-2018)  
Sec. 78-97. - Abandonment. 
(a)  A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility must remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the owner of the abandonment. 
(b)  The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the owner. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for authority utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. 
(c)  A wireless provider shall provide the Village with written notice if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdictional boundary of the Village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. 
(Ord. No. 6160, § 2, 5-15-2018)  
Sec. 78-98. - Indemnification, insurance, and severability. 
(a)  A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the authority improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this article and the Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability. 
(b)  During the period in which a wireless provider's facilities are located on the authority's improvements or rights-of-way, the wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and expense, the following insurance: (i) property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all risks; (ii) workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; and (iii) commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the authority improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of authority improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage. The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy as reasonably required by the Village. 
(c)  If any provision of this article or application thereof to any person or circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid provision or invalid application of this article is severable. 
(Ord. No. 6160, § 2, 5-15-2018)  
Chapter 82 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; director of public works, § 2-411; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; electrical code, § 18-221 et seq.; plumbing code, § 18-331 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; health and sanitation, ch. 38; nuisances of storm sewer connections, § 38-287; planning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 66; design standards for utilities in floodplains, § 66-194; water supply and sanitary sewer systems located in the floodplain in subdivisions, § 66-231; required improvements for sanitary sewer system in subdivisions, § 66-233; municipal utility taxes, § 70-121 et seq.; telecommunications (other than wireless), ch. 74; telecommunications (wireless service), ch. 78. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 82-1—82-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWER USE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 82-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Approving authority means the village engineer of the department of development or his designee. 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Combined sewer means a sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage. 
Control manhole means a structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The purpose of a control manhole is to provide access for the Village representative to sample and/or measure discharges. 
Director means the director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Federal act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of Amendments of 1972 (PL 92-500 and PL 93-243). 
Federal grant means the U.S. government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by title II of the act, Grants for Construction Treatment Works, and implementing regulations. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Industrial waste means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or process, or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Major contributing industry means an industrial user of the publicly owned treatment works that: 
(1)  Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day; 
(2)  Has a flow greater than ten percent of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; 
(3)  Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the federal act; or 
(4)  Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means a unit of concentration of water or wastewater constituent (0.001 grams of the constituent in 1,000 milliliters of water). Such term has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent in reporting the results of water and wastewater analysis. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Normal domestic sewage means wastewater with constituents within the limits of a BOD 5 concentration of 200 mg/l and a suspended solids concentration of 250 mg/l. 
NPDES permit means any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the administrator, or, where appropriated by the director, after enactment of the Federal Clean Water Act, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the federal act. 
Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity. 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the Standard Methods. 
ppm means parts per million by weight. 
Pretreatment means the treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater treatment works. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the Village. Such term also includes sewers within or outside the Village boundaries, that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the Village sanitary sewer system even though such sewers may not have been constructed with Village funds. 
Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the collection system to maintain the capacity and performance for which such systems were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes, or a combination thereof, and into which stormwater, surface water and groundwater or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage has the same meaning as the term Wastewater, as defined in this section. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage. 
Sewerage means the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage. 
Sewerage fund means the principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of the sewerage system. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; and the term "may" is permissive. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation. 
Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
State act means the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970. 
State grant means the State's participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of the State. 
Storm sewer means a sewer that carries stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Stormwater runoff means that portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the Standard Methods. 
Unpolluted water means water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Useful life means the estimated period during which the collection system and/or treatment works will be operated. 
User means any owner of a building which is connected to the sanitary sewer systems and which has a connection permit from the Village. 
User charge means a discharge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement. 
User class. 
Commercial user includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services. 
Industrial/governmental user includes schools, hospitals, churches and users associated with federal, State and local governments. 
Industrial user includes establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into products. 
Residential user means all dwelling units, such as houses, mobile homes, apartments and permanent multifamily dwellings. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community, which may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from the residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse. 
Wastewater service charge means the charge, per billing period, levied on all users of the wastewater facilities. 
Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Such term is sometimes used as synonymous with the term "waste treatment plant" or "pollution control plant." 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Water quality standards has the meaning as defined in the water pollution regulations of the State. 
(Code 1959, § 21.46) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 82-32. - Damage to sewer system. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewer system. 
(Code 1959, § 21.103)  
Sec. 82-33. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
Duly authorized employees of the Village, the State Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 21.104)  
Sec. 82-34. - Observance of safety rules. 
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 82-33, the village engineer or duly authorized employees of the Village, the State Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the Village employees. 
(Code 1959, § 21.107)  
Sec. 82-35. - Authority to inspect easements. 
The village engineer, director of public works and other duly authorized employees of the Village, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the Village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1959, § 21.108)  
Sec. 82-36. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 82-32, shall be served by the Village with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The Village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this article. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount of not less than $25.00, or more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, §§ 21.105, 21.106)  
Secs. 82-37—82-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 
 
Sec. 82-61. - Deposit of objectionable wastes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit, or permit to be deposited, in an unsanitary manner, on public or private property within the Village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Village, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1959, § 21.47)  
Sec. 82-62. - Discharges through natural outlets. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge through any natural outlet within the Village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Village any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 21.48)  
Sec. 82-63. - Privies, septic tanks, etc. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1959, § 21.49)  
Sec. 82-64. - Installation of toilet facilities required. 
The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the Village and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way, in which there is or may be located any public sanitary sewer of the Village, is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein. 
(Code 1959, § 21.50)  
Sec. 82-65. - Prohibited discharges to sanitary sewer. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1959, § 21.91)  
Sec. 82-66. - Unpolluted drainage and process waters. 
(a)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Village. 
(b)  Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Village, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1959, § 21.92)  
Sec. 82-67. - Prohibited discharges to public sewers. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 1959, § 21.93)  
Sec. 82-68. - Inspection of connections. 
A duly authorized employee of the Village shall be permitted at all reasonable hours to inspect or examine such potential connections of the stormwater connections to the sanitary sewer or the downspouts and sump pump connections. Discharge of stormwater to the sanitary sewer via such connections is unlawful and shall be punished in accordance with section 82-36. 
(Code 1959, § 21.94)  
Sec. 82-69. - Harmful discharges. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the Village, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of such wastes, the Village will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Any water or waste containing toxic or poisonous materials or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32—150 degrees Fahrenheit (0—65 degrees Celsius). 
(3)  Any water or waste containing strong acids, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(4)  Any water or waste having a pH in excess of nine. 
(5)  Any mercury or any of it compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l of Hg at any time in compliance with applicable State and federal regulations. 
(6)  Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time in compliance with applicable State and federal regulations. 
(7)  Material which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfite; 
b.  Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting slugs. 
(8)  Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(9)  Waters or wastes which are prohibited by any regulations of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Chicago (MWRDC). 
(Code 1959, § 21.95)  
Sec. 82-70. - Action upon discharge of harmful waters or wastes. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 82-69, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in chapter I, EPA Rules and Regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs part 128, Pretreatment Standards Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and any amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the Village, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, process, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Village may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. 
(b)  If the Village permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Village, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Code 1959, § 21.96)  
Sec. 82-71. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Village, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Village, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1959, § 21.97)  
Sec. 82-72. - Preliminary treatment and flow-equalizing facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at his expense. 
(Code 1959, § 21.98)  
Sec. 82-73. - Control manholes. 
Each industry, commercial property, business or multitenant building shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required by the Village, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Village. The manhole shall be installed by the owner, at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1959, § 21.99)  
Sec. 82-74. - Laboratory analyses. 
(a)  The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this article and any special conditions for discharge established by the Village or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. 
(b)  The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the Village, but, not less than once per year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, State and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the Village at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the Village. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the Village. At such times as deemed necessary, the Village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service. 
(Code 1959, § 21.100)  
Sec. 82-75. - Determination of measurements, tests and analyses. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Code 1959, § 21.101)  
Sec. 82-76. - Special agreements and arrangements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Village and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Village for conveyance, subject to payment therefor, in accordance with sections 82-61—82-64, by the industrial concern, provided, such payments are in accordance with federal and State guidelines for a user charge system and industrial cost recovery system. 
(Code 1959, § 21.102)  
Secs. 82-77—82-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 82-101. - When required. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of sections 82-61—82-64, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1959, § 21.51(a))  
Sec. 82-102. - Permit. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit, signed by the village engineer. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Village, which the applicant shall submit with any plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the village engineer and sanitarian. A permit and inspection fee, established from time to time by administrative order of the village engineer, shall be paid to the Village at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1959, § 21.51(b))  
Sec. 82-103. - Installation inspections. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the village engineer. The village engineer shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the approving authority, in writing, when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of such written notice. 
(Code 1959, § 21.51(c))  
Sec. 82-104. - Type, categories, location and layout. 
The type, categories, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State of Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code, and the State Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of lot is less than 50,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Code 1959, § 21.51(d))  
Sec. 82-105. - Connection to public sewer system. 
At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available under the provisions of sections 82-61—82-64, a direct connection shall be made to such public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1959, § 21.51(e))  
Sec. 82-106. - Operation and maintenance. 
Private sewage disposal facilities shall be operated and maintained by the owner in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 21.51(f))  
Sec. 82-107. - Additional requirements. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the State department of health, Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Chicago (MWRDC) or the County health department. 
(Code 1959, § 21.51(g))  
Secs. 82-108—82-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS, CONNECTIONS AND MAINTENANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 82-131. - Disturbing public sewers. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 21.52)  
Sec. 82-132. - Certificate of competency. 
No person shall be granted any permit to build any building sewer or lay any drain within the Village unless he shall have obtained a certificate as to his competency to engage in such business, as required by the department of registration and education in Springfield, Illinois. 
(Code 1959, § 21.53)  
Sec. 82-133. - Copy of State certificate and insurance coverage required to be filed. 
Every person desiring a permit to work on sewers shall file with the village engineer a copy of his State certificate, accompanied by a copy of his current insurance coverages, to be approved by the village engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 21.54)  
Sec. 82-134. - Power to suspend or revoke work permit. 
The village engineer and director of public works shall have the power to suspend or revoke the permit to work on sewers for violation of any of the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 21.55)  
Sec. 82-135. - Installation of junction pieces. 
(a)  Whenever it may be found necessary to make a connection between a building drain and the public sewer in the street where no junction piece was originally placed in the public sewer in front of the lot, the junction piece will be installed by a licensed plumber. 
(b)  Under no circumstances will drainlayers or other unauthorized parties be allowed to break into the sewers for the purpose of setting junctions or making any kind of connection whatsoever. 
(Code 1959, § 21.56)  
Sec. 82-136. - Methods of connecting to existing sewer mains. 
(a)  When connecting to an existing sewer main by means other than an existing Y, T or manhole, the method of using a pipe cutter, neatly and accurately cut out the desired length of pipe for insertion of the proper fitting, shall be used. Use band-seal couplings or similar couplings, and shear rings and clamps to fasten the inserted fitting and hold it firmly in place. Follow the manufacturer's recommendations for the installation. 
(b)  No cut-in connection, made by breaking or cutting a hole in the main and inserting the spigot end of an ordinary sewer pipe, shall be permitted. 
(Code 1959, § 21.57)  
Sec. 82-137. - Notice of house sewer connection; liability and expense of protecting trenches. 
(a)  Notice must be filed in the office of the village engineer before any street or highway can be opened for the purpose of constructing a house sewer. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall render the Village liable to the sewer builder or drainlayer or relieve him from the duty and expense of protecting trenches until such time as the Village is able to make the inspections and do any incidental work it is required to perform. 
(Code 1959, § 21.58)  
Sec. 82-138. - Permit request for opening street pavement and sidewalks. 
No sewer builder shall open any street pavement or sidewalk for the purpose of making a new connection to the sewer or for any other purpose, nor shall he tunnel under any part of the street pavement without a permit issued by the village engineer, and no such permit shall be issued except to bonded sewer builders, upon deposit by the applicant therefor of a sufficient sum to secure the cost of restoring such pavement or sidewalk, and such deposit shall not be less than $150.00 for digging in the parkway and $400.00 for excavating in the pavement, and the deposit shall be returned to the person making such deposit upon such restoration being approved by the village engineer. All street openings and sidewalk tunnels shall be backfilled by the applicant with clean sand and thoroughly compacted, and all tunnels under street pavements shall be backfilled with a one to 12 mixture of cement and limestone screenings or a one to four to eight concrete aggregate. 
(Code 1959, § 21.59)  
Sec. 82-139. - Drainage work. 
Drainage work on the outside of buildings and between buildings and the public sewer shall be constructed of SDR-26 pipe, or other material equally as good and approved by the village engineer, and shall be laid with a fall toward sewer connections of one-quarter inch to the running foot. All drainage is to be constructed to as near a uniform grade and in as direct line to sewer connections as practical. Such pipe and fittings must have a clean and smooth interior, and shall be the full area of its respective size. Pipe and fittings shall be put together with a flexible type coupling similar to the band seal or equal. Each length of pipe and each fitting shall have solid bedding of granular material or other solid and imperishable material under the full length thereof. A one-fourth bend shall not be used. No fittings or bend shall be used to change the direction of the line of drainage, unless such fitting or bend shall be of a radius of not less than 12 inches. Connection of one line of drainage with another shall be made, where at all practical, with full Y branches. The use of T connections is prohibited. Change in direction of any line of drainage shall not be made by the use of mitered pieces of straight pipe, but shall be made by the use of an approved fitting of the required angle. The interior of each joint of pipe or fitting laid shall be swabbed out before another joint is made. No clay or tile pipe or fittings shall be constructed inside or under any building, for drainage purposes, having an outlet to any sewer. All building sewers run to receive drainage of any kind from buildings shall terminate five feet outside the foundation walls of such building. No tile house sewer shall at any time be laid closer than five feet to any wall, foundation or footing, except at or nearly perpendicular to the wall or footing. If it should become necessary to place such building sewer closer to any such wall, foundation or footing, or under any area wall or pier, such building sewer shall be constructed of extra heavy cast iron pipe as for a building drain. 
(Code 1959, § 21.60)  
Sec. 82-140. - Separate storm sewer systems. 
All newly constructed commercial, industrial and multifamily buildings shall be provided with a separate storm sewer system for roof and surface drainage. Single-family residential construction should discharge stormwater at grade unless otherwise directed by the village engineer. All such separate storm sewer systems shall be connected into the storm sewers where such storm sewers are available. The sanitary and storm sewer drains may be laid side by side in one trench. 
(Code 1959, § 21.61)  
Sec. 82-141. - Obstructions to building sewers. 
Should water, gas or other pipes or drains be encountered in the direct line of a building sewer during its construction, the method of carrying the building sewer under, over or around such obstruction, or of doing anything involving a deviation from the proper line or standard grade, shall be approved by the village engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 21.62)  
Sec. 82-142. - Obstructions to sewers or drains. 
Should gas or water mains, or other pipes be encountered during the laying of sewers or drains, the pipes encountered shall be carefully and thoroughly protected against injury or settlement by the contractor, at his own expense. 
(Code 1959, § 21.63)  
Sec. 82-143. - Water, steam and condensation. 
No steam, exhaust, blow-off drip, drain or return pipe from any steam trap or heating apparatus shall connect directly with the public sewer or any building drain, soil or waste pipe, or rain water pipe. The water, steam or condensation from such pipes, before it shall enter any sewer drain, shall be discharged into a suitable intercepting basin. 
(Code 1959, § 21.64)  
Sec. 82-144. - Prevention of settlement damage. 
An arched or other proper opening shall be provided in the wall for the building drain to prevent damage by settlement. The opening around the building drain shall be filled with pure refined asphaltum, or made watertight by some other method that is satisfactory to the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1959, § 21.65)  
Sec. 82-145. - Size and dimensions of drains. 
It shall be the duty of every person installing, or causing to be installed, any drain, soil or waste pipe with any sewer from any building, structure or premises to install such drain, soil or waste pipe or connection of such size and dimensions as will convey and allow freely to pass whatever may properly enter therein, and in no case shall any such drain be less than six inches in diameter. 
(Code 1959, § 21.66)  
Sec. 82-146. - Building sewers laid in filled ground. 
The building sewer, when laid in filled ground, shall be of vitrified clay pipe, laid on a bed of approved grillage or concrete, or of cast iron pipe, American Society of Testing Materials' (ASTM) approved standards. 
(Code 1959, § 21.67)  
Sec. 82-147. - Dead ends; alterations to branch drains. 
(a)  In the installation of any sewerage or plumbing system, no dead ends will be permitted, except on such repair work where an antisiphon trap is to be used as provided in this article. 
(b)  In making alterations of any old plumbing or sewerage system, or upon removing any old fixture connected at the end of a branch drain, soil or waste pipe, such branch shall be removed for its entire length, or provision shall be made for a free circulation of air through such branch. When such pipe is cut off where it branches from the main, the opening shall be properly closed in accordance with the State plumbing code. 
(Code 1959, § 21.68)  
Sec. 82-148. - Wastes containing greasy matter. 
Waste from any kitchen sink, floor drain or other fixture that is likely to contain greasy matter from hotels, apartment houses, restaurants, butcher shops, packinghouses, lard rendering establishments, manufacturing establishments, bakeries, laundries, cleaning establishments, garages, service stations, stables, yard and floor drains and drains from gravel roofs shall be made through intervening receiving basins in accordance with the State plumbing code. 
(Code 1959, § 21.69)  
Sec. 82-149. - Steam or heating boiler intercepting basins. 
Intercepting basins for stream or heating boilers, or such basins, constructed for any purpose, shall not be placed closer than two feet to the wall of any building or area unless properly tested, and when such a basin is placed where the cover of such basin will be in the line of any sidewalk, the cover shall be made of extra heavy cast iron, or when such basin shall be within the lines of any road or driveway, such cover shall be a cast iron manhole cover and frame. 
(Code 1959, § 21.70)  
Sec. 82-150. - Floor and area drains. 
(a)  Floor drains may be installed by means of Y fittings inserted in the building drain and provided with a four-inch cast iron deep seal trap and fitted with a heavy barred strainer and back water valve or a screw type plug that is normally closed. 
(b)  Where the floor of an entrance area to a basement or a ground floor is more than four inches lower than such basement or ground floor, an area drain may be installed. The opening of the area drain shall be four inches in diameter and provided with a heavy barred strainer set so that it cannot be easily removed. The outlet pipe shall be of cast iron and shall be connected into the sewer through a frostproof trap. All such area drains shall be provided with an approved back water valve, set where it can be conveniently reached for cleaning. All area drains located outside of buildings shall be connected to the storm drain whenever the grade of the main storm sewer will permit. 
(Code 1959, § 21.71)  
Sec. 82-151. - Roof and paved area drainage. 
All roofs and paved areas, yards, courts and courtyards shall be drained into the stormwater system, but not into sewers intended for sanitary sewage only. 
(Code 1959, § 21.72)  
Sec. 82-152. - Subbuilding drains. 
(a)  All subbuilding drains shall discharge into an airtight sump or receiving tank located so as to receive the sewage by gravity, from which sump or receiving tank the sewage shall be lifted and discharged into the building sewer by pumps, ejectors or any equally efficient method. Such pumps shall be either automatically discharged or be of sufficient capacity to receive the building sewage and wastes for not less than 24 hours. 
(b)  The soil or vent pipe leading to an ejector or other appliance for raising sewage or other waste matter to the public sewer shall, where a water closet is installed, be provided with a vent pipe of not less than four inches in diameter, and where fixtures other than water closets are installed, the waste and vent pipe shall be the same diameter as the waste pipe. 
(Code 1959, § 21.73)  
Sec. 82-153. - Motors, air compressors and air tanks. 
All motors, air compressors and air tanks shall be located where they are open for inspection and repair at all times. The air tanks shall be proportioned so as to be of equal cubical capacity to the ejectors connected therewith, in which there shall be maintained an air pressure of not less than 2.3 pounds for each foot of height the sewage is to be raised. 
(Code 1959, § 21.74)  
Sec. 82-154. - Subsoil drains. 
Subsoil drains below the building sewer level shall discharge into a sump or receiving tank, the contents of which shall be automatically lifted and discharged into the drainage system above the cellar through some properly trapped fixture or drain. 
(Code 1959, § 21.75)  
Sec. 82-155. - Disposals into the sewer system. 
All disposals by any person into the sewer system is unlawful, except discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the federal act and more stringent State and local standards. 
(Code 1959, § 21.76)  
Sec. 82-156. - Permitting documentation and approval of appropriate governing agencies required; supplementation of permit application; permit and inspection fee; permit condition. 
(a)  The Village shall require proper permitting documentation and approval of appropriate governing agencies. 
(b)  The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Village. 
(c)  A permit and inspection fee of $100.00 for a residential or sewer permit shall be paid to the Village at the time the application is filed. 
(d)  The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity. 
(Code 1959, § 21.77)  
Sec. 82-157. - Demonstration of reserve capacity. 
A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load. 
(Code 1959, § 21.78)  
Sec. 82-158. - Cost and expense of maintenance, installation and connection; indemnification from loss or damage. 
(a)  The cost and expense incidental to the maintenance, installation and connection of a building sewer shall be borne by the owner. 
(b)  The owner shall indemnify the Village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1959, § 21.79)  
Sec. 82-159. - Use of old building sewers. 
(a)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Village, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(b)  It shall be the obligation of the owner, builder or developer to provide the Village with documentation that demonstrates the old sewer can meet the requirements of this article. 
(c)  It shall be at the sole option of the Village, that based on the information presented, to require the owner, developer or builder to either replace or reline the sanitary sewer for the building up to and including the point of connection with the sanitary sewer main. 
(Code 1959, § 21.80)  
Sec. 82-160. - Conformance with ASTM standards. 
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling of the trench shall all conform to the appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials (ASTM), Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 and the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. 
(Code 1959, § 21.81)  
Sec. 82-161. - Elevation; lifting of sanitary sewage. 
Sanitary wastes below the sewer shall comply with the requirements of the State plumbing code, as adopted in section 18-421 et seq. 
(Code 1959, § 21.82)  
Sec. 82-162. - Sump pump connections. 
(a)  No person shall make or maintain via sump pump connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, driveway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(b)  For sump pump connections to a storm sewer or natural outlet, maintain a two-inch minimum air gap between the discharge pipe from the structure and the receiving pipe drain that goes underground. 
(Code 1959, § 21.83)  
Sec. 82-163. - Specifications for connecting into the public sewer. 
The connection of a building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 and the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Village before installation. 
(Code 1959, § 21.84)  
Sec. 82-164. - Connections. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Village when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the village engineer and director of building and zoning. 
(Code 1959, § 21.85)  
Sec. 82-165. - Guarding of excavations; restoration of disturbed property. 
(a)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. 
(b)  Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 21.86)  
Sec. 82-166. - Breaks and cracks. 
Whenever any length of the public sewer or building sewer becomes broken or cracked, such defective length shall be entirely replaced. No patching of such break or crack will be accepted. 
(Code 1959, § 21.87)  
Sec. 82-167. - Installation and maintenance. 
(a)  All building sewers shall be installed and maintained at the cost to the owner of the premises to be served thereby. All such installations shall be under the supervision of the director of building and zoning. 
(b)  The building owner shall bear full responsibility and liability for maintaining the building sewer from the building up to and including the point of connection to the public sewer. 
(Code 1959, § 21.88)  
Sec. 82-168. - Repairs. 
The Village may, in case of emergency, but shall not be obligated to, repair any building sewer, but any repairs made by the Village shall be at the cost and risk of the owner of the premises to be served, and the Village shall not be liable for any damage resulting from the undertaking or making by it of repairs, nor for any damage caused by or resulting from obstructions in such branch or house drain sewer or from any disrepair thereof, or from failure to make needed repairs. 
(Code 1959, § 21.89)  
Sec. 82-169. - Separate and independent building sewers required; exception. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, and for every unit in a commercial building, except that, where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Code 1959, § 21.90)  
Secs. 82-170—82-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - INSPECTION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 82-191. - Establishment. 
It shall be the duty of the director of public works or his duly authorized representative to establish an inspection program and undertake an inspection of all private properties connected to the sanitary sewer system for the purpose of ascertaining whether all connections to the sanitary sewer system are installed and are operating in compliance with this article; and whether there are illegal connections to the sanitary sewer system or any clear water inflow, materials or other substances as defined by this article being discharged into the sanitary sewer system. Such inspections may be undertaken in the company of State or federal Environmental Protection Agency representatives and representatives of the MWRD (Metropolitan Water Reclamation District), and such inspections shall include observation of the sanitary sewer system and such measurements, sampling and testing as the inspector deems necessary to ascertain that substances and materials discharged into the sanitary sewer system are in compliance with the provisions of Ordinance No. 2748. 
(Code 1959, § 21.114)  
Sec. 82-192. - Authority to enter private property. 
The director of public works or such other representative authorized in this division to conduct inspections shall be authorized and permitted to seek entry into and upon private property at reasonable times, upon prior notice, if possible, for the purposes set forth in section 82-191. The person conducting the inspection shall provide the property owner with proper credentials and identification, and shall inform him of the purpose of such inspection. 
(Code 1959, § 21.115)  
Sec. 82-193. - Refusal to allow entry for inspection. 
(a)  Where a property owner fails or refuses entry to his property to an authorized representative of the Village for the purpose of inspection as provided in this division, then the Village is empowered to shut off the water supply to the property according to the following shutoff policy of the Village: 
Action 	Penalty 	Cumulative Days 
First notice 	— 	— 
Second notice 	— 	25 
Third notice 	— 	56 
Fourth notice—Door hanger 	Stated in 
section 30-1 	66 
Water shut off 	Stated in 
section 30-1 	67 
 
(b)  Where a property owner fails or refuses consent to the entry on his property for the purpose of inspection as provided in this division and the property is not connected to the Village water system or it is in the best interests of the Village to not shut off the water supply of the property, then no entry or inspection shall be made without the procurement of a warrant from the circuit court of the County. Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light of reasonable legislative and administrative standards which show that there is reason to believe that a condition of noncompliance exists with respect to a particular property in violation of this article, and for such purpose, the court may consider the visual observations of violations in plain view, citizen complaints, violations apparent from examining Village records of the property, documented violations of similar properties in the area, previous violations on the property itself and the passage of time since the property was last inspected. 
(Code 1959, § 21.116; Ord. No. 6026, § 2, 11-15-2016)  
Sec. 82-194. - Notice of violation. 
If a connection to the sanitary sewer system of any property within the Village is found, upon inspection, to be in violation of the provisions of this article, and particularly in violation of the permissible connections or of the discharge requirements contained in this article or as set forth in Ordinance No. 2748, then the director of public works or his authorized representative shall furnish the property owner with a notice, in writing, setting forth the substance of the violation and giving the owner a period of 60 days to correct the violation. Compliance shall be ascertained by the director of public works or his authorized representative by further inspection at the termination date of the compliance period set forth in the notice. 
(Code 1959, § 21.117)  
Sec. 82-195. - Remedies for failure to comply. 
If a violation is not corrected during the period of time set forth in the violation notice, or the director of public works is not permitted to inspect the premises to ascertain whether or not compliance has been achieved, then the Village may pursue such legal remedies as it deems necessary to achieve compliance, including, but not limited to, court action to enjoin such violation, or further administrative action pursuant to the notice and hearing provisions of section 82-194 to shut off water service to the property in question until the violation has been corrected. These remedies are not mutually exclusive and the pursuance of one remedy does not preclude pursuant of one or more additional remedies at the same time. 
(Code 1959, § 21.118)  
Sec. 82-196. - Roof water and sump pump discharges. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to direct the flow of roof water or sump pump discharge water in such a manner so that it creates a nuisance to adjacent property owners or occupants of such adjacent property or creates a public nuisance. Property owners must make reasonable efforts to contain the roof water or sump pump discharge water on their own property insofar as possible. In no event should the point of discharge be within ten feet of the property line unless, in the opinion of the director of public works or his authorized representative, no reasonable alternative exists. 
(Code 1959, § 21.119)  
Sec. 82-197. - Fire hydrants on private property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of public works or his duly authorized representative to establish an annual inspection program and undertake an inspection of all fire hydrants on private property on water lines connected to the Village water system for the purpose of ascertaining whether such fire hydrants are in proper working order. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any fire hydrant located on private property to: 
(1)  Maintain such fire hydrants in proper working order as established by the department of public works; 
(2)  Notify the fire department that a fire hydrant is not working; 
(3)  Repair such fire hydrants promptly; 
(4)  Maintain the area around each fire hydrant free from obstructions; 
(5)  Permit the department of public works and fire department to inspect such fire hydrants as needed; and 
(6)  Allow the Village to repair a fire hydrant when, in the judgment of the fire department, the immediate repair is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  Property owners will be notified of any fire hydrant found inoperative or in poor working order by the village director of public works. Owners of such fire hydrants shall be given written notice by the director of public works that the broken fire hydrant must be repaired within five days. The fire hydrant owner may choose to request that the Village water department repair the fire hydrant and should notify the Village of such choice within the five-day period. Failure to so notify the Village within the five-day period may result in the Village water department performing the repairs on a time and material basis. In addition, the property owner shall be subject to a fine of $200.00 if the Village is not notified within the five-day period as forth in this subsection. Routine maintenance may be performed by Village employees. 
(Code 1959, § 21.124)  
Sec. 82-198. - Fire hydrant rules and specifications. 
The department of public works may establish rules and specifications for the physical characteristics of fire hydrants, which may include the color of the hydrants, clear distance and height. 
(Code 1959, § 21.125)  
Sec. 82-199. - Fire hydrant maintenance and repairs. 
The Village shall, on a yearly basis, perform routine maintenance of fire hydrants at no charge to the property owner. The maintenance shall include inspection, painting, flushing and any minor repair. Any other repairs shall be billed to the owner of such hydrant on a time and material basis. 
(Code 1959, § 21.126)  
Sec. 82-200. - Refusal to allow fire hydrant inspection or maintenance. 
When a property owner fails or refuses to allow fire hydrant inspection and/or maintenance by an authorized representative of the Village as provided in this division and/or to notify the Village as provided in section 82-197, the Village may then repair the fire hydrant and charge the property owner on a time and material basis. In addition, the property owner shall be subject to a fine of $200.00 for failing or refusing to allow inspection and/or maintenance of the fire hydrant as provided for in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 21.127)  
Sec. 82-201. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction, be subject to section 1-16. Each day that a violation of the provisions of this division exists or occurs shall constitute a separate violation for which a separate fine or other penalty may be imposed. 
(b)  In addition to being subject to a fine, any person who violates any of the provisions of this division may be subject to injunctive relief to enjoin the continuance of such violation. 
(c)  In addition to being subject to a fine, any person violating any provision of this division shall be subject to the shutoff of water service to the property of such person whereon the violation exists until such time as the violation has been corrected. Such shutoff of water service shall be accomplished in accordance with the notice and hearing requirements set forth in section 82-194. 
(d)  Any property owner found to have reconnected the source of clear water inflow into the sanitary sewer system after having been required to disconnect such source shall be subject to the maximum penalty of $750.00 per day, with each day constituting a separate violation and the shut off of water service according to the hearing requirement set forth in section 82-194. 
(Code 1959, § 21.120)  
Secs. 82-202—82-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 82-231. - Findings; operation. 
(a)  It is hereby found, determined and declared necessary for the best interests of the Village that the existing waterworks system and sanitary sewerage system of the Village be combined into a single utility to be known and designated as the "Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System of the Village of Glenview." 
(b)  All property, real, personal and mixed, comprising the waterworks system and sanitary sewerage system of the Village as described in subsection (a) of this section is hereby found, determined and declared to constitute the properties of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the Village. 
(c)  From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, such existing waterworks system and sanitary sewerage system shall be owned and operated by the Village as a combined utility to be known as the "combined waterworks and sewerage system of the Village," and all improvements and extensions to such waterworks and/or sewerage system shall be considered as improvements and extensions to such combined utility, and all the properties, assets, obligations and liabilities of all kinds of such waterworks system and sanitary sewerage system, existing, outstanding and accruing or to accrue, shall be held, used, confessed and acknowledged as the properties, assets, obligations and liabilities of such combined utility. 
(d)  The Village waterworks and sewerage system shall be operated as part of the department of public works. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the director of public works shall direct all operations of the waterworks and sewerage system, and shall exercise control and management thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 21.1)  
Sec. 82-232. - Application for water service; payments; fixtures; procedure for plan approval, construction, inspection and acceptance of mains and extensions. 
(a)  No water shall be supplied to any building, structure or premises in the Village from the waterworks system, nor shall any person be permitted to tap any main or make any connection with any supply pipe or service pipe for the purpose of furnishing any water to any building, structure or premises, or for any other purpose, until an application, in writing, shall first have been made to the director of public works by the person desiring such building, structure or premises to be supplied with water, or desiring to tap any such main or make connection with such service pipe or supply pipe. Such application shall set out the full name and address of the applicant and shall state fully all purposes for which a water supply is desired, or for which it is desired to tap such water main or make connection with such service pipe or supply pipe, and the number of feet of frontage and depth of the lot included in the premises to be serviced, and, provided further, that any deposits or payments required to be made have been made by the applicant. Thereupon, such applicant shall be permitted to have water supplied to his building, structure or premises from the waterworks system and to tap any such water main or make connections with any such service pipe or supply pipe, as requested in such application and in accordance with the direction of the director of public works and under his supervision, and to his satisfaction and approval, provided that the tapping of any water main shall be done only by a tapper who is an employee or is duly authorized by the Village. 
(b)  Should the Village install any water main for the purpose of extending the Village waterworks system, wherein water fund revenues are used, any applicant whose building, structure or premises directly benefits from such main extension shall pay with such application a pro rated share of the cost of construction and engineering in accordance with a recapture ordinance on file with the village manager. Such payment shall be in addition to any other connection, tapping or meter fees in force at the time of application. 
(c)  All plumbing fixtures installed within the Village water service area, whether inside or outside of the Village corporate limits, must be water saving fixtures in conformance with the requirements of the Village plumbing code. 
(d)  Should the applicant install any water main or extension for the purpose of connecting to the Village waterworks system, the procedure for plan approval, construction, inspection and acceptance of such mains or extensions will conform to the following: 
(1)  The system shall be constructed in such a manner to provide each lot with a separate connection. The water mains shall extend to the extremities of the applicant's property and shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the requirements of the State Environmental Protection Agency and the Village. 
(2)  Prior to review of the plans and specifications by the Village, a cash review fee of one percent of the estimated construction costs of the required mains will be paid to the Village. 
(3)  A performance bond approved by the village manager shall be posted only in cash sufficient to cover estimated construction expenditures of the required main or extension. If a contract exists, the performance bond shall be 100 percent of the contract and ten percent for contingencies. In the absence of a contract, the estimate of the applicant's engineer shall be used, which shall include ten percent for contingencies. In addition to the bond, the applicant will post with the Village four percent of the first $50,000.00 of construction costs and three percent of the construction costs above $50,000.00 to cover the cost of inspection services by the Village. Such cash shall be posted only after the plans and specifications have been approved by the village engineer and before a construction permit is issued. During the period that such cash shall remain on deposit with the Village, the Village shall have the right and authority to deposit or invest the amount thereof in depositories or securities authorized by law and to retain for its own use and benefit all interest and income therefrom. 
(4)  All main extension plans, costs and estimates shall be checked and approved by the village engineer, and all improvements shall be inspected by him during and after completion of all construction. The applicant's engineer, with the approval of the village engineer, may make alterations and corrections where such are required to conform to existing field conditions. Changes from original plans shall only be approved when accompanied by an adjustment in the cash deposit. Changes, where made, shall be shown on the original working drawings as revisions, and noted "as-built," and signed and sealed by the subdivider's engineer. Before the completed improvements are accepted by the board of trustees, the applicant shall file one sepia copy of as-built working drawings, together with a duly executed bill of sale, in satisfactory form, granting, transferring and conveying to the Village, with proper warranty free of any claims of encumbrances, good title to the water main or extensions and any and all easements required by the Village for maintenance and repair of such mains. 
(5)  Payments from the cash escrow account shall be made periodically upon the certification of the applicant's engineer to the contractor constructing the improvement. Upon final payment to the contractor, any remaining balance shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(6)  If the applicant fails to complete the construction in accordance with the requirements of this article within two years of the date of the cash deposit agreement, the cash deposit shall be forfeited and the Village shall use all or such part of such deposit as may be required to complete the project in accordance with the approved working drawings. The two-year time limit may be extended by the Village when to do so is in the public interest. In the event of such forfeiture, the applicant shall only be entitled to the refund of that portion, if any, of the cash deposit that remains in escrow after completion of the project. 
(Code 1959, § 21.2)  
Sec. 82-233. - Water service pipes supplying two or more premises. 
No service pipe shall be laid or used to supply water to two or more distinct premises or buildings unless separate stopcocks for each of the premises or buildings shall be placed in the parkway outside of such premises as provided in this article and a permit fee shall be charged for each service. 
(Code 1959, § 21.10)  
Sec. 82-234. - Water service pipes for automatic sprinkler systems. 
Water pipes entering premises and used for fire protection only and connected with automatic sprinkler devices shall be supplied from a separate pipe having an independent connection with the main and shall be provided with an outside controlling valve and a meter of a type, design and size to be approved by the director of public works, all at the expense of the person using the automatic sprinkler system, and shall be constructed so as to permit, in the case of necessity, an uninterrupted flow of water. 
(Code 1959, § 21.11)  
Sec. 82-235. - Testing of sprinkler systems. 
Whenever the owner of a sprinkler system desires to make a test thereof, he shall first notify both the director of public works and the chief of the fire department, in writing, to that effect, at least 24 hours prior to the time of such test. All water used in connection with such test shall be measured and paid for by the owner of such sprinkler system. 
(Code 1959, § 21.12)  
Sec. 82-236. - Obstructing access to stopcocks, hydrants, etc.; interfering and obstructing with flow, retention, storage or authorized use of water. 
(a)  No person shall, in any manner, obstruct the access to any stopcock, hydrant or valve, or any public faucet or opening for taking water in any street, alley, public grounds or place connected with or a part of the water system or plant, nor pile or place any lumber, brick or building material or other article, thing or hindrance whatsoever thereon, so as to, in any manner, hinder, delay or obstruct the members of the fire department in reaching such equipment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner, interfere with or obstruct the flow, retention, storage or authorized use of water in the water system, plant or water main, hydrant, service pipe, water meter, shutoff box, public fountain, valve, engine or building connected with the water system or plant, or to cause, suffer or permit any of such things to be done. Any person who shall perform any act in violation of this section shall be punished as provided in this article, and shall, in addition, be liable for actual damage done or caused to be done. 
(Code 1959, § 21.13)  
Sec. 82-237. - Responsibility for keeping certain pipes, etc., in good repair; failure to repair leaks. 
Every person supplied with water from the village waterworks system shall keep his own service pipe and any stopcocks, buffalo or shutoff boxes and all appurtenances to his service pipe in good repair and protected from the frost at his own expense, and shall also prevent the waste of water by reason of defective pipes or stopcocks; and in case any portion thereof shall be in a leaky or defective condition, such person shall be notified by the director of public works, either in person or in writing, of such leaky or defective condition; and if the leak or defective condition is not repaired within 30 days after such notice, the water supply shall be shut off and shall not be again turned on until such person has complied with all the conditions of this article applicable thereto, except that the village water department will repair service pipe leaks at its own expense when such leaks occur between the water main and the buffalo or shutoff box and shall thaw frozen service pipes between the water main and the buffalo or shutoff box when it shall be proved in the presence of a water department representative that the water flow is not reestablished by first attempting to thaw the service pipe between the buffalo or shutoff box and the meter, and that the water flow is subsequently reestablished by thawing of the service pipe between the buffalo or shutoff box and the water main. Nothing in this section shall relieve the person supplied with water from the responsibility of replacing the service pipe between the water main and the buffalo or shutoff box if notified, in writing, by the director of public works that such portion of such service pipe is defective and in need of replacement; nor shall such person be relieved of the obligation or expense of lowering a shallow service pipe between the water main and the buffalo or shutoff box to prevent repeated freezing of such service pipe. If, upon receipt of written notice from the director of public works to lower or replace a service pipe between the water main and the buffalo or shutoff box because of a defect or shallow location, such person fails or refuses to take appropriate corrective action as requested, then the Village will not accept further responsibility for freezing or repairs of leaks. 
(Code 1959, § 21.14)  
Sec. 82-238. - Licensed plumbers to lay private supply lines, etc. 
No private supply pipe shall be laid or connection made thereto by any other person than a duly licensed or appointed plumber acting under authority of the permit for the laying of such private supply pipe or connection therewith or thereto, as provided in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 21.15)  
Sec. 82-239. - Buffalo or shutoff box. 
(a)  Any building, structure or premises with which it is desired to make connection with the Village waterworks system shall be provided with and shall have installed, at the expense of the owner, occupant or person in charge or control thereof, a buffalo or shutoff box, and such buffalo or shutoff box shall be constructed or located to the satisfaction and approval of the director of public works. No permit shall be issued to connect any building, structure or premises with the waterworks system unless such connection shall be equipped with a buffalo or shutoff box in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install a water service pipe from the water main to the buffalo box in any street or alley in the Village unless such service pipe shall be of copper or ductile iron and of at least one inch internal diameter. 
(Code 1959, § 21.16)  
Sec. 82-240. - Failure of water user to give notice of vacation of premises. 
If any person vacates any premises where water and/or sewerage service is used without notifying the director of public works and paying the balance of the charge due therefor, then the new owner or occupant of the premises shall be liable for and obligated to pay such delinquent charge. 
(Code 1959, § 21.18)  
Sec. 82-241. - Permit required for disturbing or opening streets to lay or make connections with water and sewer pipes. 
No street, alley, public ground or place shall be disturbed or opened for the purpose of laying water or sewer pipes, or making connections with water or sewer pipes unless a permit is first obtained from the department of public works. Such permits shall be granted only to licensed plumbers. The provisions of this section are not intended to apply to the department of public works. 
(Code 1959, § 21.20)  
Sec. 82-242. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-16, and in case of the failure to make repairs after notice to do so, a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1959, § 21.21)  
Secs. 82-243—82-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - METERS 
 
Sec. 82-261. - Generally. 
(a)  All water consumers supplied by the Village shall be supplied through meters only, and shall pay for the water at the rates and in the manner specified in this article. 
(b)  All meters must be purchased through the department of public works, and the kind and pattern of such water meters shall be as determined by the president and board of trustees. No other kind of meters shall be installed or used. 
(c)  All meters shall be a remote style water meter and shall be installed in a secure and protected area. A one-half-inch electrical metallic tubing raceway shall be installed through the exterior wall of a building to be located adjacent to the gas meter for remote meter wiring. The raceway shall be accessible from where it exits the building to the water meter location after building construction has been completed. The electrical metallic tubing raceway shall be installed in accordance with the Village National Electrical Codes. 
(d)  There shall be no unauthorized connections and/or valves placed in the service line from the buffalo box to the water meter. In cases where this subsection may be inapplicable, the director of public works will prescribe such placement. 
(e)  The owner of any building or premises supplied with water shall ensure that such meters are kept and remain free from obstruction on or about the meters and that such meters are conveniently accessible, as determined by the director of public works or his/her designee, at all reasonable times for the purpose of reading, inspecting or repairing the meters. For purposes of this division, repair shall include, to the extent necessary as determined by the Village, replacement. 
(f)  A duly authorized employee or contractor of the Village shall be permitted at all reasonable hours to inspect or examine such meters for the purpose of reading or repairing the meters. Refusal to permit such inspection, examination, reading or repair shall be unlawful and shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-16, and it shall be lawful for the director of public works or his/her designee to cut off the supply of water to the premises. 
(g)  After the meter is placed, only officers, employees of the department of public works, or authorized contractors of the Village shall be allowed to repair, remove or in any manner interfere with the meter. A full throat ball valve shall be placed on each side of the meter. 
(h)  The cost of such meter and the installation thereof shall be paid by the applicant or the owner of the premises where the meter is placed. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, mar, destroy or in any manner interfere with any such meter. It shall be the duty of such owner of or applicant for such meter to promptly notify the department of public works of all defects in any such meter or its failure to properly register the quantity of water used. 
(Code 1959, § 21.22; Ord. No. 5896, § 2, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 82-262. - Responsibility for installation. 
All meters shall be installed by the department of public works or an authorized contractor of the Village and shall be charged to the owner or occupant of the premises to be supplied with water. All water service pipes shall be of copper or ductile iron, and of such size and weight as the director of public works shall determine. 
(Code 1959, § 21.23; Ord. No. 5896, § 2, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 82-263. - Repairs; replacements; testing. 
The department of public works or an authorized contractor of the Village shall make all repairs on meters, charging the owner of the property with the expense of the cost of repair and parts supplied. If the meter is damaged beyond repair, a new meter shall be installed at the owner's expense, upon notice to such owner. All meters shall be installed under the direction of the director of public works or his/her designee and properly sealed and registered. 
(Code 1959, § 21.24; Ord. No. 5896, § 2, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 82-264. - Failure to operate. 
Whenever any meter, by reason of its being out of repair or for any cause, fails to properly register the water passing through it, the consumer shall be charged at the rate shown for a corresponding time of a previous year under similar conditions. If no record of a previous year exists, then it shall be the duty of the director of public works to estimate or determine, as far as possible, the amount of water consumed during the time such meter fails to operate and the consumer shall pay the amount estimated by the director of public works. 
(Code 1959, § 21.25)  
Sec. 82-265. - Water main connection charges. 
Wherever any permit for a connection with a water pipe is issued, the director of public works, or a person authorized by him, shall tap the main of the system or plant where such connection is to be made and shall insert the corporation stop. All applicants shall be charged as provided in section 30-1 for such connection, in addition to paying any and all fees for materials and labor related to such connections, as established in the Village plumbing code, as amended, and all such fees and charges shall be paid at the time the application provided for in this section is made. 
(Code 1959, § 21.26; Ord. No. 5411, § 9, 12-13-2010)  
Sec. 82-266. - Taps and meters. 
The fees for water main taps and meters, which shall be in addition to connection fees, shall be as outlined in chapter 30-1. 
(Ord. No. 4552, § 3, 8-5-2003; Ord. No. 5113, § 12, 6-17-2008)  
Secs. 82-267—82-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATING SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 82-291. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air conditioning system and refrigeration system includes any combination of equipment, whether compressor or other type, by which heat is removed from the air, wholly or partially, by the use of water. 
Building commissioner means the building commissioner of the village, or such officer or agent as shall be duly authorized to act in the enforcement of this division. 
Person means all users of water from the public supply, including natural persons, partnerships, corporations or associations. Whenever used with respect to a penalty, such term, as applied to a partnership or association, means the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
Rated capacity in tons means: 
(1)  The total maximum Btu per hour of capacity of the installation, divided by 12,000; 
(2)  The nameplate horsepower of any compressor prime mover unit for any comfort air conditioning installation, or two-thirds for any comfort air conditioning installation; or 
(3)  Two-thirds the nameplate horsepower of subsection (2) of this definition for any refrigeration installation. 
System means a single air conditioning refrigerating unit, a group or collection of such units or any other combination of air conditioning or refrigerating apparatus, or both, supplied with water through any single customer service pipe connected to the public water supply system. 
(Code 1959, § 21.27) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 82-292. - Installation permit required; exception; notice of completion of work. 
No person shall install, remodel, add to or operate any air conditioning system or refrigeration system which uses water from the public supply without first having procured a written permit from the building commissioner. All persons are required to give notice of completion of the installation. This section shall not apply to systems with a total rated capacity of less than two tons per 24 hours. 
(Code 1959, § 21.28)  
Sec. 82-293. - Notice or existing installations in lieu of permit. 
All persons who have installed air conditioning system and refrigeration system equipment prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall, in lieu of a permit, notify the building commissioner of such existing installation. Failure to give notice shall be considered a violation of this division. 
(Code 1959, § 21.29)  
Sec. 82-294. - Equipment and specifications. 
No water from the public supply shall be used by any air conditioning system or refrigeration system having a total rated capacity of two tons or over per 24 hours unless such air conditioning system or refrigeration system is equipped with evaporative condensers, cooling towers, spray ponds or other water cooling equipment and water conservation devices. Such equipment shall be of a sufficient capacity to ensure that the maximum requirements for makeup water, when operating under full loading at maximum summer temperatures, will not exceed 0.2 gallon per minute, per ton of capacity; however, a system with a total rated capacity of less than two tons per 24 hours may use water from the public supply if equipped with an automatic valve on each unit which will stop the flow of water when the unit is shut down and throttle the flow of water down to the momentary requirements of the system. 
(a)  The director of public works and persons designated by him shall at all reasonable hours have free access to premises supplied with water for air conditioning purposes in order to examine the equipment and ascertain if there is more water being used than allowed by this section. 
(b)  Water regulating devices which will minimize the waste of water shall be installed on all manufacturing processes which require the use of water from the public supply. 
(c)  On all installations using water from a source other than the public supply, there shall be a break between such installations and the public supply so as to prevent back siphonage into the public supply. 
(Code 1959, § 21.30)  
Sec. 82-295. - Use of water permissive only. 
The use by any person of water from the public supply for air conditioning or refrigeration systems is hereby declared permissive only. 
(Code 1959, § 21.31)  
Sec. 82-296. - Payment for water consumed. 
Payment for the water consumed by any air conditioning system or refrigeration system shall be paid for by the user at the rates in force in the Village at the time of such consumption. 
(Code 1959, § 21.32)  
Sec. 82-297. - Revocation of permissive use. 
(a)  The president and board of trustees is hereby authorized to revoke the permissive use of water referred to in section 82-295 by any person from the public supply at any time, if, in its judgment, such revocation is necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety. The following shall be deemed grounds for revocation of permissive use: 
(1)  Water supply emergency or an impending water supply emergency. 
(2)  Physical conditions hazardous to the potable water supply either within the premises or in the supply mains. 
(3)  Unnecessary waste of water. 
(4)  Continued or willful violations of the terms of this division. 
(b)  If any person fails to discontinue such permissive use after ten days' written notice, the director of public works may order the entire service of such person to be disconnected. 
(Code 1959, § 21.33)  
Sec. 82-298. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any of the terms of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this section. 
(Code 1959, § 21.34)  
Secs. 82-299—82-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FIRE HYDRANTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 82-321. - Opening. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than public officers in the performance of their duties, to open any fire hydrant in the Village without first having complied with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1959, § 21.35)  
Sec. 82-322. - Permit to draw water required; contents. 
Any person, other than a duly authorized employee of the Village or a member of the fire department, desiring to draw water from any fire hydrant in the Village for any purpose whatsoever shall first make application to the director of public works for a permit to draw water from the water system of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 21.36)  
Sec. 82-323. - Deposits required. 
Applications for permits required by section 82-322 shall be signed by the person desiring to withdraw water or by a fully authorized agent and presented to the director of public works. Prior to the issuance of such permit, a deposit is required by such person or a fully authorized agent of a sum of money sufficient to ensure the payment of the cost of replacing or repairing any part of the fire hydrant or meter that may be broken or damaged by such use. Such deposit shall be the amount provided for in section 30-1 of the Municipal Code. A further deposit as provided for in section 30-1 for a hydrant wrench shall be required to be used therewith. The deposit shall be returned to the depositor upon the return of the wrench and meter and upon inspection of the fire hydrant by the director of public works, showing that no damage was done thereto by such use. Any cost incurred in the replacement or repair of any part of any fire hydrant or meter shall be deducted from the deposit provided in this section. 
(Code 1959, § 21.37; Ord. No. 5411, § 9, 12-13-2010)  
Sec. 82-324. - Issuance of permit. 
Upon compliance with the provisions of sections 82-322 and 82-323, a permit to draw water from the mains through the fire hydrant designated shall be given by the director of public works, and properly executed by him. Such permit shall state, in substance, the manner in which the water is to be withdrawn and the period for which the permit is issued. The person to whom such permit is issued shall have the permit available for inspection by the officials of the Village, upon demand. The permit fee for rental of the fire hydrant, hydrant meter and the water usage fee shall be as provided in section 30-1 of the Municipal Code. 
(Code 1959, § 21.38; Ord. No. 5411, § 9, 12-13-2010)  
Sec. 82-325. - Prerequisites to openings. 
Upon the deposit of such sums as required by section 82-323, the permittee shall make proper connection to the hydrant; provided, however, that such fire hydrant shall not be opened until the permittee shall be satisfied that the connection thereto has been properly made so as not to interfere with the use of the public streets or injure the parkways of such public streets, compromise the water system or public safety, or in any manner impair the efficient operation of the fire hydrant in the event of fire; and that suitable platforms be constructed there to convey drip water to the gutter of such street if such street is paved, or into the nearest suitable culvert if such street is unpaved. 
(Code 1959, § 21.39)  
Sec. 82-326. - Additional applications and deposits. 
Upon the time designated in such application for its termination, the director of public works or his agent shall examine such fire hydrant meter. If the meter shall still be in use, he shall require a further application for a permit, stating the estimated additional time to be required for the use of such fire hydrant meter and shall require a new permit. Upon receipt of such application and the payment of a new permit fee, the director of public works shall thereupon renew the permit for the use of such fire hydrant for the time stated in such supplemental application. 
(Code 1959, § 21.40)  
Sec. 82-327. - Water no longer needed. 
When any person withdrawing water from a fire hydrant shall cease to require the further use of such fire hydrant, or if the time limited in the application shall have expired and no renewal is requested, such person shall immediately notify the director of public works of such fact and return the meter and wrench. The director of public works will compute the sum of money due the Village for the use of such water withdrawn from its mains, and shall give to such person a bill for the water consumed. 
(Code 1959, § 21.41)  
Sec. 82-328. - Disposition of fees and deposits. 
The director of public works shall promptly, upon final settlement with such persons using water under this division, notify the finance director of the amount of payment due for the water consumed and the amount of the deposit to be returned. 
(Code 1959, § 21.42)  
Secs. 82-329—82-350. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - WATER USE RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 82-351. - Water supply emergency. 
The president of the village or a duly authorized official of the Village is authorized and empowered, from time to time, as he, in his discretion, may see fit, should he find and determine that a water supply shortage exists in the Village, to meet the health, sanitary, safety, fire protection and public welfare needs of the people of the Village, to declare that a water supply emergency exists and to prohibit the drawing from the water supply lines of the Village or use of such water for any of the following purposes during such emergency period: 
(1)  Sprinkling; 
(2)  Car washing; 
(3)  Air conditioning or cooling; 
(4)  Commercial or industrial uses beyond requirements for sanitation or preserving health; 
(5)  Any other use that is not directly connected with the preservation of health, sanitation, safety or public welfare. 
(Code 1959, § 21.43)  
Sec. 82-352. - Sprinkling restrictions. 
(a)  From May 15 through September 15, lawn sprinkling shall not be permitted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., within or outside the Village limits, when supplied through the Village water system. No lawn sprinkling is permitted on the 31st day of any month. 
(b)  Lawn sprinkling is based on an odd/even day system. The last digit of an address determines the day. If an address ends in an even number, the resident can water on even calendar days; if the address ends in an odd number, the resident can water on odd calendar days. 
(c)  Watering of newly laid sod, hydroseed, trees and shrubs will be allowed a 90-day exemption to the restrictions set forth in subsections (a) and (b). 
(Code 1959, § 21.44; Ord. No. 5932, § 2, 9-1-2015)  
Sec. 82-353. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person charged with a violation of this division, who shall be found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense and shall be fined not less than $50.00, nor more than $500.00 for each such offense. Each day a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, § 21.45)  
Secs. 82-354—82-370. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 82-371. - Sufficiency of rates. 
The rates for water and sewer services shall be sufficient at all times to: 
(1)  Pay the cost of operation and maintenance of the combined waterworks and sewerage system; 
(2)  Provide an adequate depreciation fund; and 
(3)  Pay the principal of and interest on all revenue bonds issued for the construction and maintenance of the Village combined waterworks and sewerage system. 
(Code 1959, § 21.4)  
Sec. 82-372. - Rate amounts. 
Owners and tenants of premises sold, delivered or furnished with water and/or sewerage facilities by the Village shall pay rates as outlined in chapter 30-1. 
(Code 1959, § 21.5; Ord. No. 4403, § 1, 6-4-2002; Ord. No. 4474, § 1, 12-3-2002; Ord. No. 4536, § 1, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 4658, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 4723, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 4782, § 2, 8-2-2005; Ord. No. 4877, § 2, 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 4878, § 2, 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 5064, § 2, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 5065, § 2, 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 5113, § 12, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 5167, § 2, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 5168, § 2, 12-9-2008)  
Sec. 82-373. - Payment of charges. 
Any person becoming liable under section 82-372 for a charge for water or sewerage service in accordance with the rate provisions set forth in such section shall pay the full amount of such charge within 21 days after the date of mailing of the bill, or such charge shall become delinquent. Failure to pay the charge within the time specified shall subject the violator to a penalty of ten percent of the unpaid amount of such delinquent charge, which shall be collected as part of the delinquent charge. Any person who specifies a valid reason why such penalty should be waived because of unusual circumstances may obtain a waiver for the amount of the penalty upon application to the village manager; provided, however, that such person has not incurred a penalty or received a waiver during the preceding four quarters. 
(Code 1959, § 21.6)  
Sec. 82-374. - Shutoff of water for nonpayment of bills. 
In case of failure of any person to pay the water or sewerage rate charged against any building, structure or premises owned or occupied by him/her or in his/her possession, charge or control, the water on such premises shall be shut off and shall not be turned on until all bills and claims by the Village shall have been paid in full. The owners of the property shall be held liable for all charges until paid, and it shall be lawful for the director of public works of the Village to cut off or withhold the supply of water from such premises without any liability whatsoever against the Village or him/her-self. The fees for water shut-off and water restoration, which shall be in addition to all bills and claims owed the Village, shall be paid as outlined in section 30-1 of the Municipal Code. 
(Code 1959, § 21.7; Ord. No. 5411, § 9, 12-13-2010)  
Sec. 82-375. - Recovery of monies due. 
If any water or sewerage bill remains unpaid for more than 30 days after the date upon which the bill is due and payable to the Village, the village manager is hereby authorized, in accordance with law, to file notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds or registrar of titles of the County to foreclose the lien, and to sue the occupant or user of the real estate in a civil action to recover the money due for services rendered, plus reasonable attorneys' fees, to be fixed by the court. Any such judgment shall be enforced in accordance with law. In addition to the charges and penalty due, the Village is entitled to collect the costs of filing the notice of lien, foreclosing the lien and litigation costs, together with all legal expenses incurred in connection with the collection of the amount due. 
(Code 1959, § 21.8)  
Sec. 82-376. - Responsibility for payment of bills; reduction or rebate for leakage; notice to department of public works of vacation of premises. 
(a)  The owner and/or tenant of premises supplied with water and/or sewerage service shall be held responsible for all water registered by the meter and for all maintenance and/or repair charges levied and/or incurred by the Village to maintain the apparatus which supplies water and/or sewer service, including, but not limited to, water meters, water service lines, buffalo boxes and sewer service lines. 
(b)  No reduction shall be made or rebate allowed to any consumer on account of leakage or alleged leakage in any pipe, tank or other apparatus or device. 
(c)  Should the owner or tenant of a premises supplied with water and/or sewerage service not pay the charges for such water and/or sewerage services within 60 days from the date that a bill for such services is mailed to the owner or tenant, then and in such event the water supplied to such premises shall be terminated under order of the director of public works not less than ten days after written notification of such water shutoff is mailed by regular mail to the owner or tenant. 
(d)  Any person who shall vacate any premises or enter upon and occupy any premises shall immediately, before vacating or moving from such premises, notify the director of public works and request a reading of the meter. The person responsible for the payment of the water and sewerage bill shall pay in accordance with the actual amount of water used, and the village manager shall apply as much of the deposit required by section 82-232 as is necessary and shall return the balance, if any, to the person making such deposit and take a receipt therefor. 
(Code 1959, § 21.17)  
Sec. 82-377. - Sanitary sewer user charge. 
(a)  Sanitary sewer enterprise fund. The sanitary sewer enterprise fund established by Village Ordinance No. 2629 is hereby continued, and shall be supported by the sanitary sewer user charges established from or after the effective date of such ordinance utilized exclusively for the operation and maintenance, including replacement, of the sanitary sewer system of the Village. 
(b)  Established. There is hereby established a sanitary sewer user charge, which shall be based upon the actual or estimated use of the sanitary sewer system of the Village. Such charge is intended to require each user of the sanitary sewer system to pay their proportionate share of the operation and maintenance costs, including replacement, of the sanitary sewer system of the Village. Such charges are detailed in section 82-372. 
(c)  Computation. The sanitary sewer user charge rate shall be computed as follows: 
(1)  The projected annual revenue required to operate and maintain the sanitary sewer system for the year, including a replacement fund, will be determined. 
(2)  The volume of wasterwater expected to flow through the system will be estimated. 
(3)  The cost per 1,000 gallons of flow through the system will be computed. 
(d)  Review and revision. The sanitary sewer user charge shall be reviewed annually and revised as necessary to reflect any change in operation, maintenance and replacement. 
(e)  Measurement of flow. The volume of flow used for computing the total user charge shall be metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of 1,000 gallons; provided, however, that: 
(1)  The measurement of flow of any person discharging wastes into the sanitary sewer system who procures any part or all of his water from sources other than the Village water supply system, all or part of which is discharged into the sanitary sewer system, shall be estimated on a per capita consumption basis. 
(2)  Water used for yard sprinkling, if measured by a separate irrigation meter, shall be exempt from the sewer user charge. The irrigation meter must be installed in a manner deemed appropriate by the Village. The cost of installation, maintenance and replacement of such irrigation meter shall be borne by the property owner. 
(f)  Co-rated. The rates to be charged for sanitary sewer service are detailed in section 82-372. 
(Code 1959, § 21.109)  
Sec. 82-378. - Revenues. 
(a)  All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the sewerage fund. All such revenues and moneys shall be held by the finance director separate and apart from all other funds of the Village. 
(b)  The finance director shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such system as they may be delivered to him, and he shall deposit such amounts in the account of the fund designated as the sanitary sewer enterprise fund of the Village. The finance director shall administer such funds in every respect in the manner provided by statute. 
(Code 1959, § 21.110)  
Sec. 82-379. - Accounts; audit. 
The finance director shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to an audit by an independent auditing concern to be made of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage fund. The financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following: 
(1)  Billing data to show the total number of gallons billed. 
(2)  Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year. 
(3)  Number of users connected to the system. 
(Code 1959, § 21.111)  
Sec. 82-380. - Access to books, documents, papers and records. 
The State Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the Village which are applicable to the Village system or user charges for the purpose of making audits, examinations, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions of any State grant. 
(Code 1959, § 21.113)  
Secs. 82-381—82-400. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 82-401. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agency means the State Environmental Protection Agency. 
Approved means backflow prevention devices, methods or installations approved by the Village based on the Research Foundation for Cross Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American National Standards Institute or American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation. 
Auxiliary water system means a source of water outside of the Village's public water supply system. No connection to the Village's public water supply system shall be made with any other water system without the approval of the local authority. 
Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the intended source of the potable water supply. 
Backflow prevention device means any device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for backflow prevention in the State must meet the standards of the State plumbing code and the State Environmental Protection Agency. 
Consumer and customer mean the owner, official custodian or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system. 
Consumer's or customer's water system means any water system serving the premises, commencing at the outlet side of the service pipe shutoff valve location as stated in this division. 
Contamination means the introduction into water of micro-organisms, chemicals, wastes or wastewater in a concentration that makes water unfit for its intended use. 
Cross connection means any connection through which a supply of potable water could be contaminated or polluted. 
Double check valve assembly means an assembly composed of single, independently acting check valves, including the shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water tightness of each check valve. 
Fixed air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle. 
Health hazard means any condition, device or practice in a water system or its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-being of consumers. The term "severe," as used to qualify the term "health hazard," means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life. 
Inspection means a plumbing inspection to carefully and critically examine all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the State plumbing code, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 890. 
Local authority means the village president and board of trustees and their duly authorized agents. 
Nonpotable water means water not safe for drinking, personal use or culinary use as determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Admin. Code 604. 
Plumbing means the actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of a plumbing system by any person. Such term includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems from the source of a private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to within and about any building where persons live, work or assemble. Such term includes all piping from the discharge of the pumping unit to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Such term includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building where persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls. 
Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. 
Potable water means water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Admin. Code 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes. 
Potential cross connection means a fixture or appurtenance with a threaded hose connection, tampered spout or other connection which would facilitate extension of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point. 
Process fluid means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water system, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Polluted or contaminated waters; 
(2)  Process waters; 
(3)  Used waters originating from the public water supply system, which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; 
(4)  Cooling waters; 
(5)  Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation systems; 
(6)  Chemicals in solution or suspension; 
(7)  Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes. 
Public water supply system means all mains, pipes and structures owned and/or maintained by the Village through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing potable water. 
Reduced pressure zone principle backflow prevention device (RPZ) means a device containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves, together with an automatically operating pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. 
Service connection means the physical connection to the water main, including all fittings and appurtenances, through which water is supplied to the consumer. 
Survey means the collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross connection control devices and methods located within the customer's piping system. The survey shall be completed on a form supplied by the Village. 
(Code 1959, ch. 21, art. VIII, § A) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 82-402. - General policy. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the rules and regulations set forth in this division are to: 
(1)  Protect the public water supply system from contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public water supply system. 
(2)  Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing substances of unknown or questionable quality. 
(3)  Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the public and consumer's potable water systems. 
(b)  Application. The rules and regulations set forth in this division shall apply to all premises served by the public potable water supply system of the Village. 
(Code 1959, ch. 21, art. VIII, § B)  
Sec. 82-403. - Prohibited connections. 
(a)  No person shall establish or maintain, or permit to be established or maintained, any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply, other than the regular public water supply of the Village, may enter the supply or distribution system of such municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved, in writing, by the director of public works and/or plumbing inspectors and the State Environmental Protection Agency. 
(b)  No connection shall be permitted between the public water supply system and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency and/or the Village. 
(c)  There shall be no arrangement or connection by which contamination may enter the public water supply system. 
(Code 1959, ch. 21, art. VIII, § C)  
Sec. 82-404. - Surveys and investigations. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of public works to cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties and premises served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated as often as the director of public works shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five years. 
(b)  The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the certified cross connection control device inspector or his duly authorized agent (CCCDI) for the inspection of the presence or absence of cross connections within the consumer's premises and testing, repair and maintenance of cross connection control devices within the consumer's premises. 
(c)  On request by the director of public works or his authorized representatives, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system for water use within the consumer's premises and cross connection inspection results. The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the director of public works and/or his duly authorized agent for the verification of information submitted by the consumer regarding the piping system for water use and cross connection inspection results. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange periodic surveys of water use practices on the consumer's premises to determine whether there are actual or potential cross connections to the consumer's water system through which contamination or pollution could backflow into the consumer's or the public potable water system. All cross connection controls or other plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with 225 ILCS 320/3(1). 
(e)  It is the responsibility and financial obligation of the water consumer to prevent backflow into the public water supply system by ensuring that: 
(1)  All cross connections are removed, or approved cross connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and backsiphonage. 
(2)  Cross connection control devices are installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(3)  Cross connection control devices are inspected at least annually by a CCCDI. The inspection of mechanical devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(4)  Testing and recording is accomplished as follows: 
a.  Each device shall be tested at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer or director of public works. 
b.  Records submitted to the director of public works shall be available for inspection by agency personnel in accordance with 415 ILCS 5/4(e). 
c.  Each device shall have a tag attached, listing the date of the most recent test, name of the CCCDI, and type and date of repairs. 
(5)  A maintenance log is maintained, which shall include the following: 
a.  Date of each test; 
b.  Name and approval number of the person performing the inspection or test; 
c.  Test results/inspection; 
d.  Repairs or servicing required; 
e.  Repairs and dates completed; and 
f.  Services performed and dates completed. 
(Code 1959, ch. 21, art. VIII, § D)  
Sec. 82-405. - Backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each water service line to a consumer's water system when, in the judgment of the director of public works or his authorized representative, based upon State Environmental Protection Agency regulations, an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system may exist. 
(b)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each water service line to a consumer's water system where the following conditions exist: 
(1)  A premises having an auxiliary water system, unless such auxiliary water system is accepted as an additional source by the director of public works and the source is approved by the agency and local authority. 
(2)  A premises where any substance exists which can create an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. 
(3)  A premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of the director of public works, are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross connections exist. 
(4)  A premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross connection survey. 
(5)  A premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished. 
(c)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each water line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the director of public works determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system exists: 
(1)  Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics or nursing homes. 
(2)  Laboratories. 
(3)  Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater pumping stations. 
(4)  Food or beverage processing plants. 
(5)  Chemical plants. 
(6)  Metal plating industries. 
(7)  Petroleum processing or storage plants. 
(8)  Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors. 
(9)  Carwashes. 
(10)  All commercial, retail and industrial accounts, all water services larger than two inches, all irrigation lines and all fire sprinkler lines. 
(d)  Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 pounds per square inch (psi) or less. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the director of public works at least once a year that the device is operable. 
(Code 1959, ch. 21, art. VIII, § E)  
Sec. 82-406. - Type of protection required. 
(a)  The type of protection required shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists, as follows: 
(1)  An approved fix air gap shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated, causing a severe health hazard. 
(2)  An approved fixed air gap or an approved reduced pressure zone principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water supply system may be contaminated, causing a system or health hazard. 
(3)  An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure zone principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health. 
(b)  The type of protection required under section 82-405 shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
(c)  Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventors shall be installed between the fire sprinkler systems connected to the public water supply system, when: 
(1)  The sprinkler system contains antifreeze and/or chemical additives; 
(2)  Water may be pumped into the system from another source and can be connected to the sprinkler system. 
(Code 1959, ch. 21, art. VIII, § F)  
Sec. 82-407. - Approval required. 
All backflow prevention devices, methods, installations and maintenance required by this division shall be approved by the Village based on the Research Foundation for Cross Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering or American National Standards Institute, or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in compliance with applicable industry specifications. The manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on-site. 
(Code 1959, ch. 21, art. VIII, § G)  
Sec. 82-408. - Inspection and maintenance. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the consumer at the premises on which backflow prevention devices required by this division are installed, to have inspections, tests, maintenance and repairs made in accordance with the following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in the manufacturer's instructions: 
(1)  Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter. 
(2)  Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service performed within 15 days. 
(3)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be tested at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer. 
(b)  Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the agency as competent to service the device. Proof of such approval shall be in writing. 
(c)  Each device shall have a tag attached, including the information required in sections 82-404(e)(4)c. and 82-404(e)(5). 
(d)  Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this division are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the consumer within 15 days or as specified by the director of public works. 
(e)  Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the director of public works. 
(f)  Copies of all test results shall be forwarded to the director of public works at the time of each inspection as described in section 82-404. 
(Code 1959, ch. 21, art. VIII, § H)  
Sec. 82-409. - Corrective actions. 
Nothing in this division shall prevent the Village from taking such other action as it deems necessary to prevent or remedy a violation of this article. 
(Code 1959, ch. 21, art. VIII, § I)  
Sec. 82-410. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The director of public works may deny or discontinue, after ten days' prior written notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by this division is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the director of public works, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cutoff required by this division is not installed and maintained in working order. 
(b)  In the case of an identified cross connection, the director of public works or his duly authorized representative shall take immediate action to terminate the potable supply of water to the premises, without notice; provided, however, that written notice shall be given to the owner or occupant of the premises as soon as practicable under the circumstances as exist at the time such water service to the premises is terminated. 
(c)  Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with this division and to the satisfaction of the director of public works, and the required reconnection fee is paid. 
(d)  Any person charged with a violation of this division, who shall be found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense and shall be fined as provided in section 1-16. Each day a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, ch. 21, art. VIII, § J)  
Chapter 86 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; weeds and rubbish, § 38-311 et seq.; planning, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 66; required improvements for planting trees in subdivisions, § 66-236; zoning, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 86-1—86-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TREES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-31. - Purpose. 
The regulation of trees by this article, supplemented by the Tree Standards Manual, is intended to accomplish the protection, preservation, replacement, planting and maintenance of trees within the Village and the following related goals: 
(1)  Protect and enhance the quality of life and the general welfare of the Village and its residents, and conserve and enhance the Village's physical and aesthetic environment by: 
a.  Reducing energy consumption by providing summer shade and blocking winter wind; 
b.  Providing a buffer and screen against noise, and light pollution; and 
c.  Reducing air pollution through the removal of carbon dioxide, generation of oxygen and the precipitation of dust and other airborne pollutants. 
(2)  Protect and increase property values in a manner that maintains each property owner's enjoyment of his/her property. 
(3)  Recognize historic significance and maintain the natural heritage of the community. 
(4)  Protect and enhance our natural environment by: 
a.  Providing habitat and food that are essential for wildlife, including migratory and nesting birds, to sustain them and the many benefits they provide, including control of insects. 
b.  Stabilizing topsoil by preventing or minimizing soil erosion and sedimentation. 
c.  Controlling stormwater runoff through the detention and absorption of water. 
(5)  Eliminate trees that constitute a threat, danger or nuisance to the public or property in the Village, or that may be dangerous to the health of other trees and vegetation in the Village. 
(6)  Protect and restore, to the greatest extent possible, denuded soil that results from construction and grading work, and protect existing healthy trees during the course of development. 
(7)  Ensure diversity of tree species within individual neighborhoods and the Village of Glenview as a whole. 
(8)  Utilize best efforts to ensure an aesthetically pleasing landscape design and maintain neighborhood characteristics. 
(Code 1959, § 20.1; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 86-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction means any manmade change, other than maintenance of existing structures, paved areas or utilities, to improved or unimproved real estate, including, without limitation, the construction or installation of new or enlargement of existing structures, streets or utilities; dredging, filling, drilling, mining, grading, paving or excavating operations; demolition; and open storage of materials. 
Damage means to take any direct or indirect action that causes, or is reasonably likely to cause, the death of a tree or a significant loss of a tree's structural integrity, including, without limitation, destruction, poisoning, carving, mutilating, girdling or severing the main trunk, leader or large branches, touching with live wires, crushing or exposing the roots, digging or drilling any hole or trench within the root zone, filling with soil or other materials within the root zone, compacting a substantial portion of the soil in the root zone or moving a tree to another location. Without limitation of the foregoing, such term does not include the pruning of trees in accordance with national pruning standards. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH) means the diameter of the trunk of a tree, measured in inches, at a point four and one-half feet above the existing grade at the base of the tree (or circumference divided by pi). 
Diseased tree means any of the following types of trees: 
(1)  Trees infected with Dutch elm disease or oak wilt, as determined by laboratory analysis or by any other reliable means or positive field test. 
(2)  Trees, or parts thereof, in a dead or dying condition that may serve as breeding places for the European elm bark beetle, Dutch elm disease or oak wilt, or phloem necrosis. 
(3)  Trees of any species or variety infected with the Asian long horned beetle or the Asian cerambycid beetle (anoplophora glabripennis). 
(4)  Trees of any species or variety infected with any other disease known or which may be discovered in the future which may threaten the health of other trees or vegetation in the Village. 
Invasive species means a plant that has a tendency to spread and which is believed to cause damage to the environment, human ecology and/or human health. 
Landmark trees means all non-nuisance species, varieties and cultivars of the trees listed in the species list in the Village Tree Standards Manual, of a size as follows: 
(1)  Class A, 16 inches DBH; 
(2)  Class B, 16 inches DBH; and 
(3)  Class C, 20 inches DBH. 
National pruning standards means the most current ANSI A300 standards (referred to in this article as "pruning standards") and all updates as described in the Village Tree Standards Manual, which are incorporated into this article by this reference. 
Nuisance tree means an invasive species or the following species of trees: 
(1)  Buckthorn; 
(2)  Russian olive; and 
(3)  Ailanthus/tree-of-heaven. 
Nursery stock standards means the American Standards for Nursery Stock, as approved by the American Standards Institute, Inc., issued as ANSI Z60.1990, as such standards exist on the date of adoption of this Code, and all updates as described in the Village Tree Standards Manual, which are incorporated into this article by reference. 
Public tree means any tree located on right-of-way of the Village or any other jurisdiction, or any other tree owned by the Village. 
Public works means the department of the Village that is responsible for the administration of this article. 
Regulated tree activity means any activity specified in Section 86-33. 
Remove and removal mean the physical detachment or elimination of a tree, or the effective detachment or elimination of a tree through damage or otherwise. Without limitation of the foregoing, such terms do not include the pruning of trees in accordance with the pruning standards. 
Root zone means the area inscribed by an imaginary circular line on the ground beneath a tree, having as its centerpoint the center of the trunk of the tree and a radius equal to one foot for each inch of tree diameter. 
Subdivision code means Chapter 66, and the subdivision and engineering guide, as amended. 
Tree means a self-supporting, woody plant, together with its root system, having a well-defined stem or trunk or a multi-stemmed trunk system, a more or less well-defined crown and a mature height of at least eight feet. Such term shall not include trees in containers or nursery stock trees maintained for resale. 
Tree emergency means the existence of any tree within the Village, that has become an immediate danger or hazard to persons or property as a result of any tornado, windstorm, flood, freeze, or other natural disaster. 
Tree permit means the permit required pursuant to Section 86-61. 
Tree permit application means the application required for issuance of a tree permit pursuant to Section 86-62. 
Tree replacement list means the list of species eligible as tree replacements as set forth in the Village tree standards. 
Village Manager means the Village Manager or designee. 
Village tree standards means the standards, rules, applications and tree replacement lists contained in the tree value classes and specifications for public and private improvements, as amended. 
Zoning code means Chapter 98, as amended. 
(Code 1959, § 20.2; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-33. - Regulated tree activities. 
The following activities are regulated tree activities: 
(1)  Any activity that anticipates or involves the actual or reasonably likely damage or removal of a landmark or public tree. 
(2)  Any application for approval of a subdivision of land, as defined in the subdivision code, that anticipates or involves the actual or reasonably likely damage or removal of any landmark or public tree. 
(3)  Any application for a special permit or site plan review for development under the zoning code, that anticipates or involves the actual or reasonably likely damage or removal of any landmark or public tree. 
(4)  Any application for a building or demolition permit under this article, that involves the construction, alteration or enlargement of any building, structure or surface by adding an impervious area of 400 square feet or more to the land on which it is located and that anticipates or involves the actual or reasonably likely damage or removal of any landmark or public tree. 
(Code 1959, § 20.3; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 86-34. - Lien for abatement costs. 
(a)  Whenever billing for the removal or abatement of an illegal tree under this article, by or under the supervision of Village personnel, remains unpaid 60 days after billing for such service has been rendered, the village manager may file a statement of lien claim with the recorder of deeds of the County. Such statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the billing, plus administrative costs, and a notice that the Village claims a lien for the total amount. 
(b)  If the resident whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises, and the village manager has knowledge thereof, notice shall also be mailed to the owner of the premises. 
(c)  The failure of the village manager to mail such notice or the failure of the owner of the premises to receive such notice shall not affect the right of the Village to foreclose the lien for the unpaid services rendered. 
(d)  The village attorney may institute foreclosure proceedings, in the name of the Village, in the circuit court, against any property for which a lien claim for unpaid service charges and administrative costs has been duly filed. 
(Code 1959, § 20.50)  
Sec. 86-35. - Tree value classes. 
(a)  The following four tree value classes are recognized based on their aesthetic and ecological value, rate of growth and whether they create nuisance conditions: 
(1)  A, outstanding quality; 
(2)  B, good quality; 
(3)  C, moderate quality; and 
(4)  N, nuisance. 
(b)  The following trees are classified as set forth in this subsection: 
Ailanthus/tree-of-heaven 	N 
Apple 	B 
Arborvitae 	A 
Ash 	B 
Aspen 	C 
Bald cypress and metasequoia 	B 
Birch 	B 
Black locust 	C 
Box elder 	C 
Buckthorn 	N 
Catalpa 	B 
Cherry 	B 
Cottonwood 	C 
Douglas fir 	B 
Elm (native species) 	B 
English elm 	B 
Fir 	B 
Hackberry 	B 
Hawthorn 	B 
Hickory 	A 
Honey locust 	B 
Horse chestnut and buckeye 	B 
Ironwood (hop hornbeam) A 	
Kentucky coffee tree 	B 
Linden/basswood 	B 
Magnolia 	B 
Mulberry 	C 
Oak (red oak subfamily) 	A 
Oak (white oak subfamily) 	A 
Pines 	B 
Russian olive 	N 
Siberian elm 	C 
Silver maple 	C 
Spruces 	B 
Sugar maple 	B 
Sycamore 	B 
Walnut 	B 
Willow 	C 
 
(Code 1959, Attachment A)  
Sec. 86-36. - Violations. 
(a)  Penalties. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than $1,000.00, in addition to the applicable tree replacement fee as provided in subsection (b). Each day such violation or failure to comply is permitted to exist after notification thereof, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Tree replacement fee. In addition to the penalties described in subsection (a), any person who violates this article by destroying or removing a protected tree shall pay a tree replacement fee. The tree replacement fee shall be set forth in the Village Tree Standards Manual. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation of business license. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article two or more times during any 18-month period shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of their business license pursuant to Chapter 22. 
(Code 1959, § 20.60; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Secs. 86-37—86-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LANDMARK TREES 
 
Sec. 86-61. - Permit. 
(a)  When required. Except as expressly provided in subsection (b), tree permits shall be required: 
(1)  To remove a landmark tree; and 
(2)  Prior to the commencement of any regulated tree activity involving a landmark tree. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Pruning. A tree permit shall not be required for the pruning of any landmark tree in compliance with the pruning standards. 
(2)  Tree emergency. 
a.  In the case of a tree emergency, the Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to: 
1.  Issue a tree permit without a tree permit application; 
2.  Waive the requirement for a tree permit set forth in this section; or 
3.  Waive any of the other regulations of this section or this article. 
b.  Notwithstanding any other regulations of this article, if a tree emergency occurs, the person endangered by the tree emergency may take any reasonable action necessary to avoid or eliminate the immediate danger or hazard. The action taken shall be an action that is least likely, under the circumstances, to cause damage or removal of any tree, and the Village assumes no responsibility or liability for any such action taken. The person taking such action shall document the reasons for the tree emergency by photograph or videotape of the tree emergency condition and the damage or hazard created by such condition, and shall report the action taken to any of the above Village officials within 48 hours after the action is taken. 
(Code 1959, § 20.10; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 86-62. - Permit application. 
(a)  Submission. Applications for a landmark tree permit shall be submitted to the Village on a form provided by the Director of Public Works as set forth in the Village Tree Standards Manual. 
(b)  Approval and issuance. Upon receipt of a landmark tree permit application, the Director of Public Works or his designee shall, at his discretion, visit and inspect the property, and contiguous and adjoining lots in order to evaluate the tree permit application. The Director of Public Works shall approve a tree permit application and issue a tree permit if, based on the tree permit application, inspection of the property and all other reliable and relevant information, the Director of Public Works determines that all of the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The proposed regulated tree activity has been planned and will be performed in such a manner, to such a degree and with such equipment and personnel so as to: 
a.  Reasonably involve the least amount of damage or removal of the tree; and 
b.  Not defeat or be inconsistent with the purposes and intent of this article as set forth in Section 86-31. 
(2)  The tree permit application, including, without limitation, the construction activity protection plan, if required, satisfies the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Conditions. As a condition of the issuance of a tree permit, the Director of Public Works may require one or more of the following: 
(1)  Any landmark or public tree that may be affected by such regulated tree activity be preserved and protected; and 
(2)  Any or all landmark or public trees that may be affected by such regulated tree activity be replaced in accordance with the tree replacement standards set forth in section 86-64. 
(d)  Denial. If the tree permit application, inspection of the property and consideration of all other reliable and relevant information reveal that the applicant has not satisfied the conditions of subsection (b) or has not otherwise justified the damage or removal of trees to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, then the Director of Public Works shall promptly notify the applicant that the tree permit application is denied and that no tree permit shall be issued. 
(e)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decisions of Director of Public Works. Appeals from any decision of the Director of Public Works issuing or revoking a tree permit, denying a tree permit application, or granting or denying an exemption pursuant to subsection (e) shall be heard by the Natural Resources Commission. All decisions made by the Natural Resources Commission will be recommended to the Village Manager for final decision. Appeals of the Village Manager's decision shall be heard by the Village Board of Trustees. 
(2)  Decisions of Village Manager. The decision of the Village Manager may be appealed to the Village Board of trustees, but the board of trustees is not obligated to consider the appeal. 
(3)  Stay of regulated tree activities. The filing of a written notice of appeal pursuant to this subsection shall stay all regulated tree activity and other activity for which a tree permit subject to the appeal has been granted or sought. 
(f)  Term, expiration and renewal. Tree permits shall have no expiration dates unless otherwise indicated. 
(Code 1959, § 20.11; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 86-63. - Permit revocation and remedies. 
Tree permits shall be subject to the same provisions for revocation and other remedies as are applicable to building permits issued pursuant to chapter 18. 
(Code 1959, § 20.12; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 86-64. - Protection and preservation. 
(a)  Required. 
(1)  Regulated tree activities. All regulated tree activities shall be planned and performed in such a manner, to such a degree and with such equipment and personnel so as to: 
a.  Reasonably involve the least amount of damage or removal of landmark or public trees; and 
b.  Not defeat or be inconsistent with the purposes and intent of this article as set forth in Section 86-31. 
(2)  Construction activity. To ensure the protection of landmark and public trees before, during and after construction activity, a construction activity protection plan shall be required in accordance with Section 86-65. 
(b)  Replacement. 
(1)  Exemptions. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to waive tree replacement requirements if he or she determines that any of the following circumstances exist: 
a.  A landmark or public tree, due to natural causes, is dead, dangerous or interferes with any existing or proposed public improvements, is in dangerous proximity to any public utility lines or related facilities, or is a diseased tree or otherwise unsafe, unhealthy or insect-infected and constitutes a hazard to persons, property or other trees. 
b.  A landmark or public tree, due to natural causes, obstructs any street, sidewalk or pedestrian path, to such an extent that such protected tree interferes with free passage and clear view along such street, sidewalk or pedestrian path and at any street or driveway intersection. 
c.  Removal of a landmark or public tree is necessary to properly enhance the health and appearance of existing trees, shrubs and other vegetation in a manner to implement a landscaping scheme that the Director of Public Works determines complies with the current standards generally observed by professionals in the arboriculture, forestry, landscaping and landscape architecture professions. 
d.  The applicant demonstrates a hardship or special and unique circumstances. 
(2)  Replacement. 
a.  Required; exceptions. 
1.  Replacement shall be mandatory for the damage or removal of any landmark or public tree in the course of a regulated tree activity, except in the following instances: 
i.  Damage or removal of a nuisance tree. 
ii.  Damage or removal of a landmark or public tree which, due to natural causes, is dead, dangerous or interferes with any existing or proposed public improvements, is in dangerous proximity to any public utility line or related facility or is a diseased tree or otherwise unsafe, unhealthy or insect-infected and constitutes a hazard to persons, property or other trees. 
iii.  Where a landmark tree is lawfully removed, and where, following such removal, the remaining trees on the property on which it was located total at least 16 inches DBH for every 1,000 square feet of land area in the combined area of the required front yard and buildable area of the lot, and, further provided, that a minimum of 16 inches DBH of remaining trees is located in the required front yard of the property. 
2.  Tree replacement shall be required regardless of whether the landmark tree that is damaged or removed is located on the same lot on which the regulated tree activity takes place. 
b.  Formula. Landmark and public trees shall be replaced by trees as specified in the Village Tree Standards Manual. 
c.  Specifications. All tree replacements shall conform to the specifications set forth in the Village Tree Standards Manual. 
d.  Fee in lieu of replacement. An applicant may request that the Village accept a tree replacement fee in lieu of the required tree replacement. Acceptance of such a request shall be in the discretion of the Director of Public Works. If a request is accepted, regulations shall apply as set forth in the Village Tree Standards Manual. 
(Code 1959, § 20.13; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 86-65. - Construction activity protection plan. 
A construction activity protection plan shall be filed with all landmark tree permit applications in which the proposed regulated tree activity is construction activity as defined in Section 86-33. The requirements for the construction activity protection plan shall be as found in the Village Tree Standards Manual. 
(Code 1959, § 20.14; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Secs. 86-66—86-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 86-91. - Construction activity tree permit. 
(a)  Required. Except as expressly provided in subsection (b) of this section, construction activity tree permits shall be required prior to the commencement of any activity that involves the construction, alteration or enlargement of any building, structure or surface by adding an impervious area of 400 square feet or more to the land on which such activity located and that anticipates or involves the actual or reasonably likely damage or removal of any tree which is greater than ten inches DBH. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Pruning. A tree permit shall not be required for the pruning of any tree in compliance with the pruning standards. 
(2)  Tree emergency. 
a.  In the case of a tree emergency, the director of public works is hereby authorized to: 
1.  Issue a tree permit without a tree permit application; 
2.  Waive the requirement for a tree permit set forth in this section; or 
3.  Waive any of the other regulations of this section or this article. 
b.  Notwithstanding any other regulations of this article, if a tree emergency occurs, the person endangered by the tree emergency may take any reasonable action necessary to avoid or eliminate the immediate danger or hazard. The action taken shall be an action that is least likely, under the circumstances, to cause damage or removal of any tree, and the Village assumes no responsibility or liability for any such action taken. The person taking such action shall document the reasons for the tree emergency by photograph or videotape of the tree emergency condition and the damage or hazard created by such condition, and shall report the action taken to any of the above Village officials within 48 hours after the action is taken. 
(Code 1959, § 20.20)  
Sec. 86-92. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Submission. Applications for a construction activity tree permit shall be submitted to the Village on a form provided by director of public works as set forth in the Village tree standards. 
(b)  Approval and issuance. Upon receipt of the construction activity tree permit application, the director of public works shall, at his discretion, visit and inspect the property, and contiguous and adjoining lots in order to evaluate the tree permit application. The director of public works shall approve a construction permit application and issue a tree construction activity permit if, based on the permit application, inspection of the property and all other reliable and relevant information, the director of public works determines that all of the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The proposed construction tree activity has been planned and will be performed in such a manner, to such a degree and with such equipment and personnel so as to: 
a.  Reasonably involve the least amount of damage or removal of trees; and 
b.  Not defeat or be inconsistent with the purposes and intent of this article as set forth in section 86-31. 
(2)  The construction activity protection plan satisfies the requirements of the Village tree standards. 
(Code 1959, § 20.21)  
Sec. 86-93. - Permit revocation and remedies. 
Construction activity tree permits shall be subject to the same provisions for revocation and other remedies as are applicable to building permits issued pursuant to chapter 18. 
(Code 1959, § 20.22)  
Secs. 86-94—86-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PARKWAY AND PUBLIC TREES 
 
Sec. 86-111. - Protected. 
Parkway trees and other trees owned by the Village shall be treated in the same manner as set forth for landmark trees in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 20.23; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Secs. 86-112—86-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - DUTCH ELM AND OTHER DISEASES 
 
Sec. 86-131. - Enforcement; interference. 
The Village Manager is charged with enforcement of this division. To that end and subject to constitutional limitations, he may authorize an appropriate Village employee or officer to enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for purposes of inspecting trees thereon and for the removal of such specimens as are required for purposes of analysis to determine whether or not the specimens are infected. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the Village Manager or designee from entering on private property for purposes of carrying out his duties under this division or to interfere with the Village Manager or designee in the lawful performance of his duties under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1959, § 20.40; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 86-132. - Control and eradication. 
(a)  Trees of all species and varieties of elm, zelkova and planera that are affected with fungus ceratostomella ulmi, as determined by the Director of Public Works, are hereby declared to be illegal and shall be removed and disposed of within 30 days following notification of the discovery of such infection. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns property on which such a tree is situated to possess or keep such tree after the expiration of 15 days following notification of the discovery of the infection. 
(b)  Trees, or parts thereof, that are infected by the European elm bark beetle, scolytus multistraitus, are declared to be illegal. It shall be unlawful for the person owning property whereon such infected trees, or parts thereof, are situated to possess or keep such infected trees, or parts thereof. 
(c)  Trees, or parts thereof, that are infected by the Asian long horned beetle or the Asian cerambycid beetle, anoplophora glabripennis, are declared to be illegal. It shall be unlawful for the person owning property whereon such infected trees, or parts thereof, are situated to possess or keep such infected trees, or parts thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 20.41; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 86-133. - Abatement. 
(a)  The Village Manager or designee shall give to the owner of the premises where the nuisances described in this division are found a written notice of the existence of such tree requiring the removal and lawful disposal of such tree within ten days following such notice. Such removal and disposal shall be done under the direction and supervision of the Village Manager or designee. The notice shall also notify the owner of such premises that unless such tree is removed in compliance with the terms thereof within such ten-day period, the Village will proceed with the removal and disposal of such tree, and assess the cost thereof against the property owner. 
(b)  Service of the notice shall be by personal service or certified mail, addressed to the owner at his last known address. 
(c)  Upon service of such notice, it shall become the duty of the owner of the premises to cause such tree or breeding place to be removed and lawfully disposed of, under the direction and supervision of the Village Manager or designee. If the Village shall remove and dispose of any tree or breeding place, all expenses incurred in connection therewith shall be assessed against the property owner. 
(Code 1959, § 20.42; Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 86-134. - Lien for abatement costs. 
(a)  Whenever billing for the removal or abatement of a nuisance tree under this article, by or under the supervision of Village personnel, remains unpaid 60 days after billing for such service has been rendered, the Village Manager may file a statement of lien claim with the recorder of deeds of the County. Such statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the billing, plus administrative costs, and a notice that the Village claims a lien for the total amount. 
(b)  If the resident whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises, and the Village Manager has knowledge thereof, notice shall also be mailed to the owner of the premises. 
(c)  The failure of the Village Manager to mail such notice or the failure of the owner of the premises to receive such notice shall not affect the right of the Village to foreclose the lien for the unpaid services rendered. 
(d)  The village attorney may institute foreclosure proceedings, in the name of the Village, in the circuit court, against any property for which a lien claim for unpaid service charges and administrative costs has been duly filed. 
(Ord. No. 5882, § 3, 1-6-2015)  
Chapter 90 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Food delivery vehicles and mobile food units, § 38-211 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 42; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; vehicles for hire, ch. 94. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-102. 
Authorized emergency vehicle means emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by proper local authorities, police vehicles, vehicles of the fire department and ambulances, vehicles of the State emergency management agency and vehicles of the department of nuclear safety. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-105. 
Bicycle means every device propelled by human power, upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, except scooters and similar devices. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-106. 
Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a street when within any 600 feet along such street there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the street. (For repair of motor vehicles in gasoline service stations, see chapter 22, article IV, automobile repair shops.) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-108. 
Crosswalk means: 
(1)  The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway, measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of the highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without the sidewalk, with such extension forming a right angle to the centerline of the highway; 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted by the State department of transportation as authorized in 625 ILCS 5/11-301. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-113. 
Driver and operator mean every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-116. 
Fire lane means travel lanes for firefighting equipment, upon which there shall be no standing or parking of any motor vehicle at any time so that firefighting equipment can move freely thereon. 
Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes two roadways 40 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not constitute an intersection. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-132. 
Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-136. 
Loading zone means the space adjacent to a curb that is reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or material. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels that are in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-147. 
Motor-driven cycle means every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less than 150 cubic centimeter piston displacement, including motorized pedalcycles. 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs. For the purposes of this chapter, motor vehicles are divided into the following two divisions: 
(1)  First division. Motor vehicles which are designed for the carrying of not more than ten persons. 
(2)  Second division. Motor vehicles which are: 
a.  Designed for carrying more than ten persons; 
b.  Designed or used for living quarters; 
c.  Designed for pulling or carrying freight, cargo or implements of husbandry; and 
(3)  Of the first division and are remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the second division. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-146. 
Muffler means a device consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates, or other mechanical design, for the purpose of receiving exhaust gas from an internal combustion engine or turbine wheels, all of which are effective in reducing noise. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-148.3a. 
Owner means a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or if a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or if a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee, or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-155. 
Park, when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading merchandise or passengers. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-156. 
Parking area means an area of land near or contiguous to a shopping center and used by the public as the means of access to and egress from the stores and business establishments at a shopping center and for the parking of motor vehicles of customers and patrons at a shopping center. 
Pedestrian means any person afoot, including a person with a physical, hearing or visual disability. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-158. 
Police officer means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests and issue citations for violations of traffic regulations. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-162. 
Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-163. 
Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-166. 
Railroad sign or signal means any sign, signal or device, other than an official traffic control sign, signal or device, erected in accordance with the laws governing such sign, signal or device, and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-167. 
Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a street not comprising a business district when the property on such street for a distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. For purposes of establishing maximum speed limits, a residence district shall be at least a quarter of a mile long with residences or residences and buildings in use for businesses spaced no more than 300 feet apart. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-172. 
Right-of-way means the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-177. 
Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. If a street includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-179. 
School bus means every motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in this section, owned or operated by or for any of the following entities for the transportation of persons regularly enrolled as students in grades 12 or below in connection with any activity of such entity: 
(1)  Any public or private primary or secondary school; 
(2)  Any primary or secondary school operated by a religious institution; or 
(3)  Any public, private or religious nursery school. 
The term "school bus" shall not include the following: 
(1)  A bus operated by a public utility, municipal corporation or common carrier authorized to conduct local or interurban transportation of passengers when such bus is not traveling a specific school bus route but is: 
a.  On a regularly scheduled route for the transportation of other fare paying passengers; 
b.  Furnishing charter service for the transportation of groups on field trips or other special trips or in connection with other special events; or 
c.  Being used for shuttle service between attendance centers or other educational facilities. 
(2)  A motor vehicle of the first division. 
(3)  A motor vehicle designed for the transportation of not less than seven, nor more than 16 persons and that is operated by or for a public or private primary or secondary school, including any primary or secondary school operated by a religious institution, for the purpose of transporting not more than 15 students to and from interscholastic athletic or other interscholastic or school sponsored activities. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-182. 
Semitrailer means every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and constructed so that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-187. 
Shopping center means premises having one or more stores or business establishments in connection with which there is provided on privately-owned property near or contiguous thereto an area of land used by the public as the means of access to and egress from the stores and business establishments on such premises and for the parking of motor vehicles of customers and patrons of such stores and business establishments on such premises. 
Shopping center or property owner means the actual legal owner of the shopping center parking area, the trust officer of a banking institution having the right to manage and control such property or a person having the legal right, through lease or otherwise, to manage or control such property. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines and intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-188. 
Stop, when required, means complete cessation from movement. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-199. 
Stop, stopping and standing, when prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-200. 
Street and highway mean the entire width between property lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular traffic. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-201. 
Suburban district means that portion of the Village, other than the business and residential districts. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-203. 
Through highway means every highway, or portion thereof, on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-205. 
Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-207. 
Traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of the public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
Traffic control signal means any official traffic control device, other than a railroad sign or signal, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-208. 
Trailer means every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and constructed so that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or requiring a certificate of title under 625 ILCS 5/3-101(d), except devices moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and snowmobiles as defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act, 625 ILCS 40/1-1 et seq. For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise prescribed, a device shall be considered to be a vehicle until such time as it either comes within the definition of a junk vehicle, as defined under this Code, or a junking certificate is issued for such device. For the purposes of this chapter, vehicles are divided into the following two divisions: 
(1)  First division. Motor vehicles which are designed for the carrying of not more than ten persons. 
(2)  Second division. Motor vehicles which are: 
a.  Designed for carrying more than ten persons; 
b.  Designed or used for living quarters; 
c.  Designed for pulling or carrying property, freight or cargo; 
d.  Of the first division and remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the second division; and 
e.  Of the first division, and used and registered as school buses. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/1-217. 
(Code 1959, § 11.1.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-2. - Certain provisions of State vehicle code adopted by reference. 
Chapters 1, 4, 11, 12 and 15 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, specifically, 625 ILCS 5/1-100—5/1-1011, 5/4-1—5/4-307, 5/11-100—5/11-1515, 5/12-101—5/12-902 and 5/15-101—5/15-319, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in this section. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt vehicle code by reference, 625 ILCS 5/20-204.  
Secs. 90-3—90-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-31. - Driving on right side of roadway required; exceptions. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movements; 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the roadway, provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; 
(4)  Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic. 
(b)  Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the public highway and two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the wider shoulder shall give the right-of-way on such pavement to the other vehicle. 
(c)  Upon all roadways, any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place, and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the righthand lane available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the righthand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(d)  Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subsection (a)(2) of this section. However, this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-703.  
Sec. 90-32. - Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions. 
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-702.  
Sec. 90-33. - Overtaking and passing vehicles on the left. 
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules otherwise stated in this chapter: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle; 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of the overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle; 
(3)  The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not, in passing upon the left of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction, pass upon the right of any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless there is an unobstructed lane of traffic available to safely permit such passing maneuver. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-703.  
Sec. 90-34. - Overtaking and passing vehicles on the right. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle with three or more wheels may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making, or about to make, a left turn; 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement of a sufficient width for two or more lines of vehicles moving in the direction being traveled by the overtaking vehicle; 
(3)  Upon a one-way street or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not pass upon the right of any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the unobstructed pavement to the right of the vehicle being passed is of a width of not less than eight feet. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. Such movement shall not be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-704.  
Sec. 90-35. - Limitations on overtaking on the left. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless authorized by this chapter and unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of on-coming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable and if the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the roadway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance so as to create a hazard if another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction. 
(2)  When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
(3)  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
(c)  The limitations set forth in subsections (b)(1)—(3) do not apply upon a one-way roadway, nor upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction, nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway when such movements can be made with safety. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-706.  
Sec. 90-36. - Driving on roadways laned for traffic. 
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent with this section, shall apply: 
(1)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance or in preparation for a left turn, or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is sign-posted to give notice of such allocation. 
(3)  Official traffic control devices may be erected directing specific traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. On multilane controlled access highways with three or more lanes in one direction or on any multilaned highway with two or more lanes in one direction, the State department of transportation may designate lanes of traffic to be used by different types of motor vehicles. Drivers must obey lane designation signing, except when it is necessary to use a different lane to make a turning maneuver. 
(4)  Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadways and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-709.  
Sec. 90-37. - Required position and method of turning. 
(a)  In general. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the righthand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme lefthand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)  The State department of transportation and the Village, in their respective jurisdictions, may cause official traffic control devices to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when such devices are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such devices. 
(b)  Two-way left turn lanes. Where a special lane for making left turns by drivers proceeding in opposite directions has been indicated by official traffic control devices: 
(1)  A left turn shall not be made from any other lane. 
(2)  A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane, except when preparing for or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when preparing for or making a U-turn when otherwise permitted by law. 
(c)  When a motor vehicle and a mass transit bus are traveling in the same direction on the same multilaned highway, street or road, the operator of the motor vehicle overtaking such bus, which is stopped at an intersection on the right side of the roadway to receive or discharge passengers, shall pass to the left of the bus at a safe distance and shall not turn to the right in front of the bus at that intersection. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-801.  
Sec. 90-38. - Signals required when turning or stopping. 
(a)  No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in the proper position upon the roadway as required in section 90-37, nor turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, nor otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person may turn any such vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner as provided in this section. 
(b)  A signal of intention to turn right or left, when required, must be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning within a business or residence district, and such signal must be given continuously during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning outside a business or residence district. 
(c)  No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this section to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such a signal. 
(d)  The electric turn signal device required in 625 ILCS 5/12-208 must be used to indicate an intention to turn, change lanes or start from a parallel parked position, but must not be flashed on one side only on a parked or disabled vehicle or flashed as a courtesy or "do pass" signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear. However, such signal devices may be flashed simultaneously on both sides of a motor vehicle to indicate the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, overtaking and passing. 
(e)  Any stop or turn signal, when required in this section, shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or electrical signal device conforming to the requirements of 625 ILCS 5/12-208. 
(f)  All signals required in this section to be given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle and shall indicate and be given as follows: 
(1)  Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease of speed. Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-804—5/11-806.  
Sec. 90-39. - Vehicles approaching or entering intersection. 
(a)  When two vehicles enter an intersection from different roadways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(b)  The right-of-way rule declared in subsection (a) of this section is modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-901.  
Sec. 90-40. - Vehicles turning left. 
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded, may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-902.  
Sec. 90-41. - Driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drugs, intoxicating compounds or any combination thereof. 
(a)  A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle within the Village while: 
(1)  The alcohol concentration in the person's blood or breath is 0.08 or more based on the definition of blood and breath units in 625 ILCS 5/11-501.2; 
(2)  Under the influence of alcohol; 
(3)  Under the influence of any intoxicating compound or combination of intoxicating compounds to a degree that renders the person incapable of driving safely; 
(4)  Under the influence of any other drug or combination of drugs to a degree that renders the person incapable of safely driving; 
(5)  Under the combined influence of alcohol, other drug or intoxicating compound to a degree that renders the person incapable of safely driving; or 
(6)  There is any amount of a drug, substance or compound in the person's breath, blood or urine resulting from the unlawful use or consumption of cannabis listed in the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., a controlled substance listed in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 35 ILCS 570/1 et seq., or an intoxicating compound listed in the Use of Intoxicating Compounds Act, 720 ILCS 690/0.01 et seq. 
(b)  The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has been legally entitled to use alcohol, other drugs or intoxicating compounds, or any combination thereof, shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this section. 
(c)  Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.11) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-501(a), (b).  
Sec. 90-42. - Reckless driving. 
(a)  Any person who drives any vehicle with a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving. 
(b)  Every person convicted of reckless driving shall be punished as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.12) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-503(a), (b).  
Sec. 90-43. - Negligent driving. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon a public highway negligently, heedlessly and without due caution in a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, any person or property. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.12A)  
Sec. 90-44. - Following too closely. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the condition of traffic upon the roadway. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.15) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-710(a).  
Sec. 90-45. - Backing limitations. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1402.  
Sec. 90-46. - Starting stopped, standing or parked vehicle. 
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-803.  
Sec. 90-47. - Operation of vehicles and streetcars on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., or a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible or visual signal, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel, and as close as possible, to the righthand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection and shall, if necessary to permit the safe passage of the emergency vehicle, stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(c)  Upon approaching a stationary authorized emergency vehicle, when the authorized emergency vehicle is giving a signal by displaying alternately flashing red, red and white, blue, or red and blue lights, or amber or yellow warning lights, a person who drives an approaching vehicle shall: 
(1)  Proceeding with due caution, yield the right-of-way by making a lane change into a lane not adjacent to that of the authorized emergency vehicle, if possible with due regard to safety and traffic conditions, if on a highway having at least four lanes with not less than two lanes proceeding in the same direction as the approaching vehicle; or 
(2)  Proceeding with due caution, reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe speed for road conditions, if changing lanes would be impossible or unsafe. 
(d)  As used in this subsection (c), the term "authorized emergency vehicle" includes any vehicle authorized by law to be equipped with oscillating, rotating or flashing lights under 625 ILCS 5/12-215, while the owner or operator of the vehicle is engaged in his official duties. 
(Code 1959, § 11.9.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-907.  
Sec. 90-48. - Following, etc., fire apparatus. 
The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or stop such vehicle within 500 feet of any fire apparatus stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1959, § 11.9.2) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1411.  
Sec. 90-49. - Driving over fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over an unprotected hose of the fire department when such hose is laid down on any street, private roadway or driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1959, § 11.9.3) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1412.  
Sec. 90-50. - Approaching, overtaking and passing school buses. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle before meeting or overtaking, from either direction, any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging pupils on a highway, on a roadway on school property or upon a private road within an area that is covered by a contract or agreement executed pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-209.1. Such stop is required before reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the school bus the visual signals as specified in 625 ILCS 5/12-803 and 5/12-805. The driver of the vehicle shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion, the driver of the vehicle is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated. 
(b)  The stop signal arm required by 625 ILCS 5/12-803 shall be extended after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils and shall be closed before the school bus is placed in motion again. The stop signal arm shall not be extended at any other time. 
(c)  The alternately flashing red signal lamps of an eight-lamp flashing signal system required by 625 ILCS 5/12-805 shall be actuated after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils and shall be turned off before the school bus is placed in motion again. The red signal lamps shall not be actuated at any other time, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  The alternately flashing amber signal lamps of an eight-lamp flashing signal system required by 625 ILCS 5/12-805 shall be actuated continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the school bus before stopping for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils within an urban area and during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by the school bus outside an urban area. The amber signal lamps shall remain actuated until the school bus is stopped. The amber signal lamps shall not be actuated at any other time. 
(e)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway having four or more lanes which permits at least two lanes of traffic to travel in opposite directions need not stop such vehicle upon meeting a school bus which is stopped in the opposing roadway, and need not stop such vehicle when driving upon a controlled access highway when passing a school bus traveling in either direction that is stopped in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced or improved part of the controlled access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross. 
(Code 1959, § 11.9.4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1414.  
Sec. 90-51. - Funeral processions. 
(a)  Funeral processions have the right-of-way at intersections when vehicles comprising such procession have their headlights lit, subject to the following conditions and exceptions: 
(1)  Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving an audible or visible signal; 
(2)  Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right-of-way when directed to do so by a traffic officer; 
(3)  The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral procession shall comply with stop signs and traffic control signals, but when the leading vehicle has proceeded across an intersection in accordance with such signal or after stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in such procession may proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or signal and the leading vehicle and the vehicles in the procession shall proceed with due caution. 
(b)  The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall not drive his vehicle in the funeral procession, except when authorized to do so by a traffic officer or when such vehicle is an authorized emergency vehicle giving an audible or visible signal. 
(c)  Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may not form a procession or convoy and have their headlights lit for the purpose of securing the right-of-way granted by this section to funeral processions. 
(d)  The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may overtake and pass the vehicles in such procession if such overtaking and passing can be accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or interfering with such procession. 
(e)  The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped with a flashing amber light which may be used only when such vehicle is used as a lead vehicle in such procession. Vehicles comprising a funeral procession may utilize funeral pennants or flags, or windshield stickers or flashing hazard warning signal flashers to identify the individual vehicles in such procession. 
(Code 1959, §§ 11.9.5, 11.9.6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1420.  
Sec. 90-52. - Obstruction to driver's view or driving mechanism. 
(a)  No person may drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or so as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle may ride in such a position as to interfere with driver's view ahead or to the sides, or so as to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(c)  No person shall drive any vehicle with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, sidewings, or side or rear windows of such vehicle which obstructs the driver's clear view of the street or highway. 
(d)  No passenger on a school bus may ride or stand in a position so as to interfere with the driver's view ahead, to the side or rear, or so as to interfere with his control of the driving mechanism of the bus. 
(Code 1959, § 11.10.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1406.  
Sec. 90-53. - Attaching or clinging to moving vehicles. 
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or other device shall attach the bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, other device or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to knowingly permit any person riding on a bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or other device to cling to or attach the bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, other device or himself to the vehicle he is operating. 
(Code 1959, § 11.10.2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1504.  
Sec. 90-54. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles in motion. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1959, § 11.10.3)  
Sec. 90-55. - Unlawful riding. 
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in a space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1959, § 11.10.4)  
Sec. 90-56. - Throwing, spilling or depositing injurious materials on roadways. 
(a)  No person shall throw, spill, or deposit upon any roadway, any bottles, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, dirt, mud, gravel, crushed stone, wood, blocks, or other litter as defined in 415 ILCS 105/3. 
(b)  Any person who throws, spills or deposits any of the materials set forth in subsection (a) upon any roadway shall immediately remove such material or cause such material to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a roadway shall remove any glass or other debris, except any hazardous substance as defined in section 3.215 of the Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/3.215, hazardous waste as defined in section 3.220 of the Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/3.220, and potentially infectious medical waste as defined in section 3.360 of the Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/3.360, dropped upon the highway from such vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 11.10.5; Ord. No. 4921, § 2, 10-17-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1413.  
Sec. 90-57. - Spilling loads on streets. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street within the Village unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway for the purpose of cleaning or maintaining such roadway. 
(b)  No person shall operate on any street any vehicle with any load unless such load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent such covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the street. 
(Code 1959, § 11.10.6)  
Sec. 90-58. - Minimum age of drivers. 
No person under 18 years of age shall operate or drive a motor vehicle, except as permitted by the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/6-105 and 5/6-107. 
(Code 1959, § 11.10.7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/6-103.  
Secs. 90-59—90-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
 
Sec. 90-81. - Operation of vehicles. 
No driver of a motor vehicle shall operate such vehicle on any public street, alley or parking lot which is designated by ordinances adopted by the board of trustees and posted as a one-way street, alley or parking lot, except in the direction so designated and posted. (See section 90-550 pertaining to one-way streets, alleys and parking areas.) 
(Code 1959, § 11.16.1)  
Sec. 90-82. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division or any other division in this article where no specific penalty is prescribed shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 11.16.2)  
Secs. 90-83—90-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPEED 
 
Sec. 90-101. - Limits. 
(a)  No person shall drive any vehicle upon any public highway, roadway or street in the Village at a speed that is greater than reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the use of the highway, roadway or street, or that endangers the safety of any person or property or is greater than the applicable maximum speed limit established by this subsection or by any regulation of the State or County made pursuant to the provisions of State statute. The maximum speed limit for any motor vehicle on public roadways, streets or highways located within the Village, which streets are solely within the jurisdiction of the Village and are not within the jurisdiction of the State or County, shall be 20 miles per hour, except those public roadways, streets or highways listed in section 90-559 pertaining to speed limits. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching a crossing and intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway or when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. Speed must be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(b)  The prima facie speed limitations set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles as defined in section 90-1 when responding to emergency calls and the drivers thereof sound an audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This subsection shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the roadway, nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.13) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-601.  
Sec. 90-102. - Minimum speed regulated. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when such reduced speed is necessary for safe operation of his vehicle or in compliance with law. 
(b)  Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce this section by directions to drivers, and in the event of apparent willful disobedience to this subsection and refusal to comply with the directions of an officer in accordance with this subsection, the continued slow operation by a driver shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1959, § 11.4.14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-606.  
Secs. 90-103—90-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ACCIDENTS 
 
Sec. 90-121. - Duties of drivers. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident resulting in personal injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible and shall then forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at, the scene of the accident until the requirements of section 11-403 have been fulfilled. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(b)  Any person who has failed to stop or comply with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall, as soon as possible, but in no case later than one hour after such motor vehicle accident, or, if hospitalized and incapacitated from reporting at any time during such period, as soon as possible, but in no case later than one hour after being discharged from the hospital, report the place of the accident, the date, the approximate time, the driver's name and address, the registration number of the vehicle driven and the names of all other occupants of such vehicle, at a police station or sheriff's office near the place where such accident occurred. No report made as required under this subsection shall be used, directly or indirectly, as a basis for the prosecution of any violation of subsection (a) of this section. For purposes of this subsection, the term "personal injury" shall mean any injury requiring immediate professional treatment in a medical facility or doctor's office. 
(c)  The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such motor vehicle accident or as close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at, the scene of such motor vehicle accident until the requirements of subsection (d) of this section have been fulfilled. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(d)  The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give the driver's name, address, registration number and owner of the vehicle the driver is operating and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit such driver's license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the making of arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to this subsection is in a condition to receive and understand such information and no police officer is present, such driver, after rendering reasonable assistance, shall forthwith report such motor vehicle accident at the nearest office of a duly authorized police authority, disclosing the information required by this subsection. 
(e)  The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in a motor vehicle accident with any vehicle which is unattended or other property, resulting in any damage to such other vehicle or property, shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle or other property of the driver's name, address, registration number and owner of the vehicle the driver was operating or shall attach securely in a conspicuous place on or in the vehicle or other property struck a written notice giving the driver's name, address, registration number and owner of the vehicle the driver was driving and shall, without unnecessary delay, notify the nearest office of a duly authorized police authority and shall make a written report of such accident when and as required in 625 ILCS 5/11-406. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. 
(Code 1959, § 11.5.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-401—5/11-404.  
Secs. 90-122—90-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RIGHT-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 90-141. - Erection of stop signs and stop lights. 
The president and board of trustees may, by ordinance and when traffic conditions warrant such action, give preference to traffic upon any of the roadways under its jurisdiction, upon which has been constructed a durable hard-surfaced road, over traffic crossing or entering such roadway, by causing to be erected appropriate stop signs or stop lights. 
(Code 1959, § 11.6.2)  
Sec. 90-142. - Stop required at entrance to through roadway. 
The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through roadway and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from such through roadway or which are approaching so closely on such through roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs. 
(Code 1959, § 11.6.3)  
Sec. 90-143. - Stop required upon approaching stop signs, etc. 
(a)  Where stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk and pedestrians within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right-of-way over vehicles so stopped. Drivers of vehicles having so yielded the right-of-way to pedestrians entering or within the nearest crosswalk at an intersection shall also yield the right-of-way to pedestrians within any other crosswalk of the intersection. 
(b)  Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign or stop light shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no clearly marked stop line, then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting highway before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal. 
(Code 1959, § 11.6.4)  
Sec. 90-144. - Entering highway from an alley, building, private road or driveway. 
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered. 
(Code 1959, § 11.6.5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-906.  
Sec. 90-145. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing where the driver is not always required to stop, the person must exercise due care and caution as the existence of a railroad track across a highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until the tracks are clear and he can proceed safely. Such requirements shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman gives, or continues to give, a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; 
(3)  A railroad train approaching a highway crossing emits a warning signal and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; 
(4)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing; 
(5)  A railroad train is approaching so closely that an immediate hazard is created. 
(b)  Whenever a person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing where the driver is not always required to stop but must slow down, the person must exercise due care and caution as the existence of a railroad track across a highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in this subsection, the driver shall slow down within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until he checks that the tracks are clear of an approaching train. 
(c)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(d)  At any railroad grade crossing provided with railroad crossbuck signs, without automatic, electric or mechanical signal devices, crossing gates or a human flagman giving a signal of the approach or passage of a train, the driver of a vehicle shall, in obedience to the railroad crossbuck sign, yield the right-of-way and slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall stop, if required for safety, at a clearly marked stopped line, or if no stop line, within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall not proceed until he can proceed safely. If a driver is involved in a collision at a railroad crossing or interferes with the movement of a train after driving past the railroad crossbuck sign, the collision or interference is prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(e)  No person shall, while driving a commercial motor vehicle, fail to negotiate a railroad-highway grade railroad crossing because of insufficient undercarriage clearance. 
(Code 1959, § 11.6.6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1201(a), (b), (d).  
Sec. 90-146. - Yield intersections. 
The driver of a vehicle shall slow down to a speed that is reasonable for existing conditions and stop if necessary at the entrance to a roadway marked by a yield sign, and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection from such through roadway. Drivers of vehicles shall also yield the right-of-way to pedestrians entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway, or adjacent crosswalks in the intersection if turning. Having so yielded, such driver may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs. 
(Code 1959, § 11.6.7)  
Secs. 90-147—90-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Off-street parking and loading, § 98-291 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 90-181. - Prohibited at certain times. 
The stopping, standing or parking of vehicles at all times, or between certain hours or limited to certain time periods may be prohibited on any public street, alley or parking lot or any portion of any public street, alley or parking lot as may be designated from time to time by ordinances adopted by the board of trustees. Where parking is so prohibited, the director of public works shall cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained giving notice thereof. No person shall park a vehicle during the times prohibited at places indicated by official signs. No person shall park a vehicle for any period of time in excess of the time posted on the officially erected signs. Any vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this section may be towed away or immobilized by the application of a wheel locking device under the direction of the police department, and the owner of such vehicle shall be required to pay the towing and/or releasing charges for such vehicle, in addition to other penalties which may be imposed. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.1)  
Sec. 90-182. - Double parking. 
It shall be unlawful to double park vehicles on any street in the Village. The term "double park" shall mean that when one vehicle is standing adjacent to the curb, no other vehicle shall park in such street adjacent to such parked vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for passengers to board or alight from such other vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.2)  
Sec. 90-183. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
b.  On a sidewalk; 
c.  Within an intersection; 
d.  On a crosswalk; 
e.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings; 
f.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
g.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
h.  On any railroad tracks. A violation of this subsection shall result in a mandatory fine of $500.00 or 50 hours of community service; 
i.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; 
j.  On any controlled access highway; 
k.  In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers; 
l.  In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a current annual registration sticker or current temporary permit pending registration. 
m.  On any portion of a front yard or corner lot side yard facing a street of a property designed or used as a residence, except an area that is paved. 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers: 
a.  In front of a public or private driveway; 
b.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
c.  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
d.  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
e.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance, when properly sign-posted; 
f.  At any place where official signs prohibit standing. 
(3)  Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers: 
a.  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
b.  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(4)  Park a vehicle within eight feet of a mailbox along West Lake Avenue, adjacent to and also with the Cambridge at the Glen Subdivision, between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday inclusive, excluding holidays. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.3; Ord. No. 6008, § 2, 8-16-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1303.  
Sec. 90-184. - Manner of parking. 
(a)  Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway shall be stopped or parked with the righthand wheels of such vehicle, front and rear, within 12 inches of the righthand edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in the subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or signs. It shall at all times be unlawful to park or leave any vehicle in a municipal parking facility, except within a single designated parking stall, or to back any vehicle into any parking stall in such facility. No vehicle shall be parked or left in any driveway or other area not designated and marked for parking in such municipal parking lot. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1304(a).  
Sec. 90-185. - Parking on private property. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any private lot or lot area without the express or implied consent of the owner thereof. Whenever signs or markings have been erected on any lot or lot area contiguous or adjacent to a street, thoroughfare or alley, indicating that no vehicles are permitted to stand or park thereon, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle across any curb or lot line or over any driveway from a street or alley into such lot or lot area for the purpose of standing or parking such vehicle, or for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in such lot or lot area. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.5)  
Sec. 90-186. - Parking in predominantly residential areas. 
In any block on any public way in a residentially zoned district, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any commercial automobile, van, truck, sport utility vehicle, or other motorized vehicle regardless of size or license plate designation. Commercial vehicles may be identified by certain characteristics, including, but not limited to: (a) lettering or logos; or (b) racks used primarily for business purposes to which ladders, pipes or other equipment may be mounted; or (c) open bed vehicles containing equipment or materials used primarily for, or to promote, a business purpose. Commercial vehicles may park on any public way within a residentially zoned district only during authorized hours of construction as set forth section 18-44 of this Code when the operator of said vehicle is engaged in commercial activity on such property or at any time when the operator of said vehicle is responding to an emergency service call at such property. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.6; Ord. No. 4743, § 2, 3-1-2005)  
Sec. 90-187. - Unattended vehicles. 
(a)  No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit such vehicle to stand unattended in any public place without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the ignition key from the vehicle, or, when standing upon any perceptible grade, without effectively setting the brake thereon and turning the front wheels toward the curb or side of the street or highway. 
(b)  Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle standing unattended with the ignition key within the vehicle, in violation of this section, such police officer is hereby authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and to deliver the key to the police officer in charge of the Village police station. 
(c)  The registered owner of a vehicle found in violation of this section shall be held prima facie responsible for any such violation. 
(d)  The penalty for violation of this section shall be as provided in section 1-16. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1401.  
Sec. 90-188. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle upon or in any street, alley or parkway for the purpose of selling or offering such automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle for sale or rent. No sign or lettering shall be attached or placed upon any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle parked in or upon any public street, alley or parkway of the Village indicating that such vehicle is offered for sale or for rent. It shall also be unlawful to park upon any street in a business district a vehicle from which any merchandise is being sold. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.8)  
Sec. 90-189. - Use of loading zones regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any place established and marked as a loading zone, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers; provided, however, that the operator of any vehicle engaged in the actual loading or unloading of material or merchandise in a loading zone may occupy such loading zone for a period not to exceed 30 minutes while engaged in the actual delivery or pickup of merchandise or materials. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.9)  
Sec. 90-190. - Use of public carrier stands. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than a bus or public common carrier, to stand or park in a zone or area established and marked for the use of common carriers, or for the operator of any vehicle, other than a taxicab, to stand or park in an area established and marked as a taxicab stand. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a bus, a public common carrier or a taxicab to stop, stand or park in any place other than in the areas established and indicated for the use of such vehicles. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.10)  
Sec. 90-191. - Parking privileges for persons with disabilities. 
(a)  A motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a person with disabilities, as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-159.1, pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-616, or to a disabled veteran pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-609, or a special decal or device issued pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-616 or 5/11-1301.2, or a motor vehicle registered in another jurisdiction, state, district, territory or foreign country, upon which is displayed a registration plate, special decal or device issued by the other jurisdiction designating the vehicle is operated by or for a person with disabilities shall be exempt from the payment of parking meter fees and from any statute or ordinance imposing time limitations on parking, except limitations of one-half hour or less, on any street or highway zone, or any parking lot or parking place which is owned or leased, or owned and leased by the Village or a Village parking utility, and shall be recognized by the State and the Village as a valid license plate or parking device and shall receive the same parking privileges as residents of the State, but such vehicle shall be subject to the laws which prohibit parking in "no stopping" and "no standing" zones in front of or near fire hydrants, driveways, public building entrances and exits, bus stops and loading areas, and is prohibited from parking where the motor vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard, whereby such motor vehicle shall be moved at the instruction and request of a law enforcement officer to a location designated by the officer. Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates or a special decal or device specified in this subsection or in 625 ILCS 5/3-616, or such parking device as specifically authorized in 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2 as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a person with disabilities or disabled veteran may park, in addition to any other lawful place, in any parking place specifically reserved for such vehicles by the posting of an official sign as provided under 625 ILCS 5/11-301. Parking privileges granted by this subsection are strictly limited to the person to whom the special registration plates, special decal or device were issued and to qualified operators acting under his express direction while the person with disabilities is present. A person to whom privileges were granted shall, at the request of a police officer or any other person invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic, present an identification card with a picture as verification that the person is the person to whom the special registration plates, special decal or device was issued. 
(b)  Such parking privileges granted by this section are also extended to motor vehicles of not-for-profit organizations used for the transportation of persons with disabilities when such motor vehicles display the decal or device issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. No person shall use any area for the parking of any motor vehicle pursuant to subsection (a) of this section or where an official sign controlling such area expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.1.  
Sec. 90-192. - Unauthorized use of parking places reserved for persons with disabilities. 
(a)  It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not properly displaying registration plates or decals issued to a person with disabilities, as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-159.1, pursuant to section 90-191 and 625 ILCS 5/3-616, or to a disabled veteran pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-609, as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a person with disabilities or disabled veteran, in any parking place, including any private or public off-street parking facility, specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign as designated under 625 ILCS 5/11-301, for motor vehicles displaying such registration plates. It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle in a designated access aisle adjacent to any parking place specifically reserved for persons with disabilities, by the posting of an official sign as designated under 625 ILCS 5/11-301, for motor vehicles displaying such registration plates. When using the parking privileges for persons with disabilities, the parking decal or device must be displayed properly in the vehicle where it is clearly visible to law enforcement personnel, either hanging from the rearview mirror or placed in clear view on the dashboard of the vehicle. An individual with a vehicle properly displaying a person with disabilities license plate or parking decal or device issued to a disabled person under section 90-191 or 625 ILCS 5/3-616 is in violation of this section if the person is not the authorized holder of a person with disabilities license plate or parking decal or device and is not transporting the authorized holder of a person with disabilities license plate or parking decal or device to or from the parking location and the person uses the person with disabilities license plate or parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted through the person with disabilities license plates or parking decals or devices under this division. Any motor vehicle properly displaying a person with disabilities license plate or a person with disabilities parking decal or device containing the international symbol of access issued to persons with disabilities by any local authority, state, district, territory or foreign country shall be recognized by the State and the Village as a valid license plate or device and receive the same parking privileges as residents of the State. 
(b)  Any person or the Village owning or operating any public or private off-street parking facility may, after notifying the police or sheriff's department, remove, or cause to be removed, to the nearest garage or other place of safety, any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by a person with disabilities which does not display persons with disabilities registration plates or a special decal or device as required under this section. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16, in addition to any costs or charges connected with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle authorized under this section, but the Village shall display signs indicating the fine imposed. If the amount of the fine is subsequently changed, the Village shall change the sign to indicate the current amount of the fine. It shall not be a defense to a charge under this section that the sign posted pursuant to this section does not comply with the technical requirements of 625 ILCS 5/11-301, State department of transportation regulations or local ordinance, if a reasonable person would be made aware by the sign or notice on or near the parking place that the place is reserved for a person with disabilities. 
(d)  As used in this section, the term "authorized holder" means an individual issued a person with disabilities license plate under 625 ILCS 5/3-616, or an individual issued a person with disabilities parking decal or device under 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.2. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.12) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3.  
Sec. 90-193. - Designation of tow-away zones; power to remove illegally parked vehicles. 
The corporate authorities shall designate tow-away zones or areas in which the duly designated and authorized agents of the Village shall be empowered to remove illegally parked motor vehicles by towing them to a place designated by the Village police department. (See section 90-552 pertaining to tow-away zones.) 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.14)  
Sec. 90-194. - Charges and penalties vehicles parked in tow-away zones. 
The owner or operator of a motor vehicle towed away in accordance with section 90-195 shall be required to pay to the agent of the Village towing such vehicle a charge which shall be established by agreement between the agent and the Village before the vehicle shall be released to such owner or operator and such owner or operator shall be further required to identify himself by name and address to the towing agent or the Village police department. However, this provision shall not affect the obligation of the owner or operator of such vehicle to pay a fine for such illegal parking as provided in section 90-196, if and when such fine may be assessed against such owner or operator. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.15)  
Sec. 90-195. - Overnight on-street parking. 
No person shall park any vehicle on any street between the hours of 2:00 a.m.—6:00 a.m., from December 1—March 31, inclusive, except physicians on emergency calls and those persons who shall have received prior permission for such parking from the police department of the Village nonresidents will be given verbal permission to park on-street overnight by the police dispatcher upon calling the Village police department and stating the license plate number of the vehicle, the state of registration, the address at which such vehicle is parked and the last date for which permission is sought. Residents of the Village with no off-street parking space will be permitted to park on-street overnight by obtaining and affixing a permit in the form of a sticker provided free of charge by the Village. Such sticker is to be affixed to the lower lefthand corner of the windshield, is obtainable each year during the month of November and expires after the following March 31. The board of trustees may issue additional permits for on-street overnight parking as it deems necessary. Proper display of the on-street overnight parking permit shall also exempt such residents from the restriction contained in section 90-543 prohibiting parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, during the calendar year for which the permit is issued. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.16)  
Sec. 90-196. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than $5.00, nor more than $200.00 for each offense, and, provided further, a separate and distinct offense shall be considered as committed every day a motor vehicle or motorcycle shall be stopped or parked upon the roadways, streets, alleys, public places and private properties of the Village in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 11.7.13)  
Secs. 90-197—90-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMUTER PLAZA PARKING AREA 
 
Sec. 90-221. - Established; location. 
The commuter plaza parking area shall be parking spaces with signage denoting such designation located within the vicinity of the property commonly known as the: 
(1)  Downtown Glenview Train Station, located at 1116 Depot Street in the Village; and 
(2)  Glen of North Glenview Train Station, located at 2301 Lehigh Avenue in the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.1)  
Sec. 90-222. - Parking permit required. 
It should be unlawful for any person to park or leave any vehicle in the commuter plaza parking areas of both the Downtown Glenview Train Station and the Glen of North Glenview Train Station, other than in a daily fee parking zone in accordance with sections 90-226 and 90-227, unless a parking permit for either the Downtown Glenview Train Station or the Glen of North Glenview Train Station has been issued and is displayed for such vehicle. Commuters issued parking permits designated as nonresident must park in the commuter parking areas designated for nonresident parking. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.2)  
Sec. 90-223. - Issuance of permits; transferability. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit for the reserved parking referred to in section 90-222 shall file an application, with the Village, upon a form provided by the Village, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, a description of the vehicle for which the license is desired and such other information as may be prescribed. Permit applicants must supply proof of residency, which shall include, but is not limited to, a valid State driver's license. 
(b)  Permits for the Downtown Glenview Train Station may be issued in excess of 50 percent of the number of parking spaces provided in such parking area. Permits for the Glen of North Glenview Train Station may not be issued in excess of the number of parking spaces provided in such parking area as set forth in the Agreement for the Construction, Operation and Maintenance of the North Glenview Parking and Station Facility in Glenview, Illinois, dated March 21, 2000. 
(c)  All applications shall be filed by the Village on a waiting list, in the chronological order of their receipt by the Village and permits shall be issued in the order that applications are filed. Separate waiting lists for the Downtown Glenview Train Station and the Glen of North Glenview Train Station will be maintained. No application for which a permit is then available or for renewal of an existing permit shall be accepted, unless accompanied by the fee as provided for section 90-224. An application to be placed on one of the waiting lists may be filed without payment of a fee at the time of filing; provided, however, that no such application shall be considered valid or binding unless the required fee is paid within ten days after written notice is mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application advising the applicant that a permit is then available. No person shall be permitted to sell, transfer or assign any permit, nor shall any permit issued under this division be displayed, except in the vehicle for which the permit was issued; provided, however, that the owner of any vehicle for which a permit has been issued under this division may transfer such permit to any other vehicle under his ownership or care provided that the vehicle information has been submitted to the Village in advance. 
(d)  Commuter parking in both the Downtown Glenview Train Station and the Glen of North Glenview Train Station each has designated permit placards. Permit placards are assigned according to the train station and cannot be transferred between stations. No person in possession of a Downtown Glenview Train Station permit placard shall park in the commuter plaza parking area referred to in section 90-222 as the Glen of North Glenview Train Station, while no person in possession of a Glen of North Glenview Train Station permit placard shall park in the reserved parking referred to in section 90-222 as the Downtown Glenview Train Station. Nontransferability supports the regulated allocation of limited parking spaces for each commuter plaza parking area. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.3; Ord. No. 5504, § 2, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 5997, § 2, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 90-224. - Permit fees, renewal and reassignment. 
(a)  The yearly commuter parking permit fees for persons residing in the corporate limits of the Village shall be as stated in Section 30-1, paid in annual installments or semiannual installments as described therein for each six-month period from January 1 of each year to June 30 of the same year, and from July 1 of each year to December 31 of the same year. The yearly commuter parking permit fees for persons residing outside the corporate limits of the Village shall be as stated in Section 30-1, paid in annual installments or semi-annual installments as described therein for each six-month period from January 1 or each year to June 30 of the same year, and from July 1 of each year to December 31 of the same year. Permits shall expire on December 31. Permits are not pro-rated. 
(b)  The Village shall accept new applications for semi-annual permits on, but not before, the first business day of each December and June, assigning permits in the order of receipt of application and creating a waiting list as set forth in section 90-223. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.4; Ord. No. 4724, § 2, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 5504, § 3, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 5962, § 2, 12-8-2015)  
Sec. 90-225. - Display of permit. 
Permits issued under this division must be displayed in the vehicle parked in the commuter plaza parking area referred to in section 90-222 as the Downtown Glenview Train Station and the Glen of North Glenview Train Station. No motor vehicle shall be parked or left in the commuter plaza parking area unless such permit is affixed thereto in accordance with this section. An expired permit, or part thereof, shall not be displayed. Permits are used so that the holder may park the vehicle they desire at the commuter plaza parking area. It is necessary that permits be displayed so that parking enforcement can determine that the vehicle is authorized to use the commuter plaza parking area. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.5; Ord. No. 5504, § 4, 11-15-2011)  
Sec. 90-226. - Daily fee zone parking areas. 
(a)  No parking permit shall be required in the areas of the commuter plaza parking area designed for daily fee zones; provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave any vehicle in the daily fee zone without paying the applicable fee as stated in Section 30-1. Both the Downtown Glenview Train Station and the Glen of North Glenview Train Station provide a machine offering commuters a choice of payment options for depositing the fee. The fee may be paid by either inserting a debit card, a credit card, or by depositing dollars or change into the machine. 
(b)  The fee shall permit such vehicle to remain parked during one 24-hour period, unless sooner removed. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.6; Ord. No. 5504, § 5, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 5962, § 2, 12-8-2015)  
Sec. 90-227. - Non-exclusive multi-day parking area. 
(a)  The ten spaces along the east side of the railroad right-of-way south of Dewes Street starting at parking space number 95 through 104 shall be posted as Non-Exclusive Multi-Day Parking allowing daily fee and permit holders to park as well. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave any vehicle in the Amtrak designated parking spaces in the commuter plaza parking area of the Downtown Glenview Train Station, without an Amtrak Parking Permit Displayed. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.7; Ord. No. 4620, § 1, 2-17-2004; Ord. No. 5504, § 6, 11-15-2011; Ord. No. 5997, § 3, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 90-228. - Collection of fees; tampering with credit card machines and parking space numbering mechanisms. 
(a)  The collection of legal currency from the operation of the parking machine system shall be under the supervision of the Village. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deface, tamper with, open willfully, break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking machine or parking space numbering mechanism, including, but not limited to, the posts of signs that may number each space installed under this division. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.8; Ord. No. 5504, § 7, 11-15-2011)  
Sec. 90-229. - Exempt parking periods. 
No parking permit, nor fee for daily zoned parking shall be required for parking between the hours of 4:00 p.m.—4:59 a.m., Monday—Friday, all day Saturday and Sunday, and all day on the holidays of New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. If any of such holidays shall fall on a Saturday and be observed on the previous Friday, then such Friday shall be considered as the holiday for the purpose of this section. If any of such holidays shall fall on a Sunday and be observed on the following Monday, then such Monday shall be considered as the holiday for the purpose of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.9; Ord. No. 5997, § 4, 6-21-2016)  
Sec. 90-230. - Manner of parking. 
It shall at all times be unlawful to park or leave any vehicle in the commuter plaza parking area, except within a designated parking stall, or to back any vehicle into any parking stall in such area. No vehicle shall be parked or left in any driveway or other area not designated and marked for parking. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.10)  
Sec. 90-231. - Authority to tow vehicles. 
Any vehicle which is illegally parked or left in the commuter plaza parking area may be towed from the area and the owner of such vehicle shall be required to pay the towing charges, in addition to any other penalties which may be imposed. The chief of police of the Village police department is hereby authorized to remove any such vehicle, or cause such vehicle to be removed, and to impound such vehicle until all charges in connection therewith are paid. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.11)  
Sec. 90-232. - Loading and unloading; bus loading zone. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to prohibit the standing of an attended vehicle for the expeditious loading or unloading of railroad passengers, mail, freight and material in the portions of the commuter plaza parking area not reserved for parking stalls or ingress and egress, and posted for such loading and unloading purposes. 
(b)  Signs prohibiting parking between the hours of 6:30 a.m.—8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.—7:00 p.m. shall be installed within the bus loading zone located on the northwest corner of Lehigh Avenue and Prairie Street. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.12)  
Sec. 90-233. - Posting signs. 
The superintendent of public works shall post or erect signs at the commuter plaza parking area giving notice of the parking regulations set forth in this division. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.13)  
Sec. 90-234. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The issuance of a permit under this division, or the provision of a metered zone, and acceptance of a fee, is not to be construed as an assumption of any liability whatsoever, and without limitation of the foregoing, neither the Village, nor any of its officers or employees assumes or undertakes any responsibility for any loss or damage to the vehicle or its contents, or for the loss or theft thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.14)  
Sec. 90-235. - Use of revenue. 
All revenue derived from the permit and daily fee parking required under this division shall be kept as a separate fund and used in accordance with the Village's contractual obligations to maintain, manage and operate commuter parking facilities. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.15)  
Sec. 90-236. - Violations; penalties. 
Every person found guilty of violating any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $20.00, nor more than $500.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.16)  
Sec. 90-237. - Application of penalties to registered owners and others. 
Any person who is an owner, registered owner or in control of any vehicle parked in violation of this division shall be deemed prima facie responsible for the violation involved and subject to the penalties provided in section 90-236. 
(Code 1959, § 11.14.17)  
Sec. 90-238. - Designated areas for the parking of motor-driven cycles. 
(a)  Motor-driven cycles must be parked in areas designated by the Village at the Downtown Glenview Train Station and the Glen of North Glenview Train Station. 
(b)  All persons parking motor-driven cycles and motor-driven scooters at the Downtown Glenview Train Station or the Glen of North Glenview Train Station shall obtain a commuter parking permit from the Village. The parking permit fee shall be as stated in Section 30-1, paid in annual installments. Permits shall expire on December 31 of the same year. 
(Ord. No. 4892, § 2, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 5962, § 2, 12-8-2015)  
Secs. 90-239—90-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 90-261—90-280. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Provisions formerly found in §§ 90-261—90-264 have been moved and incorporated into § 34-313. Former §§ 90-261—90-264 pertained to fire lanes and derived from Code 1959, §§ 11.17.1—11.17.4.  
DIVISION 4. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 90-281—90-310. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Provisions formerly found in §§ 90-281—90-284 have been moved and incorporated into § 34-314. Former §§ 90-281—90-284 pertained to obstruction of building exits or sprinkler system connections and derived from Code 1959, §§ 11.18.1—11.18.4.  
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT, SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD 
 
Sec. 90-311. - When lighted lamps are required. 
(a)  When operated upon any highway in the State, every motorcycle shall at all times exhibit at least one lighted lamp, showing a white light visible for at least 500 feet in the direction the motorcycle is proceeding. However, in lieu of such lighted lamp, a motorcycle may be equipped with and use a means of modulating the upper beam of the headlamp between high and a lower brightness. No such headlamp shall be modulated, except to otherwise comply with this chapter, during times when lighted lamps are required for other motor vehicles. 
(b)  All other motor vehicles shall exhibit at least two lighted headlamps, with at least one on each side of the front of the vehicle, which satisfy the United States Department of Transportation requirements, showing white lights, including that emitted by high intensity discharge (HID) lamps, or lights of a yellow or amber tint, during the period from sunset to sunrise, at times when rain, snow, fog or other atmospheric conditions require the use of windshield wipers, and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway are not clearly discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet. Parking lamps may be used in addition to but not in lieu of such headlamps. Every motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall also exhibit at least two lighted lamps, commonly known as taillamps, which shall be mounted on the left and right rear of the vehicle so as to throw a red light, visible for at least 500 feet in the reverse direction, except a truck tractor or road tractor manufactured before January 1, 1968, and all motorcycles need be equipped with only one such taillamp. 
(c)  Either a taillamp or a separate lamp shall be constructed and placed so as to illuminate with a white light a rear registration plate when required and render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any taillamp, together with any separate lamp for illuminating a rear registration plate, shall be wired so as to be lighted whenever the headlamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted. 
(d)  A person shall install only headlamps that satisfy the United States Department of Transportation regulations and show white light, including that emitted by HID lamps, or light of a yellow or amber tint for use by a motor vehicle. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, a custom vehicle or street rod is considered to be in compliance with all vehicle lamp requirements if it has passed the approved safety inspection provided for in 625 ILCS 5/3-804.1 or 5/3-804.2. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-201.  
Sec. 90-312. - Lamps or flags on projecting loads. 
Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or body of such vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in section 90-311, a red light or lantern, plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear of such vehicle. The red light or lantern required under this section shall be in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-204.  
Sec. 90-313. - Lamps on other vehicles and equipment. 
(a)  Every vehicle, including animal drawn vehicles, referred to in 625 ILCS 5/12-101(b), not specifically required by the provisions of this article to be equipped with lamps or other lighting devices, shall, at all times specified in 625 ILCS 5/12-201, be equipped with at least two lamps on the power or towing unit, displaying a white light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of such vehicle, and shall also be equipped with two lamps, each displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear of such vehicle. 
(b)  Where the towed unit or any load thereon partially or totally obscures the two lamps displaying red light to the rear of the towing unit, the rearmost towed unit shall be equipped with two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear of such towed unit, which are positioned in such a manner as to not obstruct the visibility of the red light to any vehicle operator approaching from the rear of such vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
(c)  Where the two lamps displaying red light are not obscured by the towed unit or its load, then either towing unit or towed unit, or both, may be equipped with the two lamps displaying red light as required in this section. 
(d)  Subsection (c) of this section does not apply to antique vehicles, custom vehicles or street rods. An antique vehicle shall be equipped with lamps of the same type originally installed by the manufacturer as original equipment and in working order. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.3)  
Sec. 90-314. - Spotlamps and auxiliary driving lamps. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed one spotlamp, and every lighted spotlamp shall be aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle so that no part of the high intensity portion of the beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed three auxiliary driving lamps mounted on the front at a height of not less than 12 inches, nor more than 42 inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands. 
(c)  The restrictions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or equipment used for snow and ice removal operations, if such vehicles or equipment are owned or operated by or for any governmental body. 
(d)  The minimum and maximum height restrictions prescribed in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to privately owned motor vehicles on which a snowplow is mounted, while in transit between or during snow and ice removal operations. Such exemption shall apply only during the period from November 15—April 1, and only when the snowplow blade, commonly referred to as a "moldboard," is properly and securely affixed to the front of the motor vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-207.  
Sec. 90-315. - Use of headlamps and auxiliary driving lamps. 
(a)  Whenever the driver of any vehicle equipped with an electric driving headlamp or auxiliary driving lamp is within 500 feet of another vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, the driver shall dim or drop such headlamp and extinguish all auxiliary driving lamps. 
(b)  The driver of any vehicle equipped with an electric driving headlamp or auxiliary driving lamp shall dim or drop such headlamp and extinguish all auxiliary driving lamps when there is another vehicle traveling in the same direction less than 300 feet to the front of him. 
(c)  No vehicle shall have the lighting system modified to allow more than two electric headlamps to be lighted while operating in the dimmed or dropped position. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of auxiliary driving lamps, commonly referred to as "fog" lamps, when used in conjunction with headlamps, if such auxiliary driving lamps are adjusted and aimed so that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of drivers of oncoming vehicles. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-210.  
Sec. 90-316. - Number of driving lamps required or permitted. 
(a)  At all times specified in section 90-311, at least two lighted lamps shall be displayed, one on each side at the front of every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, except when such vehicle is parked subject to the provisions of section 90-317 governing lights on parked vehicles. 
(b)  Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlamps as required in this article is also equipped with an auxiliary lamp, spotlamp or any other lamp on the front thereof, projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a total of four of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one time when such vehicle is upon a street or highway. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-211.  
Sec. 90-317. - Lamps on parked vehicles. 
(a)  During the period from sunset to sunrise, every motorcycle or motor vehicle which is standing on any street or highway shall display a parking light on the front and at the rear of the motorcycle or motor vehicle. However, all streets within the Village limits, except the streets, or portions thereof, upon which parking is otherwise prohibited by this chapter, are hereby designated and prescribed as parking places in which vehicles may be parked without having their lamps lighted as otherwise required by this chapter or by the statutes of the State, during the period from sunset to sunrise, provided that such vehicles are equipped with at least one red reflector at the rear of such vehicle of at least the equivalent of two square inches of surface area, and clean and unobstructed so as to permit reflection from the headlights of moving vehicles approaching from the rear. 
(b)  Any lighted driving lamp upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-203.  
Sec. 90-318. - Special restrictions on lamps. 
(a)  No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any highway with any lamp or device on the vehicle or equipment displaying a red light visible from directly in front of the vehicle or equipment, except as otherwise provided in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq. 
(b)  Subject to the restrictions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a means for indicating a right or left turn as provided in 625 ILCS 5/12-208 or the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care as expressly provided in 625 ILCS 5/11-804 or 5/12-215. 
(c)  Unless otherwise expressly authorized by this chapter, all other lighting, or combination of lighting, on any vehicle shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-212.  
Sec. 90-319. - Brake equipment required. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, other than a motor-driven cycle and an antique vehicle displaying an antique plate, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of, and stop and hold such vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least one wheel on a motorcycle and at least two wheels on all other first division and second division vehicles. If such two separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be constructed so that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes. 
(b)  Every motor-driven cycle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with at least one brake, which may be operated by hand or foot. 
(c)  Every antique vehicle shall be equipped with brakes of the same type originally installed by the manufacturer as original equipment and in working order. 
(d)  Every trailer or semitrailer of a gross weight of over 3,000 pounds, when operated upon a highway, must be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of, and stop and hold such vehicle, and be designed so as to be operable by the driver of the towing vehicle from its cab. Such brakes must be designed and connected so that in case of an accidental breakaway of a towed vehicle over 5,000 pounds, the brakes are automatically applied. 
(e)  Every motor vehicle, trailer, pole trailer or semitrailer, sold in the State or operated upon the highways, shall be equipped with service brakes upon all wheels of every such vehicle, except any motor-driven cycle, and any trailer, pole trailer or semitrailer with a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or less need not be equipped with brakes, and any trailer or semitrailer with a gross weight over 3,000 pounds, but under 5,001 pounds, need be equipped with brakes on only one wheel on each side of the vehicle. Any motor vehicle and truck tractor having three or more axles and manufactured prior to July 25, 1980, need not have brakes on the front wheels, except when such vehicles are equipped with at least two steerable axles, the wheels of one such axle need not be equipped with brakes. However, a vehicle that is more than 30 years of age and which is driven on the highways only in going to and returning from an antique auto show, or for servicing or a demonstration need be equipped with two wheel brakes only. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-301(a).  
Sec. 90-320. - Performance ability of brakes. 
(a)  The service brakes upon any motor vehicle, or combination of vehicles, operating on a level surface shall be adequate to stop such vehicles within a distance of 30 feet when traveling 20 miles per hour upon dry asphalt or concrete pavement surface that is free from loose material. 
(b)  Under the conditions set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the hand brake shall be adequate to stop such vehicles, except any motorcycle, within a distance of 55 feet and the hand brake shall be adequate to hold such vehicles stationary on any grade upon which operated. 
(c)  Under the conditions set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the service brakes upon an antique vehicle shall be adequate to stop the vehicle within a distance of 40 feet and the hand brake shall be adequate to stop the vehicle within a distance of 55 feet. 
(d)  All braking distances specified in this section apply to all vehicles set forth in this section, whether such vehicles are unloaded or loaded to the maximum capacity permitted under this article. All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be adjusted so as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle. 
(e)  Brake assembly requirements for mobile homes shall be the standards required by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development adopted under Title VI of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, a custom vehicle or street rod is considered to be in compliance with all brake equipment requirements if it has passed the approved vehicle safety inspection provided for in section 3-804.1 or 3-804.2. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-301(b).  
Sec. 90-321. - Horns and warning devices. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 200 feet, but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation, give audible warning with his horn, but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a highway. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this section. Any authorized emergency vehicle or organ transport vehicle, as defined in Chapter 1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., may be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet, but such siren, whistle or bell shall not be used, except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in either of which events, the driver of such vehicle shall sound such siren, whistle or bell when necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-601.  
Sec. 90-322. - Mufflers and exhaust systems. 
Every motor vehicle driven or operated upon the streets of the Village shall at all times be equipped with an adequate muffler or exhaust system in constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise. No such muffler or exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout, bypass or similar device. No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise of such vehicle above that emitted by the muffler originally installed on the vehicle, and such original muffler shall comply with all the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.12) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-602.  
Sec. 90-323. - Mirrors. 
Every motor vehicle, operated singly or when towing another vehicle, shall be equipped with a mirror located so as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such motor vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.13) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-502.  
Sec. 90-324. - Wipers. 
Every motor vehicle, except motorcycles, shall be equipped with a device, controlled by the driver, for cleaning rain, snow, moisture or other obstructions from the windshield; and no person shall drive a motor vehicle with snow, ice, moisture or other material on any of the windows or mirrors, which materially obstructs the driver's clear view of the highway. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/12-503(d).  
Sec. 90-325. - Tires. 
It shall be unlawful to operate on any street or highway any motor vehicle which is not equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the State traffic law. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.15)  
Sec. 90-326. - Provisions adopted for regulation, limitation and enforcement of vehicle sizes, weights and loads. 
In order to provide for and prescribe regulations and limitations relating to the size, weight and load of motor vehicles operating on streets and highways within the Village and, further, to provide for the enforcement of size, weight and load limitations, there is hereby adopted the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/15-101—5/15-115, providing for such regulation, limitation and enforcement. The provisions of such statutes are specifically incorporated in this article by reference as fully as if set out in this section, and from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, such provisions shall be controlling on streets and highways within the limits of the Village and shall be enforced by the Village police department. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.16)  
Sec. 90-327. - Projecting loads on passenger vehicles. 
No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street within the Village with any load carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of such vehicle, nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders on the right side of such vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/15-105.  
Sec. 90-328. - Towed vehicles. 
When one vehicle is towing another, the drawbar or other connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed thereby and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one vehicle to the other, except for the connection between any two vehicles transporting poles, pipes, machinery or other objects of a structural nature which cannot readily be dismembered. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.18) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-110(a).  
Sec. 90-329. - Maximum gross weight on certain streets. 
No truck exceeding the posted weight limit on a particular street shall be permitted to pass through that section of street or over any structure located within the restricted length of roadway. 
(Code 1959, § 11.3.19)  
Sec. 90-330. - Definitions—Oversize and overweight vehicles. 
For purposes of Sections 90-330 through 90-336, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  A one-way or single trip movement means one move from the point of origin to the point of destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are effective for five consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed by the traffic unit. 
(2)  Round trip movement means two trips over the same route in opposite directions. Round trip permits over a circular or roundabout route will not routinely be issued unless different return routing is necessary due to lower clearance or a deficiency in a structure in the opposite directions. 
(3)  Multiple moves are those in such close proximity to each other in distance or in time that the traffic unit would consider incorporating two or more permit moves as one move. Multiple move permits, when granted by the traffic unit, shall be for a period of time not to exceed 30 days from the date of issuance. Multiple moves must be identified prior to obtaining a permit. 
(4)  Limited continuous use movements are movements generally to one site over a period of three months made by over-dimension (oversized) vehicles which do not exceed the weight limits defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, Act 5, Chapter 15. Limited continuous use permits may be issued for up to ten trips, generally to the same site during the time period allowed. Each move must be verified by the traffic unit prior to making the move due to possible lane closures requiring a route change. 
(Ord. No. 5082, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 90-331. - Permits. 
(a)  A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle and/or non-divisible load (one which cannot be reasonably disassembled) or combination of vehicles on roadways and bridges within the jurisdiction of the Village of Glenview which exceeds the following limits: 
(1)  Maximum gross weight of more than 73,280 pounds. 
(2)  Maximum gross length of more than 60 feet. 
(3)  Maximum gross width of more than 8 feet, 6 inches. 
(4)  Maximum gross height of more than 13 feet, 6 inches. 
(5)  Maximum axle weight of more then 18,000 pounds. 
(6)  Maximum axle tandem weight of more then 32,000 pounds. 
However, access on Village streets within one mile of I-294 and I-94 within the Village limits is permitted, as required by the Illinois Vehicle Code, to those vehicles meeting maximum weights and dimensions and for those purposes, as the Village Code allows. With respect to those roadways and bridges under construction, road closures with or without signage do not exempt overweight and/or over-dimension movements from permit requirements when any traffic is allowed through construction zone(s) and when the movement is made by applicant(s) not performing construction on the roadway closed. In an emergency declared by resolution of the Village Board, the requirements to obtain permits may be waived. 
Exempt from permits are the following: 
(1)  Fire department vehicles. 
(2)  Those vehicles operating under an emergency declaration. 
(3)  Village owned vehicles engaged in emergency utility repair. 
(4)  Equipment used for snow and ice removal, owned or operated by any government body. 
(b)  Permits shall be issued only in the name of a person, firm, business or corporation that owns and operates the transporting vehicle or that operates the vehicle under a bona fide lease agreement. 
(c)  Permits for vehicles that are both overweight and over-dimensional are valid only a half hour before sunrise to a half hour after sunset, on any day which the permit is valid. 
(d)  Permits are non-transferable and apply only to the permittee. 
(e)  The Village may issue revisions to permits: 
(1)  To correct an error attributed to the Village. 
(2)  To correct an error attributed to the applicant, discovered before the move. 
(3)  To adjust weights, dimensions or routes as issued on the permit, before the move is made. 
(4)  Any revision made at the request of the permittee for purposes of changing weights, dimensions, routes or load descriptions shall be made before any move is made at a cost of $10.00 per permit. 
(f)  The permit, when issued, constitutes an agreement between the permittee and the Village that the move described in the application will take place only as described. The permittee has the responsibility to report to the Village's police department traffic unit any inaccuracies or errors on the part of either the Village or the permittee before starting any move. Undertaking the move is prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit as issued and its terms. 
(g)  The routing prescribed in the permit constitutes the sole extent of the authority granted by the permit for the use of Village roads, and any vehicle and/or load found to be off route will be considered off route and without a permit. Permits shall be in the driver's possession at all times unless otherwise directed by the traffic unit and presented upon demand to any and all police officers for the purpose of inspection. 
(h)  If required, arrangements shall be made by the permittee to have the proper utilities notified, property moved, bridges or highways analyses performed and completed in advance of any permit movement. 
(i)  All movements under the permit shall be made in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and Local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(j)  Permits are void if altered for the purpose of deception. The permits issued under this section constitute the grant of a privilege by the Village and may be denied or suspended for such reasons as the Village may deem rationally related to its governmental interests including, but not limited to: 
(1)  A permittee knowingly providing incorrect information in an applicant for a permit. 
(2)  A permittee, its agents or employees acting on a permit which has been altered for purposes of deception. 
(3)  Non-compliance by permittee, its agents or employees with Federal, State or Local ordinances pertaining to the transport of goods or operation of a vehicle engaged in the transport of goods. 
(4)  Moving on Village streets without a valid permit as required under this section. 
(Ord. No. 5082, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 90-332. - Application for permit. 
(a)  All applications for permits shall be given full consideration. Permits for proposed moves may be issued: 
(1)  When the Village roadways and bridges will not be unduly damaged; and 
(2)  When the safety of the traveling public will be adequately protected. 
(b)  Applications for a permit to move an oversized and/or overweight vehicle, and/or load, must be made to the traffic unit of the Village of Glenview's Police Department. The following information shall be included on the permit: 
(1)  Permittee's name. 
(2)  Fax and telephone number of applicant. 
(3)  Name of person making application. 
(4)  Description of hauling vehicle. 
(5)  Registration number of hauling vehicle and/or trailer. 
(6)  Description of load to be moved. 
(7)  Overall dimensions of vehicle and axle weight information. 
(8)  Village roadways to be traveled. 
(9)  Any special conditions. 
(10)  Permit type with corresponding fee due to the Village. 
(11)  Date Permit issued and expiration date. 
(12)  Time permit issued and by whom. 
(13)  Category of permit. 
(14)  State and/or County permit numbers if applicable. 
(c)  A schedule of overweight and oversize vehicle permit fees is contained in Section 30-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5082, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 90-333. - Police escorts. 
Police escorts are required for certain vehicles and loads as indicated in subsection herein. The total number of officers necessary to provide for a safe move shall be determined by the traffic unit, based upon the size and weight of the permit move. Fees for escorts shall be in addition to the permit fees set forth in Section 30-5 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5082, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 90-334. - Bonds, indemnification and insurance. 
(a)  The permittee shall assume total liability for any and all damages to streets, bridges, Village owned appurtenances and private or public property while engaged in a permit move. The measure of liability is the cost for all repairs or replacement of property damaged by the permittee. 
(b)  The permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the Village from any costs, judgments or settlements, including attorney(s) fees, arising from physical injuries, including loss of life, or damage to or loss of property related to acts or omissions by permittee, its officers, agents or employees pursuant to the permit. 
(c)  Upon application for a permit(s) each applicant shall provide evidence of a valid comprehensive general liability insurance policy, with an insurance company approved by the Village, for protection against personal injury or property damage in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 5082, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 90-335. - Suspension and reinstatement. 
(a)  Suspension of a current permit shall be for the time determined appropriate by the traffic unit; however, reinstatement may be made upon condition determined by the Village and payment of all outstanding settlements or judgments. 
(b)  The charges for reinstatement are: 
(1)  Denial = No charge. 
(2)  Suspended = $50.00. 
(c)  The chief of police or their designee shall administer and enforce this section and shall have the authority to grant, deny or reinstate permits. Any applicant or permittee denied a permit or who has had a permit suspended, upon request, shall be given a hearing before the traffic unit of the Village of Glenview Police Department and, if applicant, or permittee desires, may appeal the decision of the traffic unit in a hearing before the chief of police and/or Village manager. 
(Ord. No. 5082, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Sec. 90-336. - Fines and bonds. 
In addition to other remedies the Village may seek, a permittee, its officers, agents or employees, found guilty of moving an over-dimension (oversized) or overweight vehicle or load on Village streets on a permit altered for purposes of deception or without a valid permit as is required under this section, shall be subject to a $500.00 fine for the first day during which a move was made and a $750.00 fine for each additional day during which a move was made. 
(Ord. No. 5082, § 2, 3-18-2008)  
Secs. 90-337—90-360. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - INOPERABLE OR ABANDONED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 90-361. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle means any vehicle which is left at any location for a period of 14 days or more and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned. 
Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least 14 days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed or altered, damaged or otherwise treated so that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. Such term shall not include a: 
(1)  Motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations; 
(2)  Motor vehicle which is kept within a building when not in use; 
(3)  Historic vehicle over 25 years of age; or 
(4)  Motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in wrecking or junking of motor vehicles. 
Not more than one currently unregistered or unlicensed vehicle shall be kept, parked or stored on any premises at any time, except as set forth in this definition. 
Property means any real property within the Village which is not a street or highway. 
Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides, and transport persons or property, or pull machinery, and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies and wagons. 
(Code 1959, § 11.8.1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-40-3.  
Sec. 90-362. - Abandonment of vehicles. 
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Village, nor leave any vehicle at any place within the Village for such a time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned. 
(Code 1959, § 11.8.2)  
Sec. 90-363. - Leaving inoperable motor vehicle on street or highway. 
No person shall leave, for a period of more than 12 hours, on any street or highway in the Village, any vehicle which is in such a state of disrepair as to be incapable of being driven under its own motor power. 
(Code 1959, § 11.8.3)  
Sec. 90-364. - Inoperable motor vehicles declared a nuisance. 
Inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property, are hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1959, § 11.8.4) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 38-281 et seq.  
Sec. 90-365. - Disposition of inoperable motor vehicles. 
All persons are required to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle under their control upon written notice received from the corporate authorities or the chief of police, or any member of his department designated by him, commanding such disposition of such inoperable motor vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 11.8.5)  
Sec. 90-366. - Removal and impoundment. 
The chief of police or any member of the police department designated by him is hereby authorized to remove, or have removed, any vehicle left at any place within the Village which reasonably appears to be in violation of this article or which reasonably appears to be lost, stolen or unclaimed, or which is an inoperable motor vehicle. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/4-201—5/4-213. 
(Code 1959, § 11.8.6)  
Sec. 90-367. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such under this section. 
(Code 1959, § 11.8.7)  
Secs. 90-368—90-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MOTORCYCLES 
 
Sec. 90-401. - Operation. 
(a)  A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person, nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event, a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if such seat is designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator. 
(b)  A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle. 
(c)  No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebars higher than the height of the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the normal driving position astride that portion of the seat or saddle occupied by the operator. 
(Code 1959, § 11.11.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1403.  
Sec. 90-402. - Eye protection devices. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Glasses means ordinary eye pieces, such as spectacles or sunglasses, worn before the eye, made of shatter-resistant material. The term "shatter-resistant material," as used in this subsection, means material manufactured, fabricated or created so that it substantially prevents shattering or flying when struck or broken. 
Goggles means a device worn before the eyes, the predominant function of which is protecting the eyes without obstructing peripheral vision. Goggles shall provide protection from the front and sides, and may or may not form a complete seal with the face. 
Transparent shield means a windshield attached to the front of a motorcycle, that extends above the eyes when an operator is seated in the normal, upright riding position, made of shatter-resistant material, or a shatter-resistant protective face shield that covers the wearer's eyes and face at least to a point approximately to the tip of the nose. 
(b)  Operators. The operator of a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle or motorized pedalcycle and every passenger thereon shall be protected by glasses, goggles or a transparent shield. Contact lenses are not acceptable eye protection devices. 
(Code 1959, § 11.11.2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1404.  
Sec. 90-403. - Handlebars. 
No motorcycle may be operated with handlebars rising more than 15 inches in height above the level of the seat or saddle. 
(Code 1959, § 11.11.3)  
Secs. 90-404—90-430. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BICYCLES 
 
Sec. 90-431. - Registration and tag. 
(a)  Every person residing within the Village who owns, possesses or regularly operates within the Village limits a bicycle with a wheel dominator of over 20 inches shall obtain from the chief of police a registration tag for each bicycle so owned, possessed or regularly used. A fee, as established from time to time by resolution of the president and board of trustees, shall be charged for issuing such registration tag. A registration tag may be transferred to another bicycle owned by a registrant without additional charge only upon proof that the original bicycle is no longer owned, possessed, used or offered for rent within the Village limits by the original registrant thereof, and the bicycle to which the registration tag is to be transferred complies with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Upon the receipt of the fees for such registration, the chief of police shall accept the bicycle for registration and issue a registration tag, bearing an identifying number, and attach the tag to the bicycle which meets the equipment standards for bicycles as set forth and published by the chief of police from time to time. The chief of police may require any bicycle to be reinspected from time to time. 
(c)  No bicycle rental agency operating within the Village limits shall rent, or offer for rent, any bicycle unless the bicycle is registered and a registration tag is attached thereto as provided in this section, and such bicycle is equipped as required by this article. 
(d)  The chief of police shall maintain such records as are necessary to carry out the requirements of this section. 
(e)  The chief of police may from time to time authorize such persons as, in his opinion, are necessary to perform the work necessary to carry out the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 11.12.1)  
Sec. 90-432. - Lamps and other equipment. 
(a)  Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front, which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the State department of transportation which shall be visible from all distances from 100—600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(b)  A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren. 
(c)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately control movement of and stop and hold such bicycle. 
(d)  No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that is not equipped with a reflex reflector conforming to specifications prescribed by the State department of transportation, on each pedal, visible from the front and rear of the bicycle, during darkness, from a distance of 200 feet. 
(e)  No person shall sell, or offer for sale, a new bicycle that is not equipped with side reflectors. Such reflectors shall be visible from each side of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet and shall be essentially colorless or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially colorless or amber to the front of the center of the bicycle. The requirements of this subsection may be met by reflective materials which shall be at least three-sixteenths of an inch wide on each side of each tire or rim to indicate as clearly as possible the continuous circular shape and size of the tires or rims of such bicycle and which reflective materials may be of the same color on both the front and rear tire or rim. Such reflectors shall conform to specifications prescribed by the State department of transportation. 
(f)  No person shall sell, or offer for sale, a new bicycle that is not equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector. 
(g)  All bicycles shall have such other equipment as the chief of police may from time to time reasonably determine to be necessary for the safe operation of any bicycle; provided, however, a list of such equipment is published by the chief of police as provided in section 90-431(b ). 
(Code 1959, § 11.12.2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1507.  
Sec. 90-433. - Operating regulations. 
(a)  The operator of any bicycle within the Village shall, in addition to the other provisions of this article, conform to the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq. 
(b)  No person shall ride a bicycle, except upon or astride the regular permanent seat attached thereto. 
(c)  No person shall carry upon a bicycle more persons than the number for which such bicycle has been designed and is properly equipped to carry, except that an adult rider may carry a child securely attached to his person in a backpack or sling. 
(d)  No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed faster or in any manner other than that which is reasonable and prudent with regard to the safety of the riders thereof and others using the roadway. 
(e)  No person shall ride a bicycle without having at least one hand on the handlebar or other steering device at all times. 
(f)  All bicycles shall be operated as near to the righthand curb as conditions will permit, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or a vehicle proceeding in the same direction. 
(g)  No person riding upon a bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach such bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle, or himself to any other moving vehicle. 
(h)  The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right turn, shall follow the righthand lane next to the righthand edge of the roadway. No operator of a bicycle shall suddenly start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn without first giving the standard signal required by State law for motor vehicles under the same circumstances. 
(i)  No bicycle shall have attached to it any other vehicle, such as a wagon or sled. 
(j)  No person shall ride a bicycle on any sidewalk or roadway on which the chief of police, by sign, has posted as "Bicycles Prohibited." 
(k)  Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such person. 
(l)  No bicycle shall be left lying upon any street, sidewalk or alley or in such a position as to obstruct or interfere with the use of any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(m)  Proper hand signals should be used at all times by a bicycle operator. 
(n)  Every person operating a bicycle must obey all traffic signs. 
(Code 1959, § 11.12.3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1503, 5/11-1504.  
Sec. 90-434. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00, nor more than $100.00 for each offense, or have his bicycle impounded for a period not to exceed 120 days. 
(Code 1959, § 11.12.4)  
Secs. 90-435—90-460. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 90-461. - Obedience to traffic control devices and traffic regulations. 
(a)  A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device specifically applicable to him, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian control signals as provided in 625 ILCS 5/11-306 and 5/11-307, but, at all other places, pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
(Code 1959, § 11.13.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1001.  
Sec. 90-462. - Right-of-way at crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic control signals are not in place or operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a moving vehicle which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply under the condition stated in 625 ILCS 5/11-1003(b). 
(d)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked or unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(e)  Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians as set forth in 625 ILCS 5/11-904. 
(Code 1959, § 11.13.2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1002.  
Sec. 90-463. - Crossing at other than crosswalks. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked or unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  Between any intersections, whenever the board of trustees of the village shall determine, upon the basis of a traffic investigation upon any roadway under its jurisdiction, that crossing between intersections should be prohibited in the interest of public safety, pedestrians shall not cross at any place, except in a marked or unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, and that such prohibition shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn, when necessary, and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child, or confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1959, § 11.13.3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1003.  
Sec. 90-464. - Visibly disabled pedestrians. 
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian with clearly visible disabilities. 
(Code 1959, § 11.13.4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1004.  
Sec. 90-465. - Soliciting rides. 
No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 11.13.5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1006(a).  
Sec. 90-466. - Walking on highways. 
(a)  Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway. 
(c)  Where neither a sidewalk, nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an outside edge of a roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on the left side of the roadway. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(Code 1959, § 11.13.6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, 625 ILCS 5/11-1007.  
Secs. 90-467—90-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SHOPPING CENTER TRAFFIC 
 
Sec. 90-501. - Contract to regulate traffic. 
The corporate authorities of the Village and any shopping center owner located within the Village may, by contract, empower the Village to regulate the parking of automobiles and traffic at such shopping center. Such contract shall empower the Village to accomplish all or any part of the following: 
(1)  Erection of stop signs, flashing signals or yield signs at specified locations in a parking area and the adoption of appropriate regulations pertaining thereto, or the designation of any intersection in the parking area as a stop intersection or yield intersection and the ordering of like signs or signals at one or more entrances to such intersection, subject to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Prohibition or regulation of the turning of vehicles or specified types of vehicles at intersections or other designated locations in the parking area. 
(3)  Regulation of the crossing of any roadway in the parking area by pedestrians. 
(4)  Designation of any separate roadway in the parking area for one-way traffic. 
(5)  Establishment and regulation of loading zones. 
(6)  Prohibition, regulation, restriction or limitation of the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified areas of the parking area. 
(7)  Designation of safety zones in the parking area and fire lanes. 
(8)  Providing for the removal and storage of vehicles parked or abandoned where they constitute an obstruction to traffic, and for the payment of reasonable charges as may be established from time to time by resolution of the president and board of trustees of the village for such removal and storage by the owner or operator of any such vehicle. 
(9)  Providing that the cost of planning, installation and maintenance of parking and traffic regulations pursuant to any contract entered into under the authority of this article shall be borne by the property or shopping center owner and the cost for the enforcement thereof shall be borne by the Village. 
(10)  Contracting for such additional reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article, with respect to traffic and parking in a parking area as local conditions may require for the safety and convenience of the public or the users of the parking area. 
(Code 1959, § 11.15.1)  
Sec. 90-502. - Contract approval. 
Contracts entered into pursuant to this article must be approved by the board of trustees, signed by the president and attested to by the clerk. 
(Code 1959, § 11.15.2)  
Sec. 90-503. - Contract term. 
No contract entered into between the Village and any shopping center owner pursuant to this article shall exceed a period of 20 years. No lessee of a shopping center shall enter into such a contract for a longer period of time than the length of his lease. 
(Code 1959, § 11.15.3)  
Sec. 90-504. - Contract recording. 
Any contract entered into between the Village and any shopping center owner pursuant to this article shall be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of the County, and no regulation made pursuant to the contract shall be effective or enforceable until three days after the contract is recorded and the posting of signs indicating such regulation in the shopping center. 
(Code 1959, § 11.15.4)  
Sec. 90-505. - Violations; penalties. 
At such time as parking and traffic regulations have been established at any shopping center pursuant to the contract as provided for in this article, it shall then be an offense for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by such parking or traffic regulation, and such violation is punishable by a fine of not less than $1.00, nor more than $200.00. 
(Code 1959, § 11.15.5)  
Secs. 90-506—90-540. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - SCHEDULES 
 
Sec. 90-541. - Stop intersections. 
In accordance with section 90-141 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the intersections of the following streets: 
Third at Main (southbound) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Third at Southbranch (southbound) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Fourth at Southbranch (southbound) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Fifth at Northbranch (northbound) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Fifth at Southbranch (southbound) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Sixth at Southbranch (one-way street) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Seventh at Northbranch (one-way street) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Eighth at Southbranch (one-way street) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Ninth at Northbranch (one-way street) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Tenth at Northbranch (northbound) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Tenth at Southbranch (one-way street) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Eleventh at Northbranch (northbound) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Eleventh at Southbranch (northbound) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Twelfth at Southbranch (southbound) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Alvin (northwest corner) at Swainwood 
Alvin (southeast corner) at Swainwood 
Ave D/Shermer 
Ave E/Shermer 
Balmoral Avenue and Kings Lane 
Bel Air Drive (stop) at Harrison (through) 
Bennington Ct./Independence (east) 
Bennington Ct./Independence (west) 
Bluestem/Chestnut 
Bonnie Glen (northeast and southwest corners) at Hawthorn 
Buccaneer/First St. 
Burton Terrace (westbound) at Brandon Road. 
Butterfly/Violet 
Butterfly/West Lake 
Camden Drive northbound and southbound at Aberdeen Drive 
Camden Drive eastbound at Summit Drive 
Cardinal Rd./Lehigh 
Carousel Drive (southbound) at Crestwood Drive 
Castle Drive (stop southbound traffic) 
at Knollwood Lane 
Cedarwood Lane (stop northbound traffic) 
at Fir Street (through) 
Cedarwood Lane (stop southbound traffic) 
at Fir Street (through) 
Cedarwood Lane (stop) 
at Linden Leaf Drive (stop) 
Central Road at Glenridge Drive 
(stop eastbound and westbound traffic) 
Central Road (eastbound) at Coronet Road 
Central Road (eastbound) at Lehigh Avenue 
Central Road (stop on northeast corner) 
at Glendale 
Church Street (stop) and Grove Street (stop) 
Clavey Lane (southbound traffic) 
at Bel Air Drive 
Colfax Avenue (westbound and eastbound) at Harlem Avenue 
Colfax (northwest corner) at Neva 
Colfax (southeast corner) at Neva 
Cornone Road (stop southbound traffic) 
at Woodland Drive 
Coronet Road (northbound and southbound) at Central Road 
Cottonwood/Thistle 
Country Lane (stop northbound traffic) 
and Central Parkway (through) 
Crestwood Drive (westbound) at Landwehr Road 
Crestwood Lane (stop) 
and Highland Park (stop) 
Crestwood Lane (stop) 
at Glendale Road (through) 
Daisy/Bluestem 
Dauntless Drive (southbound and northbound) 
at Constellation Drive 
Dell Place (stop) 
at Glenwood Road (through) 
Elizabeth Lane (stop) at Bonnie Glen 
Drive (stop) 
Elizabeth Lane (stop) Sanford Lane (eastbound) 
Elizabeth Lane (stop westbound traffic) 
at Sanford Lane 
Elizabeth Lane (stop westbound traffic) 
at Raleigh Road 
Elm (northwest and southeast corner) 
at Dewes Street 
Elm Court (stop) and Spruce Drive (stop) 
Elmdale (northbound & southbound)/West Lake 
Elm Street (northbound and southbound) at Henley Street 
Elm Street (northbound) at Harrison Street 
Elm Street (northbound) at Colfax Avenue 
Elm Street (southbound) at Colfax Avenue 
Elm Street (southbound) at Harrison Street 
Elm Street (stop) and Prairie Street (stop) 
Elmwood Avenue (stop) 
and Brandon Road (stop) 
Elmwood Avenue (stop) 
and Canterbury Lane (through) 
Elmwood Avenue (stop) eastbound 
and westbound traffic at Meadow Lane 
Enterprise/Chestnut 
Enterprise/Fielding 
Estate Lane (stop) at Rugen Road (through) 
Fernwood Drive (southeast corner) at Greenfield Drive 
Fielding (northbound & southbound)/Thistle 
Fielding (westbound & eastbound)/Bluestem 
Fir Street (stop) and Roosevelt Avenue (through) 
First St. (northbound & southbound) Ave D 
Fontana Drive (stop) and Flora Avenue (through) 
George Court (eastbound and westbound) at Lehigh Avenue 
Glenayre Drive (southbound) at Central 
Glenayre Drive (stop northbound and southbound traffic) at Glenridge Drive 
Glendale Drive at Central Road 
(stop southbound) 
Glendale Drive (northbound) at Westview 
Glenridge Drive at Central Road 
(stop southbound) 
Glenridge Drive at Glenayre Drive 
(stop westbound) 
Golden Rod (northbound & southbound)/Violet 
Golden Rod/Patriot 
Golden Rod/West Lake 
Greenwood Road (stop) and Happy Hollow Road (stop) 
Greenwood Road (stop) and Mapleleaf Drive (stop) 
Greenwood Road (stop) Winnetka Road (through) 
Grove Street (stop) at Pine Street (stop) 
Grove Street (stop) at Raleigh Road (stop) 
Grove Street (stop eastbound and westbound traffic) at Vernon Drive 
Hammersmith Lane (northeast corner) at Potter Road 
Hammersmith Lane (stop eastbound) at Potter Road 
Happy Hollow Road (eastbound) at Mapleleaf Drive 
Harrison Street (stop westbound traffic) at Sheryl Lane 
Hawthorn (northwest and southeast corners) at Bonnie Glen 
Hawthorne Lane (stop northbound and southbound) at Elmwood Avenue. 
Independence (northbound)/Fielding 
Independence at Patriot (4 way) 
Independence (westbound)/Constitution 
Indigo Ln/Primrose 
Indigo (southbound & northbound)/Indigo 
Jefferson Avenue (stop eastbound traffic) at Waukegan Road (through) 
Johns Court (westbound) at Johns Drive 
Kendale Lane (northbound) 
at Pleasant Lane 
Kenilworth Avenue (stop and East Ridgewood Lane (through) 
Knollwood Lane (stop westbound traffic) at Castle Drive 
Knollwood Lane (stop) Glendale Road (stop) 
Knollwood Lane (stop) Highland Lane (stop) 
Knollwood Lane (stop) at Pfingsten Road (through) 
Knollwood Lane (stop) and Springdale Avenue (stop) 
Langley Cir./Independence (east) 
Langley Cir./Independence (west) 
Lehigh Avenue (stop) and Prairie Street 
(stop) 
Lilly/West Lake 
Lincoln Street (northbound) at Colfax 
Lincoln Street (northbound and southbound) at Larkdale Drive 
Lincoln Street (northbound) at McArthur Drive 
Lincoln Street (southbound) at Colfax 
Lincoln Street (southbound) at Henley Street 
Lincoln Street (southbound) at McArthur Drive 
Lincoln Street (stop northbound and southbound traffic) at Dewes Street (through) 
Lincoln Street (stop) at Harrison Street (stop) 
Lincoln Street (southeast corner) at 
Linneman 
Lincoln Street (stop) at Prairie Street (stop) 
Lindenleaf Drive (stop eastbound traffic) at Roosevelt Avenue (through) 
Lindenwood Lane (stop) and Glendale Road (through) 
Lindenwood Lane (stop) at Pam Anne Drive (through) 
Lindenwood Lane (stop) and Pfingster Road (through) 
Linneman (northeast corner) at Lincoln 
Linneman (northeast corner) at Prairie Lawn 
Linneman (southwest corner) at Lincoln 
Linneman (southwest side) at Prairie Lawn 
Long Road (stop) at Wilmette Avenue (through) 
Longmeadow Lane (stop southbound traffic) at Bellwood Lane 
Longvalley (stop) and Country (stop) 
Main at Fifth (westbound) 
Main at Waukegan Road (eastbound) 
Mapleleaf (stop east and west) at Strawberry 
Mary Kay Lane (northbound) at Mapleleaf Drive 
McArthur Drive (stop) and Elm Street (stop) 
Meadow Lane (stop northbound and southbound traffic) at Elmwood Avenue 
Michael Manor (southeast side) at Virginia Lane 
Michael Manor (stop) at Harrison Street (through) 
Michael Manor (stop) at Virginia Lane (southbound) 
Midway Ln./Monterey 
Mint/Patriot 
Mint/West Lake 
Mohawk Drive (northeast corner) at Indian Ridge Drive 
Mohawk Drive (southeast corner) at Saranac Lane 
Mohawk Drive (southwest corner) at Indian Ridge Drive 
Monroe Avenue (stop southbound traffic) at Chestnut Avenue (through) 
Monterey Dr./Independence 
Monterey Dr./West Lake 
Montgomery Lane (northbound) at Colfax Avenue 
Montgomery Lane (northbound) at Harrison Street 
Montgomery Lane (southbound) at Colfax Avenue 
Montgomery Lane (southbound) at 
McArthur Drive 
Neva (northwest corner) at Colfax 
Neva (southwest corner) at Colfax 
Nimitz Dr./Constitution 
Nimitz Dr./Patriot 
Northbranch Road at Fifth (eastbound) 
Northbranch Road (stop northbound traffic) at Central Parkway (through) 
North Lake Ter./Test Lake 
North Parking Structure exit drives (stops) at building exits 
North Parking Structure exit drives (stops) at Valor Drive 
2 exits for the Park District 
and Attea/Chestnut 
Parkview Road (northbound) at Colfax Avenue 
Parkview Road (southbound) at Colfax 
Avenue 
Parkview Road (southbound) at McArthur 
Drive 
Patriot Boulevard (northbound and southbound stops) at Independence Drive 
Pebble Creek Drive (westbound) at Pebble Creek Drive (northbound/southbound) 
Pfingsten Road (stop) at Glenview Road 
Pfingsten Road (stop) at Springdale Lane 
(stop) 
Pickwick (northbound)/West Lake 
Pickwick (southbound)/Thornwood 
Pickwick (southbound)/West Lake 
Pickwick Avenue at Thornwood Avenue (southbound) 
Pinehurst Drive (stop northbound and southbound) at Swainwood Drive 
Pleasant Lane (eastbound and westbound) at Highland Terrace 
Polo (northeast and southwest corners) at Wagner Road 
Poppy/Violet 
Poppy/West Lake 
Potter Road (northwest corner) at 
Hammersmith Lane 
Potter Road (southeast corner) at 
Hammersmith Lane 
Prairie Lawn (northwest corner) at 
Linneman 
Prairie Lawn Rd./Independence 
Prairie Street (stop eastbound and westbound traffic) at Pine Street (through) 
Prairie Street (stop) and Roosevelt Avenue 
(through) 
Prairie Street (eastbound and westbound) at Washington 
Prairie Street (stop eastbound and westbound traffic) at Spruce Street 
Primrose (southbound & northbound) at Thistle 
Raleigh Road (northbound) at Vernon Drive 
Ravine Way (westbound) at Old Willow Road 
River Drive (stop southbound) at Dewes Street 
Roosevelt (southeast corner) at Swainwood 
Russet Way (southbound) at Crestwood Drive 
Sable Drive (stop) at Tower Drive 
Sable/Tower 
Saranac Court (southwest corner) at Saranac Lane 
Sanford Lane (stop) at Elizabeth Lane (southbound) 
Saranac Lane (northwest corner) at Indian Ridge Drive 
Saranac Lane (northwest corner) at Saranac Court 
Saranac Lane (southeast corner ) at Indian Ridge Drive 
Saranac Lane (southeast corner) at Saranac Court 
Saratoga Lane (east/west) / Kittyhawk 
Saratoga Lane / West Lake 
Shermer/West Lake 
Sherwood Road (stop) at Beech Drive (stop) 
Sheryl Lane (stop southbound traffic) at Harrison Street 
South Parking Structure Driveway (stop 
eastbound 330 feet west of Tower Drive west curbline) 
South Parking Structure Driveway (stop) 
at Sable Drive 
South Parking Structure exit drives (stops 
at South Parking Structure Driveway) 
South Parking Structure exit drives (stops) 
at Wolverine Drive 
Springdale Lane (stop) at Castle Drive 
(through) 
Springdale Avenue (stop) at Glendale Road 
(through) 
Spruce Drive (southbound) at Colfax Avenue 
Spruce Drive (northbound) at Harrison Street 
Spruce Street (stop) and Prairie Street 
(through) 
Spruce Street (stop) at Dewes Street (stop) 
Strawberry Lane (northbound) at Mapleleaf Drive 
Summit Drive (southbound) at Westleigh Drive 
Sundrop Dr./Violet 
Sundrop/West Lake 
Sussex Lane (northbound) at Crestwood Drive 
Swainwood (northeast corner) at Alvin 
Swainwood (southwest corner) at Alvin 
Swainwood Drive (stop southbound, both the westbound and eastbound legs) at Spruce Drive. 
Thistle (eastbound & westbound) / Bluestem 
Thistle/Lehigh 
Thistle (eastbound)/Independence 
Thistle (westbound)/Independence 
Thornwood (westbound)/Greenwood 
Thornwood (eastbound)/Pickwick 
Thornwood Avenue at Pickwick Avenue (eastbound) 
Topp Lane (eastbound) at Huntington Drive 
Tower Drive and Aviator Lane (stop all directions) 
Tower Drive and Navy Boulevard (stop all directions) 
Tower Drive and Valor Drive (stop all directions) 
Triangle Commuter Parking Plaza driveway onto Washington Street 
Valor/West Lake 
Vernon Drive (stop northbound and southbound traffic) at Grove Street 
Violet/Mint 
Eastbound Violet/Poppy (one way) 
Wagner (northwest corner) at Central Road 
Wagner (southeast corner and northwest corner) at Polo 
Washington Street (northbound) at Colfax Avenue 
Washington Street (northbound) at Harrison Street 
Washington Street (northbound) at McArthur Drive 
Washington Street (northbound) at the entrance to the Triangle Commuter Parking Plaza 
Washington Street (northbound and southbound) at Henley Street 
Washington Street (southbound) at Colfax Avenue 
Washington Street (southbound) at Harrison Street 
Washington Street (stop) at Dewes Street 
(through) 
Washington Street (stop) and Grove Street (stop) 
Washington Street (stop) at Prairie Street (through) 
Westbranch at Northbranch (northbound) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Westbranch at Southbranch (southbound) 
Sunset Mobile Home Park 
Westview (westbound) at Glendale Drive 
Wildberry Drive (stop eastbound traffic) 
Wolverine Drive (stop) at Tower Drive 
Woodland Drive (northbound) at Central Road 
Woodland Drive (stop eastbound traffic) at Coronet Road 
 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 1; Ord. No. 4220, § 1, 10-3-2000; Ord. No. 4378, § 1, 3-5-2002; Ord. No. 4452, § 1, 11-5-2002; Ord. No. 4563, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 4812, § 3, 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 4855, § 2, 4-4-2006; Ord. No. 4900, § 2, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 4909, § 2, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 4918, § 2, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 5133, s; 2, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 5139, § 2, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 5149, § 2, 10-7-2008; Ord. No. 5151, § 2, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 5152, § 2, 10-21-2008; Ord. No. 5195, § 2, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 5233, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 5572, § 3, 6-19-2012; Ord. No. 5749, § 2, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 6012, § 2, 9-6-2016)  
Sec. 90-542. - Through highways. 
In accordance with the provisions of section 90-142 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop at every intersection before entering any of the following streets: 
Central Road (Harlem Avenue to the west village limits) 
Chestnut Avenue 
Dearlove Road 
Glenview Road 
Golf Road 
Greenwood Road (Southbound from West Lake Avenue) 
Greenwood Avenue 
Harlem Avenue 
Harms Road 
Lake Avenue 
Landwehr Road 
Lehigh Avenue (Northbound from Harlem Avenue) 
Milwaukee Avenue 
Patriot Boulevard 
Pfingsten Road (Northbound from Lake Avenue) 
Sanders Road 
Shermer Road (Northbound from West Lake Avenue and Southbound from Lake Avenue) 
Sunset Ridge Road 
Wagner Road (Northbound from Glenview Road) 
Washington Road 
Waukegan Road 
West Lake Avenue 
Willow Road 
Winnetka Road 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 2; Ord. No. 5572, § 2, 6-19-2012)  
Sec. 90-543. - Parking prohibited at certain times. 
(a)  For all temporary road closures, parking restrictions, and restrictions deemed necessary for public safety in conjunction with special events, the Board of Trustees may approve such changes via resolution or other approval action of the Board. 
(b)  In accordance with section 90-181 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places during the indicated times: 
Aviator Lane, from Tower Drive to Patriot Boulevard, in designated parking spaces between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
Barry, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days, in LaFontaine. 
Beaver Road (west curb), from a point 20 feet north of the south end of Beaver Road to the end of the road at Cunliff Park between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., no exceptions. 
Brett Lane (both sides), from the west curbline of Pfingsten Road to a point 475 feet west, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Butterfly Lane, from West Lake Avenue to Violet Lane (both sides), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Chandler Lane, between the hours of hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Church Street (east curb), from Grove Street to Sleepy Hollow Park, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Colfax (both sides), between Nottingham and Harlem, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m. 
Depot Street (west side), from the north curbline of Grove Street to a point 730 feet north, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Dewes Street (south side), from the west curb of Washington Street to Spruce Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Dewes Street (south side), from 100 feet east of East Railroad Avenue to approximately 100 feet west of Waukegan Road, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
East Railroad Avenue (east side), from Dewes Street to Henley Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
East Railroad Avenue (east side), from Henley Street to Linneman Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Elm Street (both east and west sides), from the north edge of Grove Street to the south edge of Fir Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday. 
Elm Street (both sides), from Prairie Street to rove Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Elm Street (west side), from Linneman Street to Henley Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Elm Street (west side), from the south curb of Glenview Road to the north curb of Henley Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Elmwood Avenue (both sides), between Sunset Ridge Road and Brandon Road, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 3:30 p.m., on school days. 
Fir Street (both sides), from Lincoln Street to Elm Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Fir Street (south side), from Spruce Drive to Elm Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Glenlake Drive (A, B, C and D), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on schooldays. 
Glenlake Drive, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Glenlake Drive, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Glenview, between the hours of 3:00 p.m.—11:00 p.m., July 5, 1993. Goldenrod Lane, from Violet Street to Patriot Boulevard (both sides), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Goldenrod Lane, from West Lake Avenue to Violet Street (both sides), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Grace, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days, in LaFontaine. 
Green Willow Lane (north side and west side), west of Tinker Way, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, inclusive. 
Grove Street (north side), from Spruce Drive to Elm Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Grove Street (north side), from the west curbline of Vernon Drive to a point 142 feet west, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Grove Street (south side), from Depot Street to Church Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Grove Street (south side), from Elm Street and Lincoln Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Grove Street (south side), from the east curbline of Waukegan Road to the west curbline of Vernon Drive, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Harrison Street (north side), from 150 feet east of the east curb of Sheryl Lane to 250 feet west of the west curb of Sheryl Lane, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Henley Street (north side), from the west side of the Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad right-of-way and the east curb of Lincoln Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Henley Street (south side), from East Railroad Avenue to Waukegan Road, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Henley Street (south side), from Lincoln Street to Spruce Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Hutchings (east side) from the north curbline of Grove Street to the south curbline of MacLean Court, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Inverness Lane, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Johns Drive (east side) from Chestnut Avenue intersection curb to a point 710 feet north. 
Joy, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days, in LaFontaine. 
LaFontaine (all streets), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
LaFontaine, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days, in LaFontaine. 
Lilly Lane, from West Lake Avenue to Violet Street (both sides), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Lincoln Street (east side), from Glenview Road to the north end of the side of Lincoln Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Lincoln Street (west side), from Henley Street to Glenview Road, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Lincoln Street (west side), from the south curb of Dewes Street to the north curb of Henley Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Lindenleaf Drive-Roosevelt (north side), no parking. 
Linneman Street, from Harlmen Street to Washington Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Linneman Street (north side), from East Railroad Avenue to Waukegan Road, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Linneman Street (north side), from Lincoln Street to Washington Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Linneman Street, 1900 block (south side), from a point 30 feet west of the intersection of Harlem Avenue and Linneman Street to Lincoln Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Linneman Street (south side), from Spruce Street to Lincoln Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Linneman Street (south side), from the east curbline of Harlem Avenue to a point 530 feet east, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
MacLean Court (north side), from a point 160 feet west of the west line of the Waukegan Road right-of-way, between the hours of 7:30 a.m.—4:30 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
MacLean Court (south side), from Hutchings Avenue to a point 20 feet east of the eastern edge of the Hutchings Avenue right-of-way, between the hours of 7:30 a.m.—4:30 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
MacLean Court (south side), from the west of Hugchings Avenue, between the hours of 7:30 a.m.—4:30 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Marie, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days, in LaFontaine. 
Mint Lane, from West Lake Avenue to Patriot Boulevard (both sides), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Navy Boulevard, from Patriot Boulevard to Tower Drive, in designated parking spaces between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
Neva (eastside and westside), between 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., 200 and 300 blocks, Monday—Friday. 
Nordica Avenue (both sides), from the north curb of Colfax Avenue to the south curb of Harrison Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Nordica Avenue (both sides), from the south curb of Colfax Avenue to the south end of Nordica, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
North Parking Structure (2701 Sable Drive), in designated parking spaces, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
Norwich Court, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Nottingham Avenue (both sides), from the north curb of Colfax Avenue to the south curb of Harrison Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Nottingham Avenue (both sides), from the south curb of Colfax Avenue to the south end of Nottingham Avenue, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Palmgren Drive (both sides), from the west curb of Harlem Avenue to the east curb of Lincoln Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Patriot Boulevard (east side), from 200 feet north of the north curbline of Chestnut Avenue to 65 feet south of the south curbline of Aviator Lane (extended), between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., weekdays. 
Patriot Boulevard (east side), from 45 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane (extended) to 70 feet south of the south curbline of Navy Boulevard (extended), between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., weekdays. 
Patriot Boulevard (east side), from 65 feet north of the north curbline of Navy Boulevard (extended) to 60 feet south of the south curbline of Valor Drive (extended), between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., weekdays. 
Patriot Boulevard (west side), from 175 feet south of the south curbline of Valor Drive to 235 feet north of the north curbline of Navy Boulevard, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., weekdays. 
Patriot Boulevard (west side), from 215 feet south of the south curbline of Navy Boulevard to 205 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., weekdays. 
Pfingsten Road (both sides), from the south curbline of Joy Lane to a point 320 feet south of curbline of Knight Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Pine Court (south side), from Tanker Way to Pine Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Pine Street (both sides), from Church Street to East Lake Avenue, between the hours of 9:00 a.m.—11:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Pine Street (east curb), from the south curb of Lake Avenue to Church Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Pine Street (west side), from the north curb of Prairie Street to the south curb of Lake Avenue, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Poppy Lane, from West Lake Avenue to Violet Street (both sides), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Prairie Street (both sides), from Spruce Street to Roosevelt, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Prairie Street (north side), from East Railroad Avenue to Church Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Prairie Street (north side), from the west curb of Pine Street to a point 30 feet east of the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railroad right-of-way property, between the hours of 8:00 p.m.—6:00 a.m., Sunday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Prairie Street (south side), from Elm Street to Washington Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Robin, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days, in LaFontaine. 
Roosevelt Road (east side), from Glenview Road to a point 645 feet north, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Rugen Road (north side), from Lehigh Avenue to the western edge of the Dearborn Station Townhomes' property, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Sable Drive, from Tower Drive and the cul-de-sac, in designated parking spaces between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
South Parking Structure (2701 Aviator Lane), in designated parking spaces between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
South Parking Structure Driveway, from Wolverine Drive to Sable Drive, in designated parking spaces between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
Sundrop Drive, from West Lake Avenue to Violet Street (both sides), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Spruce Drive (both north and south sides), from the west edge of Lehigh Avenue to the east edge of Swainwood Drive, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Spruce Street (west side), from Glenview Road to a point 645 feet north, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Stratford Lane, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Sussex Lane (adjacent to Winkelman School), from Brett Lane to Lizette, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Swainwood Drive (both sides), up to the cul-de-sac, north of Spruce Drive, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday. 
Tinker Way (east side), from the north end of Tinker Way to a point 260 feet south of Pine Court, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Tower Drive, from West Lake Avenue to Chestnut Avenue, in designated parking spaces between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
Trent Court, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Trowbridge Court, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Valor Drive, from Patriot Boulevard to West Lake Avenue, in designated parking spaces between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
Violet Street, from Lilly Lane to Mint Lane (both sides), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Warrington Court, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Warwick Lane, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Washington Street (west side), from Linneman Street to Dewes Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Washington Street (west side), from the south property line of 1200 Washington to Prairie Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Washington Street (west side), from a point 100 feet south of the south curb line of Glenview Road to a point 15 feet north of the 940 Washington dedicated alley, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Washington Street (west side), from south of the 940 Washington dedicated alley to Dewes Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Washington Street north dead end (west curb), from the north dead end limits to the northerly curb line of Washington Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Washington Street (west side), from the north curb of Henley Street to the south curb of Linneman Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
West Lake Avenue, from Lehigh Avenue to Patriot Boulevard (both sides), in designated parking spaces, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Winchester Lane, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Winnetka Road (both sides), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—3:00 p.m., on school days. 
Wolverine Drive, from Tower Drive to South Parking Structure Drive, in designated parking spaces between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
Woodview Lane (south side), west of Tinker Way, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 3; Ord. No. 4376, § 1, 3-5-2002; Ord. No. 4377, § 1, 3-5-2002; Ord. No. 4404, § 1, 6-4-2002; Ord. No. 4435, § 1, 8-20-2002; Ord. No. 4481, § 1, 1-7-2003; Ord. No. 4482, § 1, 1-7-2003; Ord. No. 4490, § 1, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 4564, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 4584, § 1, 10-21-2003; Ord. No. 4859, § 2, 4-18-2006; Ord. No. 4944, § 2, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 5085, § 2, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 5130, § 2, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 5147, § 2, 10-7-2008; Ord. No. 5253, § 2, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 5343, § 2, 5-18-2010; Ord. No. 5363, § 2, 6-20-2010; Ord. No. 5880, § 3, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 6022, § 2, 11-15-2016; Ord. No. 6146, § 2, 1-16-2018; Ord. No. 6186, § 2, 9-4-2018)  
Sec. 90-544. - Thirty-minute parking. 
In accordance with section 90-181 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places for a period of time longer than 30 minutes: 
Aviator Lane (south side, 2 spaces), from 54 feet east of the east curbline of Tower Drive to 80 feet east of the east curbline of Tower Drive. 
Depot Street, from south of the south curb of Grove Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Harlem Avenue (east side), from a point 47 feet north of the north curbline of Glenview Road to a point 304 feet north of the north curbline of Glenview Road. 
Harrison Street (south curb), from a point 17 feet, five inches east of the east curb of Wilson School Drive to a point 228 feet east of the east curb of Wilson School, between the hours of 7:30 a.m.—4:30 p.m., Monday—Friday. 
Lehigh Avenue (west curb), at all times, from a point 100 feet north of the north curb of Prairie Street to a point 250 feet north of the north curb of Prairie Street. 
Navy Boulevard (north side, 2 spaces), from 136 feet east of the east curbline of Tower Drive to 160 feet east of the east curbline of Tower Drive. 
Navy Boulevard (south side, 2 spaces), from 140 feet east of the east curbline of Tower Drive to 165 feet east of the east curbline of Tower Drive. 
Prairie Street, from the west curb of Pine Street to a point 30 feet east of the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railroad property, between the hours of 8:00 p.m.—8:00 a.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Tower Drive (east side, 1 space), from 14 feet of the north curbline of Aviator Lane to 27 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane. 
Tower Drive (east side, 4 spaces), from 200 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane to 244 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane. 
Tower Drive (east side, 2 spaces), from 445 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane to 473 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane. 
Tower Drive (east side, 2 spaces), from 554 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane to 583 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane. 
Tower Drive (east side, 1 space), from 722 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane to 737 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane. 
Tower Drive (east side, 3 spaces), from 184 feet north of the north curbline of Navy Boulevard to 221 feet north of the north curbline of Navy Boulevard. 
Tower Drive (east side, 2 spaces), from 333 feet north of the north curbline of Navy Boulevard to 357 feet north of the north curbline of Navy Boulevard. 
Tower Drive (east side, 1 space), from 488 feet north of the north curbline of Navy Boulevard to 501 feet north of the north curbline of Navy Boulevard. 
Tower Drive (west side, 2 spaces), from 103 feet south of the south curbline of Sable Drive to 131 feet south of the south curbline of Sable Drive. 
Tower Drive (west side, 1 space), from 604 feet south of the south curbline of Sable Drive to 619 feet south of the south curbline of Sable Drive. 
Tower Drive (west side, 3 spaces), from 193 feet south of the south curbline of Wolverine Drive to 233 feet south of the south curbline of Wolverine Drive. 
Valor Drive (north side, 3 spaces), from 58 feet east of the east curbline of Tower Drive to 98 feet east of the east curbline of Tower Drive. 
Valor Drive (north side, 3 spaces), from 206 feet south of south curbline of Valor Drive to 237 feet south of the south curbline of Valor Drive. 
Waukegan Road (west curb), from a point 183 feet south of the south curbline of East Lake Avenue to a point 338 feet south of the south curbline of East Lake Avenue between the hours of 9:00 a.m., to 10:00 p.m., no exceptions. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 4; Ord. No. 4634, § 1, 5-4-2004; Ord. No. 5002, § 2, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 4220, § 1, 10-3-2000; Ord. No. 5213, § 2, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 5324, § 2, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 5422, § 3, 1-18-2011)  
Sec. 90-545. - One-hour parking limitations. 
(a)  In accordance with section 90-181 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places for a period of time longer than one hour: 
Colfax Avenue, from the west curbline of Waukegan Road to the east curbline of Nottingham Avenue, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Harlem Avenue (east curb), from a point 30 feet south of the south curb of Prairie Street to a point 50 feet north of the north curb of Glenview Road, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Pine Street (both sides), from a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Dewes Street to a point 140 feet north of the north curb of Dewes Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Pine Street (west curb), from a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Dewes Street to a point 26 feet south of the south curb of the intersection of Glenview Road an Pine Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Waukegan Road (east curb), from a point 92 feet south of the south curb of Glenview Road to a point 30 feet south of the south curb of Glenview Road, and from a point 120 feet north of the centerline of Glenview Road to a point 170 feet south of the south curb of Maclean Court, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Waukegan Road (west curb), from a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Colfax Avenue to a point 100 feet south of the south curb of Harrison Street, and from a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Linneman Street and a point 30 feet south of the south curb of Henley Street, and from a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Glenview Road to the south curbline of Grove Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
The first four parking spaces on the south side of Stevens Drive and four parking spaces on the north side of Stevens Drive to the west of the disabled parking space, adjacent to the Waukegan Road and Stevens Drive intersection. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any vehicle at any time along the south side of Glenview Road between the east curb of the intersection of Washington Street and Glenview Road, with the following exceptions: 
Glenview Road (south side), from a point 30 feet east of the east curb of Washington Street to a point 154 feet west of the west curb of Harlem Avenue, between the hours of 4:00 p.m.—7:00 p.m. daily, and from a point 294 feet west of the west curb of Waukegan Road to a point 170 feet east of the east curb of Waukegan Road, at all times, and from a point 22 feet east of the east curb of Railroad Avenue to 20 feet west of the west curb of Pine Street, between the hours of 4:00 p.m.—7:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, and 7:00 a.m.—1:00 p.m. on Saturdays. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 5; Ord. No. 4565, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 4635, § 1, 5-4-2004; Ord. No. 5130, § 3, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 5324, § 3, 4-6-2010)  
Sec. 90-546. - Two-hour parking limitations. 
In accordance with section 90-181 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle in any of the following places for a period of time longer than two hours: 
Church Street (east curb), from a point 100 feet north of the north curb of Glenview Road to a point 557 feet north of the north curb of Grove Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Colfax Avenue (south side), from the east curb of Nordica Avenue to the west curb of Nottingham Avenue, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Crestwood Drive (both sides), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m., June 1—August 31 each year, Monday—Friday. 
Dewes Street (north), from the curb cut of the parking lot entrance for the mixed-use building located at 998 Church Street to approximately 104 feet to the west, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays. 
Dewes Street (south curb), from a point 100 feet east of the east curb of Railroad Avenue to the west curb of Waukegan Road, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
East Railroad Avenue (east curb), from the north curb of Linneman Street to a point 213 feet north of the north curb of Linneman Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
East Railroad Avenue (east curb), from the south curb of Dewes Street to the north curb of Henley Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
East Railroad Avenue (east curb), from the south curb of Glenview Road to the north curb of the alley south of Glenview Road, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Elm Street (both sides), from 105 feet north of the north curb of Prairie Street to the south curb of Grove Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Elm Street (both sides), from the north curb of prairie Street to 105 feet north of the north curb of Prairie Street. 
Elm Street (east side), from 120 feet north of the north curb of Glenview Road to the south curb of prairie Street. 
Elm Street (east side), from the north curb of Glenview Road to 120 feet north of the north curb of Glenview Road, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Elm Street (west side), from Glenview Road to Prairie Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Glenview Road (south side), from East Railroad Avenue to Church Street (23 parking spaces), between the hours of 8:00 a.m. — 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays. 
Glenview Road parking lane spaces (north side), from Elm Street to Spruce Street; from Washingtong Street to Lincoln Street; and from Church Street to Pine Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays. 
Glenview Road parking lane spaces (south side), from Waukegan Road to the first driveway west of Waukegan Road and from Waukegan Road to the first driveway west of Waukegan Road, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays. 
Grove Street (south curb), from a point 210 feet west of the west curbline of Pine Street to the east curbline of Depot Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Grove Street (south side), from a point 30 feet west of the west curbline of Waukegan Road to the east curbline of Pine Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Grove Street (south side), from the west curb of Lincoln Street to the east curb of Elm Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Lehigh Avenue (both sides, in designated parking spaces), from 500 feet north of Compass Road to 700 feet south of West Lake Avenue, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—8:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Library parking lot (located at Washington and Glenview Roads), the entire lot, except that portion consisting of spaces posted for library employees, between the hours of 7:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m. 
Lincoln Street (east curb), from the north curb of Glenview Road to the south curb of Fir Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Lincoln Street (west curb), from the south curb of Glenview Road to the north curb of Dewes Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Maplewood Lane (north side), from the west curb of Waukegan Road to the east curb of Sleepy Hollow Drive, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Municipal parking lot (located at 1725—1733 Glenview Road) between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and holidays. 
Municipal parking lot (located at 1850 Glenview Road) between the hours of 8:00 a.m. — 6:00 p.m., Monday — Saturday, inclusive. 
Municipal parking lot (northwest corner of Harlem Avenue and Glenview Road) for library patrons only, between the hours of 7:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m., except on Sundays and holidays, and Village authorized vehicles. 
Municipal parking lot (northwest corner of Church Street and Dewes Street), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, and Village authorized vehicles. 
Municipal parking lot (south half), located at 1227—29 Waukegan Road, from the south one-half of the lot (33.5 feet) for the full linear length (148) feet of such parking lot. 
Pine Court (south side), from the east curbing of Tinkerway to the west curbline of Pine Street. 
Pine Street municipal lot, the entire lot, except that portion consisting of spaces posted for municipal employees, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Pine Street (east side), from the north curb of Glenview Road to the south curb of Prairie Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Pine Street (west curb), from a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Prairie Street to a point 557 feet north of the north curb of Grove Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Pine Street (west side), from a point 150 feet north of the north curb of Glenview Road to the south curb of Prairie Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Prairie Street (north curb), from the west curb of Church Street to a point 30 feet east of the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railroad property, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Prairie Street (north side), from the east curb of Pine Street to the west curb of Church Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Prairie Street (north side), from the west curb of Pine Street to a point 30 feet east of the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railroad property, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Prairie Street (north side), from the east curb line of Washington Street to the west limits of the cul-de-sac. 
Prairie Street (south side), from the west curb of Elm Street to the east curb of Spruce, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Prairie Street (south side), from the west curb of Lincoln Street to the east curb of Elm Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Prairie Street (south side), from the east curb line of Washington Street to the west limits of the cul-de-sac. 
Public library parking lot, the entire lot, except that portion consisting of spaces posted for library employees, between the hours of 7:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
River Drive parking lane spaces (east side), from Glenview Road to Dewes Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays. 
Russet Way (both sides), between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—5:00 p.m., June 1—August 31 each year, Monday—Friday. 
Stevens Drive (south side), from the west curbing of Waukegan Road to the east curbing of the alley, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
The southernmost eight of the 16 parking spaces located on Railroad Avenue (east side), from Dewes Street to the north end of the 1800 Dewes Property, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; provided, however, that the parking restriction will be applied as each of the four tenant spaces are leased, at a rate of two parking spaces per retail tenant space. 
Tinkerway (east side), from the north end of Tinkerway to a point 260 feet south of Pine Court, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Topp Lane (north side), from the east curb of Waukegan Road to the west curb of Huntington Drive, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday. 
Valor Drive (east side), in designated parking spaces, from Tower Drive to West Lake Avenue. 
Washington Street (west side), from the south curb of Dewes Street to the north curb of Henley Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Waukegan Road (west side), from a point 30 feet north of the north curbline of Glenview Road to a point 140 feet south of the south curb of East Lake Avenue, except for the area 183 feet south of the south curbline East Lake Avenue to a point 338 feet south of the of the south curbline of East Lake Avenue, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 6; Ord. No. 4383, § 1, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 4491, § 1, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 4523, § 1, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 4566, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 4636, § 1, 5-4-2004; Ord. No. 4871, § 2, 6-6-2006; Ord. No. 5130, § 4, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 5232, § 2, 6-2-2009; Ord. No. 5324, § 3, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 5343, § 3, 5-18-2010; Ord. No. 5413, § 2, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 5422, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 5478, § 2, 8-2-2011; Ord. No. 5482, § 2, 9-20-2011; Ord. No. 5881, § 2, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 5903, § 2, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. 5925, § 2, 7-20-2015; Ord. No. 6064, § 2, 2-21-2017)  
Sec. 90-547. - No parking zones. 
In accordance with section 90-181 and when signs are erected thereof, no person shall at any time, unless otherwise noted, park a vehicle upon any of the following streets, or parts thereof: 
Admiral Whitehead Drive, GNAS. 
Alley between Pine Street and Church Street, from parallel and lying between Glenview Road and Prairie Street. 
Avalon Court, south side, in front of the mailbox kiosk located on the southeast side of Avalon Court turnaround. 
Avalon Court, west side, 15 feet to the north and 15 feet to the south of the mailbox kiosk located on the west side of Avalon Court. 
B Avenue, GNAS. 
Beech Drive (south side), from the east curbline of Sherwood Road to a point 127 feet east. 
Beech Street (north side), from Sherwood Road to a point 127 feet east. 
Bellwood Lane (both sides), from the west and east curbs of Greenwood Road to a point 75 feet west and east. 
Bluestem Lane (west side), from Chestnut Avenue to Fielding Drive. 
Brandon Lane (both sides), from the west edge (entering the roadway to the south cul-de-sac) to a point 115 feet. 
Brandon Lane, in the south cul-de-sac. 
C Avenue, GNAS. 
Cambria Court, north side, 15 feet to the east and 15 feet to the west of the mailbox located on the north side of the Cambria Court turnaround. 
Cambria Court, west side, 15 feet to the north and 15 feet to the south of the mailbox kiosk located on the west side of Cambria Court. 
Cariann Lane (both sides), from the south curb of East Lake Avenue to a point 250 feet south of the south curb of East Lake Avenue. 
Castle Drive, in the cul-de-sac north of Springdale Lane. 
Castle Drive, in the cul-de-sac south of Knollwood Lane. 
Cedar Court (north side), from the west curb of Montgomery Lane to a point 185 feet west of the west curb of Montgomery Lane. 
Central Road (both sides), from Huber Lane (south) to Harlem Avenue. 
Central Road (both sides), from the east curb of Waukegan Road to the west side extended of North Branch Road. 
Chestnut Avenue (both sides), from Waukegan Road to the east gates of Glenview Naval Air Station at Chestnut Avenue. 
Chestnut Avenue (north side), from the east curbline of patriot Boulevard to 520 feet east of the Patriot Boulevard east curbline. 
Chestnut Avenue (north side), from the west curbline of Lehigh Avenue to 880 feet west of the Lehigh Avenue west curbline. 
Chestnut Avenue (south side), from the west curbline of Lehigh Avenue to 450 feet west of the Lehigh Avenue west curbline. 
Church Street (both sides), from the north curb of Dewes Street to the south curb of Glenview Road. 
Church Street (east side), from the north curb of Glenview Road to a point 100 feet north of the north curb of Glenview Road. 
Church Street (west curb), from the north curb of Glenview Road to a point 557 feet north of the north curb of Grove Street. 
Claire Court, from the start of the Claire Court cul-de-sac to the end of the Claire Court cul-de-sac. 
Colfax Avenue (south side), from the west curb of Waukegan Road to the east curb of Nottingham Avenue. 
Concord Lane, north side, 15 feet to the east and 15 feet to the west of the mailbox kiosk located on the north side of Concord Lane between Avalon Court and Cambria Court. 
Concord Lane, north side, 15 feet to the east and 15 feet to the west of the mailbox kiosk located immediately north of the intersection of Concord Lane and Cambria Court. 
Concord Lane, south side, 15 feet to the east and 15 feet to the west of the mailbox kiosk located on the south side of Concord Lane between Cambria Court and the Concord Lane turnaround. 
Cottonwood Drive (north and east side), from Fielding Drive to Thistle Road. 
Country Lane, from the northern edge of Overlook Drive to a point directly west of the northeast corner of the intersection of Locust Lane and Country Lane, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—10:00 a.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Crewman Drive, GNAS. 
D Avenue, GNAS. 
Dearlove Road (within the Village limits), from Milwaukee Avenue to Central Road. 
Depot Street (east curb), from the north curb of Grove Street to a point 380 feet north of the north curb of Grove Street. 
Depot Street and Lehigh Avenue (west side, except as set forth in section 90-544), from a point 99 feet north of the north boundary of the Glenview Road right-of-way to the south side of the intersection of Washington Street and Lehigh Avenue. 
Dewes Street (north curb), from the west curb of Washington Street to the east curb of Shermer Road. 
Dewes Street (north side), from the west curb of Harlem Avenue to the east curb of Washington Street. 
Dewes Street (north side), from the west curb of Waukegan Road to the east curb of Harlem Avenue. 
Dewes Street (south side), from the est curb of Shermer Road to a point 200 feet east of the east curb of Shermer Road. 
Dewes Street (south side), from the west curb of Harlem Avenue to a point 175 feet west of the curb of Harlem Avenue. 
E Avenue, GNAS. 
East Lake Avenue (both sides), from the east Village limits to the west Village limits. 
East Lake Avenue (both sides), from the west limits of the Village to a point 50 feet east of the east curb of Huntington Drive. 
East Lake Avenue (both sides), from the west side of Lehigh Avenue to the east side of Shermer Road. 
East Railroad Avenue (west side), from Glenview Road to Linneman Street. 
Elm Street (both sides), from the north curb of Prairie Street to 105 feet north of the north curb of prairie Street. 
Elm Street (east side), from Henley Street to Linneman Street. 
Elm Street (east side), from 120 feet north of the north curb of Glenview Road to the south curb of Prairie Street. 
Elm Street (east side), from the south curb of Glenview Road to the north curb of Henley Street. 
Elm Street, from Henley Street to Linneman Street. 
Elmdale Avenue (1851, north parking lot driveway exit), from 50 feet north of the north curb of the drive located thereon to 50 feet south of the south curb of the drive located thereon. 
Elmdale Avenue (west side), from the north curb of West Lake Avenue to 880 feet north. 
Fielding Drive (south and west side), from Bluestem Lane to Cottonwood Drive. 
Fir Street (north curb), from the east curbing of Spruce Street to the west curbing of Elm Street. 
First Street, GNAS. 
Flick Park pedestrian/bicycle path, from such path to 14 feet to the north and 15 feet to the west on Rugen at Limar. 
Fourth Street, GNAS. 
Fowler Drive, GNAS. 
Gallery Park (three north lots), four hours. 
Glenview Road, from the east Village limits, except where permitted, to Milwaukee Avenue. 
Glenwood Avenue (north and south sides), from the east edge of Waukegan Road to the east property line of 1618 and 1619 Glenwood Avenue. 
Glenwood Avenue (north side), from the east curb of Highland Terrace to a point 440 feet east. 
Golf Road (north curb), from the east curb of Waukegan Road to a point 300 feet east of the east curb of Waukegan Road. 
Green Willow Lane (north side), from Tinkerway to a point 30 feet west of the west curb of Tinkerway. 
Green Willow Lane (south side), from the west curb of Tinkerway to the east curb of Tinkerway, which connects Woodview Lane and Green Willow Lane. 
Greenwood Road (both sides), from the south edge of pavement of West Lake Avenue to the north edge of pavement of Thornwood Avenue. 
Grove Street (north side), from Elm Street to Lincoln Street. 
Grove Street (north side), from the east curbline of Waukegan Road to a point 130 feet east. 
Grove Street (north side), from the west curb of Lincoln Street to the east curb of Elm Street. 
Grove Street (north side), from the west curb of Waukegan Road to a point 30 feet east of the east curb of Depot Street. 
Grove Street (south side), from Spruce Drive to Elm Street. 
Grove Street (south side), from the west curbline of Pine Street to a point 210 feet west of the west curbline of Pine Street. 
Grove Street (south side), from the west radius of 1719 Grove Street to a point ten feet west of the driveway. 
Harlem Avenue (east side), from the south Village limits to Glenview Road. 
Harlem Avenue (west side), from the south Village limits to Prairie Street. 
Harrison Street (south curb), from the east curb of Wilson School Drive to a point 17 feet, five inches east of the east curb of Wilson School Drive, between the hours of 7:30 a.m.—4:30 p.m., Monday—Friday. 
Henley Street (north side), from the west curb of Waukegan Road to the east curb of East Railroad Avenue. 
Henley Street (south side), from Milwaukee Railroad right-of-way to the east curb of Lincoln Street, and from the west curbline of Waukegan Road to a point 275 feet west of the west curbline of Waukegan Road. 
Henley Street (north side), from the west curbline of Lincoln Street to a point 30 feet west. 
Henley Street (north side), from the west curbline of Elm Street to a point 30 feet west. 
Hutchings Street (west side), from Grove Street to Maclean Court. 
Independence Avenue, from 3041 Independence Avenue to 3061 Independence Avenue. 
Independence Avenue (east side), from Thistle Road to Fielding Drive. 
Indigo Lane, from 765 feet south of the south curbline of Primrose Lane to Primrose Lane. 
Indigo Lane (both sides), from Patriot Boulevard to 138 feet east of the east curbline of Patriot Boulevard. 
Indigo Lane (west side of the street), from Primrose Lane to 145 feet south of the south curbline of Primrose Lane. 
Indigo Lane (west side of the street), from 340 feet south of the south curbline of Primrose Lane to 470 feet south of the south curbline of Primrose Lane. 
Indigo Lane (south side), from 100 feet both east and west of the existing Vi at The Glen loading dock. 
Jefferson Avenue, from the west curb of Waukegan Road on the north side to a point 138 feet west of the west curb of Waukegan Road on the north side, and from a point 265 feet west of the west curb of Waukegan to the east edge of Monroe Avenue on the north side, and from a point 102 feet west of the west curb of Waukegan Road on the south side to the east edge of Monroe Avenue. 
Jefferson Street, from the east edge of Monroe Avenue to a point 285 feet east of the east edge of Monroe Avenue on the south side of Jefferson Avenue and a point 500 feet east of the east edge of Monroe Avenue on the north side of Jefferson Avenue. 
Johns Court on the south side of Johns Court starting at a point 355 feet from the intersection of Johns Drive and Johns Court, ending 300 feet west to the cul-de-sac. 
Johns Court (south side of Johns Court, north side of Johns Drive and the north side of the cul-de-sac) from the cul-de-sac to the end, 100 feet east and 100 feet west. 
Johns Drive (west side), from the north curbline of Chestnut Avenue to a point 3,030 feet north. 
Kenilworth Lane (south side), from the west curb of Wagner Road, west to the point where Kenilworth Lane dead-ends at the rear of 1030 Kenilworth. 
Kenilworth Lane along east side, from the intersection of Kenilworth Avenue, north 173 feet to the mouth of the cul-de-sac. 
Kenilworth Avenue along the northwest side of Kenilworth Avenue, from the driveway entrance at 1030 Kenilworth Lane, east 104 feet to the entrance of Kenilworth Lane. 
Kenilworth Avenue along the northeast side of Kenilworth Avenue from the driveway entrance at 1020 Kenilworth Avenue east 106 feet to the entrance of Kenilworth Lane. 
Kittyhawk Lane (along the island curb), from 1416 Kittyhawk Lane to 1452 Kittyhawk Lane. 
Kittyhawk Lane (along the island curb), from 1413 Kittyhawk Lane to 1449 Kittyhawk Lane. 
Knollwood Lane (south side), Pam Anne Drive to Flick Park 
Lakewood Terrace (both sides), from the west curb of Greenwood to a point 75 feet west. 
Landwehr Road from West Lake Avenue to the north Village limits. 
Laramie Avenue, from Glenview Road to Wilmette Avenue on the west side. 
Larch Avenue (north side), from Milwaukee Avenue to Maple Street. 
Larch Avenue (south side), from Maple Street to Magnolia Street. 
Laurel Avenue (south side), from Maple Street to Magnolia Street. 
Lehigh Avenue (east side), from the south curbline of Henley Street to a point 200 feet south and 220 feet north, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, inclusive. 
Lehigh Avenue (west side), from the south curb of Henley Street to a point 200 feet south and 220 feet north. 
Library parking lot (located at Washington and Glenview Roads), the entire lot, between the hours of 11:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 
Lilac Avenue (south side), from Milwaukee Avenue to Magnolia Street. 
Lincoln Street (east side), from Dewes Street to Henley Street. 
Lincoln Street (east side), from Glenview Road to Henley Street. 
Lincoln Street (west side), from the north curb of Glenview Road to the south curb of Fir Street. 
Linden Avenue (south side), from Maple Street to Magnolia Street. 
Lindenwood Lane (north side), from Pfingsten Road to the Flick Park entrance. 
Linneman Street (both sides), from Prairie Lawn to approximately 150 feet east of the east curb of Prairie Lawn to the road closure. 
Linneman Street (north side), from Spruce Street to Lincoln Street. 
Linneman Street (south side), from East Railroad Avenue to Waukegan Road. 
Linneman Street (south side), from Lincoln Street to Harlem Avenue. 
Loading zone, where it shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any vehicle at any time, other than for the expeditious loading and unloading of mail, passengers, freight and material, in the area beginning at a point on the northerly line of Grove Street produced westerly for a distance of 8.5 feet westerly of, as measured at right angles to, the centerline of the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railway Company's easterly spur track in the Village; thence northerly, parallel to such spur track, for a distance of 210 feet; thence westerly, at right angles, for a distance of 16 feet, more or less, to a point distant 17 feet easterly of, as measured at right angles to, the centerline of the railroad company's main track; thence southerly, parallel to such main track, for a distance of 200 feet, more or less, to such produced street line; thence easterly along such produced street line for a distance of 20 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. 
Locust Avenue (south side), from Maple Street to Magnolia Street. 
Lotus Lane, from 500 feet south of Central Road, on both sides of the street. 
Maclean Court (north side), from a point 200 feet east of the east curb of Hutchings Avenue extended to a point 64 feet west of the west curb of Hutchings Avenue extended. 
Magnolia Street (east side), from West Lake Avenue to Linden Avenue. 
Maple Street (east side), from the south curbline of West Lake Avenue to the south curbline of Larch. 
Maple Street (west side), from West Lake Avenue to Linden Avenue. 
Maplewood Lane (south side), from the west curb of Waukegan Road to the east line of Sleepy Hollow Park. 
Maplewood Lane (south side), from the west curb of Waukegan Road to a point 145 feet west. 
Milwaukee Avenue (both sides), from the south Village limits to the north Village limits. 
Navy Boulevard (both sides), from 50 feet west of the west curbline of Patriot Boulevard (extended) to 130 feet west of the west curbline of Patriot Boulevard. 
Old Willow Road (south side), from 100 feet west of the east terminus of Old Willow Road to a point 340 feet west of the terminus of Old Willow Road. 
Overlook Drive (north curb), from the east side of the Chicago, Milwaukee and Pacific Railroad to the west curb of Country Lane St. Paul right-of-way. 
Pam Anne Drive (east side), from Lindenwood Lane to a point 125 feet north. 
Pam Anne Drive, in the cul-de-sac north of Springdale Lane. 
Pam Anne Drive, in the cul-de-sac south of Knollwood Lane. 
Pam Anne Drive (west side), from Lindenwood Lane to a point 200 feet north. 
Patriot Boulevard (both sides), from East Lake Avenue to 80 feet north of the Independence Avenue north curbline. 
Patriot Boulevard (both sides), from West Lake Avenue to Willow Road. 
Patriot Boulevard (east side), from East Lake Avenue to 110 feet north of the Independence Avenue north curbline. 
Patriot Boulevard (east side), from the south curbline of Chestnut Avenue to 120 feet south of the Chestnut Avenue south curbline. 
Patriot Boulevard (west side), from East Lake Avenue to 130 feet north of the Independence Avenue north curbline. 
Patriot Boulevard (west side), from the south curbline of Chestnut Avenue to 650 feet south of the Chestnut Avenue south curbline. 
Pickwick Avenue (both sides), from a point 595 feet north of the north edge of pavement of West Lake Avenue to a point 645 feet north of the north edge of pavement of West Lake Avenue. 
Pickwick Avenue (east side), from the south edge of pavement of West Lake Avenue to a point 300 feet south of the south edge of pavement of West Lake Avenue. 
Pine Court (north side), from the east curbing of Tinkerway to the west curbing of Pine Court. 
Pine Street (west side), from the north curb of Glenview Road to a point 150 feet north of the north curb of Glenview Road. 
Pfingsten Road, from the north curbline of East Lake Avenue to the south curbline of Willow Road. 
Pfingsten Road, in the cul-de-sac north of Knollwood Lane, east and west of Pfingsten Road. 
Pfingsten Road, in the first cul-de-sac north of Glenview Road, east and west of Pfingsten Road. 
Pfingsten Road, in the first cul-de-sac north of Lindenwood Lane, east and west of Pfingsten Road. 
Pfingsten Road, in the first cul-de-sac north of Springdale, east and west of Pfingsten Road. 
Pleasant Lane (north and south curbs) and the median strip, from the east curbline of Waukegan Road to a point 700 feet east of the east curbline of Waukegan Road, between the hours of 10:00 p.m.—4:00 a.m., Sunday—Saturday, inclusive. 
Potter Road (both sides), from the north curb or West Lake Avenue to a point 150 feet north of the north curb of West Lake Avenue. 
Prairie Lawn Road, (both sides), in front of 1346 and 1347 Prairie Lawn Road. 
Prairie Street (north side), from the west curb of Elm Street to the east curb of Spruce Street. 
Prairie Street (south side), from a point 190 feet west of the west curb of Elm Street to the west curb of Elm Street. 
Prairie Street (south side), from East Railroad Avenue to Church Street. 
Primrose Lane (north side), from 1528 — 1532 Primrose Lane. 
Primrose Lane (south and west sides of the street), from Indigo Lane to Indigo Lane. 
Richards Drive, GNAS. 
River Drive (east side parking lane spaces), from Glenview Road to Dewes Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays. 
Rugen Road (north side), from the west curb of the west driveway of Glenview Gardens Condominium Association, 15 feet to the east. 
On Rugen Road (north side), from the west curb of the center driveway of Glenview Gardens Condominium Association, 15 feet to the west. 
On Rugen Road (north side), from the east curb of the center driveway of Glenview Gardens Condominium Association, 15 feet to the east. 
On Rugen Road (north side), from the west curb of the east driveway of Glenview Gardens Condominium Association, 15 feet to the west. 
On Rugen Road (north side), from the east curb of the east driveway of Glenview Gardens Condominium Association, 15 feet to the east. 
Second Street, GNAS. 
Shermer Road (both sides), from East Lake Avenue to Golf Road, except the parking lane from a point 200 feet south of the south curb of Glenview Road to a point 265 feet south of the south curb of such curb on the west side. 
Shermer Road (both sides), from Old Willow Road to West Lake Avenue. 
Shermer Road (east side), from south of the south driveway of Will-Sher Plaza to the railroad underpass. 
Shermer Road (west side), from the south curbline of Willow Road to a point 716 feet south. 
Sherwood (both sides), from the south curb of East Lake Avenue to a point 100 feet to the south side. 
Sherwood Road (east side), from the north curb of Beech Drive to a point 200 feet north of the north curb of Beech Drive, between the hours of 7:45 a.m.—8:45 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.—3:30 p.m., on school days. 
Sherwood Road (west side), from the south curb of Beech Drive to a point 200 feet south of the south curb of Beech Drive, between the hours of 7:45 a.m.—8:45 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.—3:30 p.m., on school days. 
Spruce (east side), from First Street to Alvin Court. 
Tanglewood Drive (east side), from Chestnut Avenue to Valley Lo Lane. 
Tanglewood Lane (west side), from the north curbline of Chestnut Avenue to a point 150 feet north. 
Third Street, GNAS. 
Thistle Road (north side), from Cottonwood Drive to Independence Avenue. 
Thornwood Avenue (north side), from the west curbline of Greenwood Road to a point 55 feet west of the curbline of Greenwood Road, and from a point 350 feet west of the west curbline of Greenwood Road to the east curb of Imperial Drive. 
Thornwood Avenue (south side), from the west curbline of Greenwood Road to the east curbline extended of Elmdale Avenue. 
Tower Drive (west side), from 105 feet north of the north curbline of Navy Boulevard (extended) to ten feet north of the north curbline of Navy Boulevard (extended). 
Tower Drive (west side), from ten feet south of the south curbline of Navy Boulevard (extended) to 90 feet south of the south curbline of Navy Boulevard (extended). 
Tower Drive (west side), from 50 feet south of the south curbline of Wolverine Drive (extended) to 170 feet south of the south curbline of Wolverine Drive (extended). 
Train station drop-off temporary parking area on Lehigh Avenue (east side), 210 feet from the centerline of Prairie Street to 360 feet from the centerline of Prairie Street. 
Train station drop-off temporary (Kiss N'Ride) parking area on Prairie Street cul-de-sac east of Washington Street. 
Tinerway (Depot Street, east side), from a point 260 feet south of Pine Court to a point 385 feet south of Pine Court. 
Village parking lot, where it shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any vehicle on the paved lot leased by the Village from the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad Company, located on the east side of Lehigh Avenue between a point 638 feet north of the centerline of Spruce Drive and a point 140 feet north of the centerline of Spruce Drive, unless such vehicle is licensed in accordance with the Village licensing requirements and appropriately displays an unexpired Village vehicle sticker. 
Village parking lot, where it shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any vehicle on the paved lot owned by the Village and located north of Village hall, unless such vehicle is licensed in accordance with the Village licensing requirements and appropriately displays an unexpired Village vehicle sticker. 
Washington Road (both sides), from Covert Road to Central Road. 
Washington Street (east curb), from north curb of Dewes Street to the west curb of Lehigh Avenue. 
Washington Street (east side), from Henley Street to Linneman Street. 
Washington Street (east side), from the south curb of Dewes Street to the north curb of Henley Street. 
Washington Street (west curb), from the south curb line of Glenview Road to a point 100 feet to the south. 
Washington Street (940), from north line of the dedicated alley to a point 15 feet north. 
Washington Street (west side), from the westerly curbline of Lehigh Avenue to the south property line of 1200 Washington. 
Washington Street north dead end (east curb), from the northerly curb line of Washington Street to the north dead end limits. 
Washington Street (west side), from the south curb line of Prairie Street to the north curb line of Glenview Road. 
Waukegan Road (both sides), from the north curb of Golf Road to a point 300 feet north of the north curb of Golf Road. 
Waukegan Road (east curb), from a point 300 feet south of the south curb of Overlook Drive to a point 92 feet south of the south curb of Glenview Road, and from a point 170 feet south of the south curb of Maclean Court extended to a point 300 feet north of the north curb of Topp Lane. 
Waukegan Road (east side), from the south Village limits to the south line of Overlook Drive, and from a point 300 feet north of the north curb of Topp Lane to a point 533 feet south of the north Village limits. 
Waukegan Road (west curb), from the extended south curb of Overlook Drive to a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Colfax Avenue; from a point 100 feet south of the south curb of Harrison Street to a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Linneman Street; from a point 70 feet south of the south curb of Dewes Street and a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Glenview Road; from a point 140 feet south of the south curb of East Lake Avenue to the south curb of Topp Lane extended; from the north curbline of Maplewood Lane to a point 100 feet north of the north curbline of Maplewood Lane; and from a point 22 feet south of the south curbline of Stevens Drive to a point 90 feet north of the north curbline of Stevens Drive. 
Waukegan Road (west side), from the south Village limits to a point 800 feet north of the south Village limits; from a point 322 feet north of the north curb of Glenview Road to a point 385 feet north of the north curb of Glenview Road; and from the south curbline of Topp Lane extended to the north Village limits. 
West Drive, GNAS. 
West Lake Avenue (both sides), from the Village limits on the west side of the Glen Subdivision to Patriot Boulevard. 
West Lake Avenue, from the east Village limits to the west Village limits. 
West Lake Avenue (south side), four hours. 
Wildberry Drive (north and west curbs), from the west curb of Waukegan Road to a point of intersection with the private road south of the Wildberry Drive cul-de-sac. 
Wildberry Drive (south and east curbs), from the west curb of Waukegan Road to a point 420 feet west of the west curb of Waukegan Road; from a point 966 feet west of the west curb of Waukegan Road to a point 1,041 feet west of the west curb of Waukegan Road; from a point 1,387 feet west of the west curb of Waukegan Road to a point 1,686 feet west of the west curb of Waukegan Road; and from a point 1,884 feet west of the west curb of Waukegan Road to a point of intersection with the private road south of the Wildberry Drive cul-de-sac. 
Willow Road, from the east curb of Pfingsten Road on the north and south sides to a point 955 feet east of the east curb of Pfingsten Road on the north and south sides. 
Woodlawn Avenue (both sides), from the east curb of Waukegan Road to the west curb of Highland Terrace. 
Woodview Lane (north side), from the west curb of Tinkerway to the east curb of the street which connects Woodview Lane and Green Willow Lane. 
Woodview Lane (south side), from Tinkerway to a point 30 feet west of Tinkerway, and from the east edge of the driveway of 1333 Woodview Lane to a point 25 feet east of the east edge of such driveway. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 7; Amend. of 7-17-1967; Ord. No. 4453, § 1, 11-5-2002; Ord. No. 4476, § 1, 12-3-2002; Ord. No. 4519, § 1, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 4562, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 4567, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 4621, § 1, 2-17-2004; Ord. No. 4758, § 1, 7-7-2005; Ord. No. 4812, § 2, 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 4833, § 2, 1-10-2006; Ord. No. 4879, § 1, 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 4893, § 2, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 4907, § 2, 8-16-2006; Ord. No. 4916, § 2, 9-19-2006; Ord. No. 5085, § 3, 4-1-2008; Ord. No. 5129, § 2, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 5213, § 3, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 5243, § 3, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 5254, § 1, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 5301, § 2, 1-19-2010; Ord. No. 5343, § 4, 5-18-2010; Ord. No. 5412, § 2, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 5413, § 3, 12-13-2010; Ord. No. 5897, § 2, 4-7-2015; Ord. No. 5933, § 2, 9-1-2015; Ord. No. 5963, § 2, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 6101, §§ 2, 3, 10-17-2017; Ord. No. 6162, § 2, 6-5-2018)  
Sec. 90-548. - Parallel parking. 
The 1700 block of Maclean Court (south side) shall be parallel parking. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 7A)  
Sec. 90-549. - Dead-end streets; U, Y and left turns. 
(a)  Sequoia Trail is hereby closed and shall become a dead-end street at its present intersection with the south right-of-way line of Chestnut Avenue in the Village, and vehicular traffic through such intersection point is hereby prohibited, except for emergency vehicles. 
(b)  Silver Pine Drive is hereby closed and is declared to be a dead-end street at its present intersection with the east right-of-way line of temporary East Lake Avenue in the Village, and there shall be no pedestrian or vehicular traffic through such intersection point. 
(c)  Swainwood Drive South is hereby closed and declared to be a dead-end street at its present intersection with the south right-of-way line of temporary East Lake Avenue in the Village, and there shall be no pedestrian or vehicular traffic through such intersection point. 
(d)  No vehicle shall at any time make a U or Y turn on the following streets: 
(1)  Glenview Road between Lincoln Street, Raleigh Road and Waukegan Road. 
Lehigh Avenue (northbound and southbound directions) between Prairie Street and the south driveway along Lehigh Avenue of the Village municipal parking at Lehigh Avenue and Washington Street. 
(e)  No vehicle shall at any time make a left turn: 
(1)  From River Drive onto Waukegan Road. 
(2)  When northbound on Waukegan Road onto westbound Glenview Road. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 8)  
Sec. 90-550. - One-way streets, alleys and parking areas. 
In the following locations, traffic shall move only in the directions indicated: 
(1)  River Drive, from the southern curb cut of the southern driveway of 990 River Drive to the north curb of Dewes Street. 
(2)  West Fork Green parking area, from the west driveway curb cut entrance off of Glenview Road to the east driveway curb cut exit onto Glenview Road. 
(3)  East Railroad Avenue, south from the south curb of Glenview Road to a point 215 feet south of the south curb. 
(4)  South lane of Pleasant Drive (divided), eastbound only from Waukegan Road to Sunset Ridge Road. 
(5)  North lane of Pleasant Drive (divided), westbound only from Sunset Ridge Road to Waukegan Road. 
West Lake Avenue, eastbound only from 407.5 feet west of the centerline of Pfingsten Road to Pfingsten Road. 
(6)  Pine Street Municipal Parking Lot, enter only on Dewes Street and exit only on Pine Street. 
(7)  There shall be a 20-foot easement running north from Woodlawn Avenue to Glenwood Avenue. 
(8)  Train station drop-off, temporary parking area on Lehigh Avenue (east side of street) from a point 210 feet from the centerline of Prairie Street to a point 360 feet from the centerline of Prairie Street. 
(9)  Sixth Street, southbound, Sunset Mobile Home Park. 
(10)  Seventh Street, northbound, Sunset Mobile Home Park. 
(11)  Eighth Street, southbound, Sunset Mobile Home Park. 
(12)  Ninth Street, northbound, Sunset Mobile Home Park. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 9)  
Sec. 90-551. - Left and right turns only. 
Traffic must turn either left or right: 
(1)  Onto Waukegan Road when exiting from Overlook Drive. 
(2)  Onto Waukegan Road when exiting from the driveway directly opposite Overlook Drive. 
(3)  On the north end of the 20-foot concrete easement, where it exists, onto Glenwood Avenue. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 10)  
Sec. 90-552. - Towaway zones. 
In accordance with section 90-192 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the duly designated and authorized agents of the Village shall be empowered to remove illegally parked motor vehicles from the following places by towing such vehicles to a place designated by the Village police department: 
Dewes Street from the west curb of Waukegan Road to the east curb of Washington Street. 
Jefferson Street (both sides at all times), from the east edge of Monroe Avenue to a point 285 feet east of the east edge of Monroe Avenue on the south side of Jefferson Avenue and a point 500 feet east of the east edge of Monroe Avenue on the north side of Jefferson Avenue. 
Pleasant Lane (north and south curbs and median strip), from the east curbline of Waukegan Road to a point 700 feet east of the east curbline of Waukegan Road, between the hours of 10:00 p.m.—4:00 a.m., Sunday—Saturday, inclusive. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 11)  
Sec. 90-553. - Left turn prohibited during certain times. 
(a)  Except for school buses, traffic shall not turn left onto Happy Hollow Road from Willowbrook Circle between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.—3:30 p.m., on days when school is in session. Traffic shall not turn left onto Willowbrook School Circle from Happy Hollow Road. 
(b)  Traffic shall at all times, not turn left from Overlook Drive onto the two driveways on the south side of Overlook Drive, adjacent to the residential development at 195 Waukegan Road. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 12; Ord. No. 4995, § 2, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 5663, § 2, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 5880, § 4, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 90-554. - Fire lanes. 
Drivers of motor vehicles are prohibited from leaving such vehicles unattended and leaving delivered materials in the designated and posted fire lanes of the following properties: 
3220—3230 Plaza, 3220—3230 Glenview Road 
Abington of Glenview, 3901 Glenview Road 
Ace Hardware, 1560 Waukegan Road 
Ammer Ridge Condominiums, 1951—2129 Ammer Ridge Road 
Aspen Enterprises Building, 1845—1859 Elmdale Avenue 
Avoca West School, 235 Beech Drive 
Avon Products Company, 1601 Overlook Drive 
Bess Hardware, 1850 Glenview Road 
B and G Warehouse, 1852—1854 Elmdale Avenue 
Big Oak Condominiums, 1501—1687 Winnetka Road 
Busch Manufacturing, 1870 Elmdale Avenue 
Callan Building, 1939 Waukegan Road 
Cambridge at the Glen Subdivision, all private alleys 
Canaan Presbyterian Church, 1424 Greenwood Road 
Carillon Square Shopping Center, 1412—1500 Waukegan Road 
Carlson Building, 1739 Chestnut Avenue 
Carlson Industrial Center, 1807—1825 Elmdale Avenue 
Chestnut Gardens Condominiums, 1800—1844 Chestnut Avenue 
Colonial Court Medical Building, 1775 Glenview Road 
Cook County Forest Preserve Facility, 1140 Harms Road 
Dearlove Cove Apartments, 4100—4198 Cove Lane 
Dearlove Office Center, 4200—4267 Commercial Way 
Di Paolo Industrial Center, 4300—4350 Dearlove Road 
Dominick's Finer Foods, 1020 Waukegan Road 
Essex Court Apartments, 4151—4197 Dearlove Road 
Flick Park, 3600 Glenview Road 
Glen Cove Estates, 1002—1112 Castillian Court 
Glen Grove School, 3900 Glenview Road 
Glen-Lake Office Center, 3633 West Lake Avenue 
Glenlake Drive/Winnetka Avenue, emergency access gate 
Glen Oak Shopping Center, 1524—1534 East Lake Avenue and 1403—1435 Waukegan Road 
Glenbrook Hospital, 2100 Pfingsten Road 
Glenbrook Market Place, 2821—2871 Pfingsten Road 
Glenbrook Professional Building, 2050 Pfingsten Road 
Glenbrook South High School, 4000 West Lake Avenue 
Glenview Community Church, 1000 Elm Street 
Glenview Indoor Ice Center, 1851 Landwehr Road 
Glenview Mobile Home Park, 1718 Waukegan Road 
Glenview State Bank, 800 Waukegan Road 
Glenview United Methodist Church, 727 Harlem Avenue 
Guarantee Trust Office Building, 1275 Milwaukee Avenue 
Harlem-Dewes Condominiums, 921 Harlem Avenue 
Hoffman School, 2000 Harrison Street 
Hospital Drive 
Howard Plaza, 1700—1740 Milwaukee Avenue 
Indian Ridge/Potter Road, emergency access gate 
Jewel/Osco Stores, 1509—1517 Waukegan Road 
Kraft Company Corporate North and West, 1 and 3 Kraft Court 
Kraft Research and Development, 801 Waukegan Road 
L and W Building, 1701 East Lake Avenue 
Lexus/Monroe Street, emergency access gate 
Lehigh Apartments, 1460—1502 Lehigh Avenue 
Lyon School, 1335 Waukegan Road 
Maryhaven Village, 1700 East Lake Avenue 
Moore Business Forms, 1205 Milwaukee Avenue 
Motivation Media, 1245 Milwaukee Avenue 
North Glenview Mobile Home Park, 2000 Waukegan Road 
North Shore Country Club, 1340 Glenview Road 
North Shore Racket Club, 2860 Old Willow Road 
North Suburban Blood Center, 1255 Milwaukee Avenue 
Orchard Glen Condominiums, 702, 706 and 720 Waukegan Road 
Orthodox Church, 1401 Wagner Road 
Overtime Sports Bar, 3315 Milwaukee Avenue 
Pebblecreek Condominiums, 1408—1657 Pebble Creek Drive 
Plaza del Prado Shopping Center, 2711—2801 Pfingsten Road 
Plaza del Reno Office Buildings, 3701—3703 West Lake Avenue 
Pleasant Ridge School, 1730 Sunset Ridge Road 
Princeton Lane/Pebbleford, emergency access gate 
Radisson Suite Hotel, 1400 Milwaukee Avenue 
Roosevelt Park, 2239 Fir Street 
Rugen Community Center, 901 Shermer Road 
Rugen Road Apartments, 2132—2156 Rugen Road 
Saint Catherine Laboure, 3425 Thornwood Avenue 
Saints Peter and Paul Greek Syms, 9840 Milwaukee Avenue 
Shermer/Willow Shopping Center, 2657—2701 Shermer Road 
Signode-Ad Com Building, 3700 West Lake Avenue 
Signode/ITW, 3640 West Lake Avenue 
Springman Junior High School, 2701 Central Road 
Tall Trees Off Chestnut,emergency access gate 
The Prime Minister, 3355 Milwaukee Avenue 
The Princeton Club Complex, 3100 Lexington Lane 
Valley Lo North Condominiums, 1700—1844 Wildberry Drive 
Valley Lo South Condominiums, 1809—1965 Tanglewood Lane 
Valley Lo Sports Club, 2200 Tanglewood Drive 
Valley Lo Towers Condominiums, 2004—2020 Chestnut Avenue 
Webb Plastics, Inc., 2820 Old Willow Road 
Westbrook School, 1333 Greenwood Road 
Willowbrook School, 2500 Happy Hollow Road 
Winkleman School, 1919 Landwehr Road 
Zenith Corporation, 1000 Milwaukee Avenue 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 13; Ord. No. 4492, § 1, 2-4-2003) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; fire lanes, § 90-261 et seq.  
Sec. 90-555. - Areas adjacent to buildings designated and posted no parking. 
Drivers of motor vehicles are prohibited from leaving such vehicles unattended and leaving delivered materials in designated and posted areas adjacent to buildings at the following properties: 
(1)  Fire exits. 
3220—3230 Plaza, 3220—3230 Glenview Road 
Butcher Block and More, 580 Waukegan Road 
Dominick's Finer Foods, 1020 Waukegan Road 
Fun in Motion, 1742 Glenview Road 
Glenbrook Market Place, 2821—2871 Pfingsten Road 
Glen Grove School, 3900 Glenview Road 
Glen Oak Plaza Building No. 2, 1511—1517 Waukegan Road 
Glenview Indoor Ice Center, 1851 Landwehr Road 
Henking School, 2941 Linneman Street 
Hoffman School, 2000 Harrison Street 
Lyon School, 1335 Waukegan Road 
Our Lady of Perpetual Help School, 1123 Church Street 
Overtime Sports Bar, 3315 Milwaukee Avenue 
Playdium, 1766 Glenview Road 
Plaza del Prado Shopping Center, 2711—2801 Pfingsten Road 
Pleasant Ridge School, 1730 Sunset Ridge Road 
Poko Loko Day Care Center, 300 Waukegan Road 
Rugen Community Center, 901 Shermer Road 
Shoppers Row Shopping Center, 967—981 Waukegan Road 
Springman Junior High School, 2701 Central Road 
The Prime Minister, 3355 Milwaukee Avenue 
Valley Lodge, 2132 Waukegan Road 
Walker Brothers Pancake House, 1615 Waukegan Road 
Westbrook School, 1333 Greenwood Road 
(2)  Fire zones (sprinkler connections). 
Ace Hardware, 1560 Waukegan Road 
Aspen Enterprises Building, 1845—1859 Elmdale Avenue 
Bess Hardware, 1850 Glenview Road 
B and G Warehouse, 1852—1854 Elmdale Avenue 
Busch Manufacturing, 1870 Elmdale Avenue 
Carillon Square Shopping Center, 1412—1500 Waukegan Road 
Colborne Manufacturing Company, 1879 Chestnut Avenue 
Conor Dodge, 2100 Waukegan Road 
Currie Motors, 2038 Waukegan Road 
Dominick's Finer Foods, 1020 Waukegan Road 
Duxler Tire Company, 2200 Waukegan Road 
Glen Cove Estates, 1002—1112 Castillian Court 
Glen Lake Office Center, 3633 West Lake Avenue 
Glen Oak Plaza Building No. 2, 1511—1517 Waukegan Road 
Glenview Paint and Glass, 1900 Glenview Road 
Ground Round, 630 Waukegan Road 
Hackney's Bakery, 1516 East Lake Avenue 
Hackney's on Lake, 1514 East Lake Avenue 
Jennings Chevrolet,241 Waukegan Road 
Jewel/Osco Stores, 1509—1517 Waukegan Road 
Kraft Corporate North and West, 1 and 3 Kraft Court 
Kraft Research and Development, 801 Waukegan Road 
Loren Buick, 1620 Waukegan Road 
Mansard Square Shopping Center, 2200 Waukegan Road 
Mid-Central Printing, 1904 Grove Street 
Moore Business Forms, 1205 Milwaukee Avenue 
North Shore Country Club, 1340 Glenview Road 
Plaza del Prado Shopping Center, 2711—2801 Pfingsten Road 
Saints Peter and Paul Greek Orthodox Church, 1401 Wagner Road 
Signode/ITW, 3640 West Lake Avenue 
Treasure Island Foods, 1409 Waukegan Road 
Valley Lo Sports Club, 2200 Tanglewood Drive 
Walgreens Drugstore, 1435 Waukegan Road 
Walker Brothers Pancake House, 1615 Waukegan Road 
Western Savings and Loan Association, 950 Milwaukee Avenue 
Zenith Corporation, 1000 Milwaukee Avenue 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 14)  
Sec. 90-556. - No stopping, standing or parking zones. 
In accordance with section 90-181 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time, unless otherwise noted, stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any of the following streets, or parts thereof: 
Aviator Lane, from Patriot Boulevard to South Parking Structure, except in designated parking spaces. 
Chestnut Avenue (both sides), from Patriot Boulevard west to dead end, except in designated parking spaces. 
Dewes Street (north side), from the west curb of Harlem Avenue to the east curb of Washington Street 
Happy Hollow Road (south side), from a point 440 feet west of the west curb of Greenwood Road to a point at the south curbline of Lawson Road between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.—3:30 p.m., on school days. 
Harrison Street (south side), from Parkview Road to Washington Street, 7:00 a.m.—4:00 p.m., on school days. 
Johns Court from the cul-de-sac. 
Johns Court (south side), from Johns Drive to the end. 
Johns Court (north side), from Johns Drive to 100 feet east. 
Johns Court (north side) from the cul-de-sac to 100 feet west. 
Lincoln Street (east side), from the south curb of Harrison Street to a point 250 feet south of the south curbline of Harrison Street, between the hours of 7:00 a.m.—4:00 p.m., on school days. 
Linneman Street (north side), from the west curb of Prairie Lawn to the Village limits (60 feet). 
Navy Boulevard, from Patriot Boulevard to Tower Drive, except in designated parking spaces and no parking zones. 
North Branch Road, from the south curb of Country Lane to a point 90 feet north. 
Patriot Boulevard (east side), from Chestnut Avenue to 200 feet north of the north curbline of Chestnut Avenue. 
Patriot Boulevard (east side), from 65 feet south of the south curbline of Aviator Lane (extended) to 45 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane (extended). 
Patriot Boulevard (east side), from 70 feet south of the south curbline of Navy Boulevard (extended) to 65 feet north of the north curbline of Navy Boulevard (extended). 
Patriot Boulevard (east side), from 60 feet south of the south curbline of Valor Drive (extended) to West Lake Avenue. 
Patriot Boulevard (west side), from West Lake Avenue to 175 feet south of the south curbline of Valor Drive. 
Patriot Boulevard (west side), from 235 feet north of the north curbline of Navy Boulevard to 215 feet south the south curbline of Navy Boulevard. 
Patriot Boulevard (west side), from 205 feet north of the north curbline of Aviator Lane to Chestnut Avenue. 
Prairie Lawn (east side) from 80 feet north of the north curbline of Linneman Street to 247 feet north of the north curbline of Linneman Street, between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days. 
Prairie Lawn (east side), from the north curb of Linneman Street to a point 80 feet north of the north curbline of Linneman Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days. 
Prairie Lawn (west side), from the north curb of Linneman Street to a point 90 feet north of the north curbline of Linneman Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days. 
Sable Drive, from Tower Drive to the cul-de-sac, except in designated parking spaces. 
South Parking Structure Driveway, from Wolverine Drive to Sable Drive, except in designated parking spaces. 
Tower Drive, from West Lake Avenue to Chestnut Avenue, except in designated parking spaces and no parking zones. Valor Drive, from Patriot Boulevard to West Lake Avenue, except in designated parking spaces. 
Waukegan Road (east side), from a point 533 feet south of the north Village limits to the north Village limits. 
Wolverine Drive, from Tower Drive to South Parking Structure Drive, except in designated parking spaces. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 15; Ord. No. 4220, § 1, 10-3-2000; Ord. No. 4569, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 4683, § 1, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 5164, §§ 2, 3, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 5240, § 2, 8-4-2009; Ord. No. 5880, § 2, 1-6-2015)  
Sec. 90-557. - Right turn only. 
All traffic shall at all times turn right from: 
(1)  The parking lot exit at 1834 Waukegan Road onto Waukegan Road southbound. 
(2)  River Drive onto Dewes Street westbound. 
(3)  The parking lot exit at 1249 Waukegan Road onto Maplewood Lane eastbound. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 16)  
Sec. 90-558. - Yield intersections. 
In accordance with section 90-146 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, all drivers of vehicles entering the following intersections shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on the through roadway, as well as pedestrians within or entering the nearest crosswalk: 
Annapolis Dr. (southbound) yields to Fielding 
Annapolis (westbound) yields to Constitution 
Bluestem (southbound) yields to Cottonwood 
Carousel and Barbary, Barbary yields to Carousel 
Church and Prairie, Prairie yields to Church 
Colfax and Nora, Nora yields to Colfax 
Colfax and Nottingham, Nottingham yields to Colfax 
Covert and Pick, Covert westbound yields to northbound and southbound Pick 
Daisy (westbound) yields to Primrose 
Debra and Mary Kay, Debra yields to westbound and eastbound Mary Kay 
Dewes and Lincoln, Lincoln yields to Dewes 
Drake and Raleigh, Drake southbound yields to Raleigh 
Elmwood and Hawthorne, Hawthorne yields to Elmwood 
Harrison and Greenfield, Greenfield yields to Harrison 
Heatherfield southbound at Hunter 
Henley and East Railroad, Henley yields to northbound and southbound East Railroad 
Henley and Spruce, Spruce yields to Henley 
Highland Ter. and Kenilworth, northbound - Highland and Kenilworth 
Ivy Lane and Potter westbound, Ivy Lane yields to Potter 
Ivy Drive and Potter westbound, Ivy Drive yields to Potter 
LaFontaine and Joy, LaFontaine eastbound yields to Joy 
Lindenwood Lane and Rugen Road, Lindenwood Lane westbound yields to Rugen Road 
Linneman and Spruce, Spruce yields to Linneman 
Locust and Country, Locust yields to Country 
Long Valley and North Branch, Long Valley yields to North Branch 
Marie and Joy, westbound Marie yields to Joy 
Meadowlark and Brassie, Brassie yields to Meadowlark 
Merle and Gregory, northbound and southbound Merle yields to eastbound and westbound Gregory 
Michael and Barbary, Barbary yields to Michael 
Midway Lane (southbound) yields to Independence Avenue 
Nordica Avenue (northbound and southbound) at Colfax Avenue 
Overlook and County, Country yields to Overlook 
Overlook and Crabtree, Crabtree yields to Overlook 
Pine Street and Prairie, Prairie yields to Pine 
Pine Street and Pine Point, Pine Street yields to eastbound and westbound Pine Point 
Pinehurst Drive and Swainwood Drive, Pinehurst Drive yields to westbound and eastbound Swainwood 
Sally Court and Neil Lane, Sally Court yields to northbound and southbound Neil Lane 
Sandy Lane and Debra Lane, Sandy yields to northbound and southbound Debra 
Sandy Lane and Mary Kay Lane, Sandy Lane yields to westbound and eastbound Mary Kay 
Saratoga Lane (eastbound) yields to Midway Lane 
Springdale and Highland, westbound Springdale yields to northbound and southbound Highland 
Spruce and Robincrest, Spruce yields to eastbound and westbound Robincrest 
Swainwood and Spruce, Swainwood southbound yields to westbound and eastbound Spruce 
Thistle Lane (westbound) yields to Annapolis Drive 
Timothy Lane (eastbound) yields to Cottonwood Lane 
Timothy Lane (westbound) yields to Primrose Lane 
Westview Road at Glenayre Drive 
Wildwood Terrace (southbound) yields to Woodlawn Avenue 
Wilmette and Abor, Arbor yields to Wilmette 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 17; Ord. No. 4547, § 1, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 4900, § 3, 8-1-2006; Ord. No. 4918, § 3, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 5133, § 3, 8-19-2008; Ord. No. 5149, § 3, 10-7-2008; Ord. No. 5140, § 2, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 5572, § 4, 6-19-2012; Ord. No. 5749, § 3, 12-10-2013)  
Sec. 90-559. - Speed limits. 
Speed limits shall be as follows: 
Admiral Ewen Avenue, from First Street to Fourth Street, 25 miles per hour. 
Admiral Whitehead Drive, from Admiral Ewen Avenue to C Avenue, 25 miles per hour. 
B Avenue, from First Street to Fourth Street, 20 miles per hour. 
C Avenue, from First Street to Fourth Street, 20 miles per hour. 
D Avenue, from First Street to C Avenue, 20 miles per hour. 
E Avenue, from First Street to USCG facility, 20 miles per hour. 
Central Road, from Harlem Avenue to a point 450 feet west of the west right-of-way of Huber Lane on the north side of Central Road, 35 miles per hour. 
Chestnut Avenue, from Lehigh Avenue to Patriot Boulevard, 25 miles per hour. 
Chestnut Avenue, from Lehigh Avenue to the east gate of Glenview Naval Air station, 30 miles per hour. 
Chestnut Avenue, from Waukegan Road to Lehigh Avenue, 35 miles per hour. 
Compass Road, from Lehigh Avenue to Patriot Boulevard. 
Crewman Drive (both directions), from First Street to E Avenue, 20 miles per hour. 
D. Miller Drive, 20 miles per hour. 
Edwards Drive, 20 miles per hour. 
Fourth Street, from Admiral Ewen Avenue to D Avenue, 20 miles per hour. 
Fowler Drive, from Admiral Ewen Avenue to Shermer Road, 20 miles per hour. 
Glenview Road (both directions), from Lincoln Street to Milwaukee Avenue, 35 miles per hour. 
Glenview Road (both directions), from Waukegan Road to Lincoln Street, 25 miles per hour. 
Glenview Road (both directions), from Waukegan Road to the east Village limits, 35 miles per hour. 
Harlem Avenue, from Golf Road to Glenview Road, 30 miles per hour. 
Harlem Avenue, from Glenview Road to Prairie Street, 25 miles per hour. 
Hercules Court, 20 miles per hour. 
John's Drive, from Chestnut Avenue to Old Willow Road, 30 miles per hour. 
Lehigh Avenue (both directions), from 500 feet north of Compass Road to Patriot Boulevard, 35 miles per hour. 
Lehigh Avenue (both directions), from 700 feet south of West Lake Avenue to 500 feet north of Compass Road, 25 miles per hour. 
Lehigh Avenue (both directions), from 820 feet north or Rugen Road to 700 feet south of West Lake Avenue, 35 miles per hour. 
Lehigh Avenue (both directions), from Spruce Drive to 820 feet north of Rugen Road, 30 miles per hour. 
Lehigh Avenue (both directions), from Prairie Street to Spruce Drive, 25 miles per hour. 
Neptune Court, 20 miles per hour. 
Old Willow Road, from Willow Road to John's Drive, 25 miles per hour. 
Patriot Boulevard (both directions), from Chestnut Avenue to West Lake Avenue, 25 miles per hour. 
Patriot Boulevard (both directions), from East Lake Avenue to Chestnut Avenue, 25 miles per hour. 
Patriot Boulevard (both directions), from West Lake Avenue to Willow Road, 35 miles per hour. 
Ravine Drive, from Willow Road to Old Willow Road, 35 miles per hour. 
Richards Drive, from Fowler to West Drive, 20 miles per hour. 
Second Street, from Admiral Ewen Avenue to D Avenue, 20 miles per hour. 
Shermer Road (both directions), from Golf Road to East Lake Avenue, 30 miles per hour. 
Shermer Road, from Old Willow Road to West Lake Avenue, 25 miles per hour. 
Skytrain Lane, 20 miles per hour. 
Third Street, from Admiral Ewen Avenue to D Avenue, 20 miles per hour. 
Washington Road, from Central Road to Harrison Street, 30 miles per hour. 
West Drive, from Richards to Admiral Ewen Drive, 20 miles per hour. 
West Lake Avenue (both directions), from Patriot Boulevard to Lehigh Avenue, 25 miles per hour. 
West Lake Avenue (both directions), from West Lake Avenue Village limits at the west side of the Glen Subdivision to Patriot Boulevard, 30 miles per hour. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 18; Ord. No. 4477, § 1, 12-3-2002; Ord. No. 4726, § 1, 12-6-2004; Ord. No. 4788, § 2, 8-2-2005; Ord. No. 4943, § 2, 1-16-2007; Ord. No. 5343, § 5, 5-18-2010)  
Sec. 90-560. - Maximum gross weight on certain streets; exception. 
In accordance with the provisions of section 90-329 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles exceeding 28,000 pounds or having an IL "J" plate shall not be permitted to pass over the following restricted sections of roadway or structures: 
Chestnut Avenue bridge over the West Fork of the North Branch of the Chicago River shall be restricted as follows: 
Single Unit Vehicles 19 Tons 
Combinations 3 or 4 Axles 28 Tons 
5 or more Axles 32 Tons 
Johns Drive from 547 feet north of the intersection of Chestnut Avenue and Johns Drive to 658 feet north of the intersection of Chestnut Avenue and Johns Drive. 
Valor Drive from Tower Drive to West Lake Avenue. 
This section shall apply to school buses. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 20; Ord. No. 4571, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 5717, §§ 2, 3, 11-5-2013)  
Sec. 90-561. - Left turn only. 
All traffic shall at all times turn left from: 
(1)  The parking lot exit at 950 River Drive onto River Drive southbound. 
(2)  The two driveways on the south side of Overlook Drive, adjacent to the residential development at 195 Waukegan Road, onto Overlook Drive westbound. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 21; Ord. No. 5663, § 3, 4-16-2013)  
Sec. 90-562. - Construction traffic in Indian Ridge Subdivision. 
(a)  No construction traffic is allowed in the use of any residential street included in an area known as the "Indian Ridge Subdivision" for purposes of either entering or exiting any construction area adjacent to the Indian Ridge Subdivision. 
(b)  Indian Ridge Subdivision is a residential section of single-family dwellings located on the west side of Landwehr Road, with an entrance/exit at Indian Ridge Road. The streets included in the Indian Ridge Subdivision are: 
(1)  Indian Ridge Road; 
(2)  Osage Drive; 
(3)  Saranac Lane; 
(4)  Mohawk Lane; and 
(5)  Iroquois Drive. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "construction traffic/vehicle" means any vehicle used for the purpose of providing material for construction sites, vehicles hauling, or towing on a trailer, other motorized machinery commonly used for construction purposes, or any vehicle used for the sole purpose of construction efforts. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 22)  
Sec. 90-563. - Three-hour parking limitations. 
There is a three-hour parking limitation on Waukegan Road (west curb), from a point 30 feet north of the north curb of Henley Street to a point 70 feet south of the south curb of Dewes Street, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday, inclusive. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 23)  
Sec. 90-564. - Residents only parking permits. 
(a)  Residents may obtain a resident only parking permit from the Village manager's office by presenting evidence of residency as may be determined by the office of the Village manager. 
(b)  The residents only parking permits provided for in this section are to be affixed to the lower lefthand corner of the front windshield on the driver's side of the vehicle for which the permit has been issued. 
_____ 
Location 	From 	To 	Time 
500 block of Hunter Road and 529 and 530 Central (both sides) 	East curbline of Hunter Road 	West curbline of Hunter Road and the south curbline of 	Monday—Friday, 8:00 a.m.—2:00 p.m., excluding holidays 
			
This shall terminate automatically after the village manager has been presented with a certificate of occupancy from the County building department, which authorizes full use of the reconstructed parking structure after construction has been completed. 
			
600 block of Hunter Road 	South of Glenview Road 	North of Central Road 	
			
This will be in effect for approximately two years during the course of reconstruction of the parking structure. 
 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 24)  
Sec. 90-565. - No turn on red light. 
Drivers of motor vehicles are prohibited from turning right on a red light where prohibited by Village ordinance at the following streets, maintained by the Village: 
Chestnut Avenue and Lehigh Avenue, from westbound Chestnut Avenue to northbound Lehigh Avenue. 
Chestnut Avenue and Patriot Boulevard, from Chestnut Avenue to Patriot Boulevard. 
Glenview Road and Waukegan Road from westbound Glenview Road to northbound Waukegan Road. 
Lehigh Avenue and Chestnut Avenue, from northbound Lehigh Avenue to eastbound Chestnut Avenue. 
Patriot Boulevard and Chestnut Avenue, from Patriot Boulevard to Tower Drive. 
Patriot Boulevard and Chestnut Avenue, from Patriot Boulevard to Chestnut Avenue. 
Patriot Boulevard and West Lake Avenue, from Patriot Boulevard to West Lake Avenue. 
Tower Drive and Patriot Boulevard at West Lake Avenue, from Tower Drive to Patriot Boulevard. 
Tower Drive and Patriot Boulevard at Chestnut Avenue, from Tower Drive to Chestnut Avenue. 
Waukegan Road and Glenview Road from southbound Waukegan Road to westbound Glenview Road. 
West Lake Avenue and Tower Drive, from West Lake Avenue to Tower Drive. 
West Lake Avenue and Patriot Boulevard, from West Lake Avenue to Patriot Boulevard. 
(Code 1959, ch. 11, art. XIX, app. no. 19; Ord. No. 4570, § 1, 9-16-2003; Ord. No. 4760, § 1, 6-7-2005; Ord. No. 4793, § 2, 9-6-2005)  
Sec. 90-566. - Four-hour parking limitations. 
There is a four-hour parking limitation in the Gallery Park parking lot (located immediately adjacent to West Lake Avenue and Lehigh Avenue, with an entrance from West Lake Avenue), for the entire lot, except on Saturdays, Sundays, Holidays, and Village authorized vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 5122, § 2, 7-15-2008)  
Sec. 90-567. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5482, § 3, adopted Sept. 20, 2011, repealed § 90-567, which pertained to five-hour parking limitations and was derived from Ord. No. 5185, § 2, adopted Jan. 8, 2009; Ord. No. 5198, § 2, adopted Mar. 3, 2009; Ord. No. 5232, § 3, adopted June 2, 2009; and Ord. No. 5413, § 5, adopted Dec. 13, 2010.  
Sec. 90-568. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5213, § 4, adopted May 5, 2009, repealed § 90-568. Former § 90-568 pertained to disabled parking and was derived from Ord. No. 5198, § 3, 3-3-2009.  
Sec. 90-569. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5482, § 4, adopted Sept. 20, 2011, repealed § 90-569, which pertained to permit parking and was derived from Ord. No. 5213, § 5, adopted May 5, 2009; Ord. No. 5232, § 4, adopted June 2, 2009; Ord. No. 5413, § 4, adopted Dec. 13, 2010; and Ord. No. 5478, § 3, adopted Aug. 2, 2011.  
Sec. 90-570. - Disabled parking. 
It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not properly displaying registration plates or decals issued to a person with disabilities, as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-159.1, pursuant to section 90-191 and 625 ILCS 5/3-616, or to a disabled veteran pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-609, in the two eastern most parking spaces on the north side of Stevens Drive. 
(Ord. No. 5325, § 2, 4-6-2010)  
Secs. 90-571—90-575. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - MOTOR DRIVEN SCOOTERS 
 
Sec. 90-576. - Definitions. 
Motor driven scooter defined. For the purpose of this article, a "motor driven scooter" is defined as any electric or gas driven wheeled scooter, motor driven cycle or other similar motor driven vehicle for which the State of Illinois does not issue a title document, and does not issue license plates or registration documents. 
(Ord. No. 4725, § 1(11-15-1), 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 90-577. - Operation of motor driven scooters restricted. 
No person shall operate a motor driven scooter upon any public street, sidewalk, parking lot, bike path, park or on any other public property. 
(Ord. No. 4725, § 1(11-15-2), 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 90-578. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempt from the prohibitions contained in this article: 
(1)  Any police vehicle, fire vehicle, municipal vehicle, special district vehicle, vehicle owned by another unit of State or local government, operated by an employee in the course of his or her duties. 
(2)  Motorized wheelchairs. For purposes of this article, a motorized wheelchair means any motorized vehicle designed for and used by a person with disabilities. 
(3)  Electric personal assistive mobility devices, as defined in section 625 ILCS 5/1-117.7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 4725, § 1(11-15-3), 12-6-2004)  
Sec. 90-579. - Penalties. 
Any person 18 years of age or older who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $750.00 for each offense. An offense committed by a minor under the direct control or with the consent of a parent or guardian may subject the parent or guardian to the penalties provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 4725, § 1(11-15-4), 12-6-2004)  
Chapter 94 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; vehicles and traffic, ch. 90. 
 
Sec. 94-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Glenview chauffeur's license or chauffeur's license means a license issued to an individual and authorizes the individual to operate a taxicab or limousine within the Village. 
License year means January 1 through December 31 of each year. 
Livery operator's license means a license issued to the owner of a livery service that is eligible to operate livery vehicles or limousines within the Village. 
Livery vehicle means any public passenger vehicle transporting passengers for hire on a pre-arranged contract, trip, and hourly or daily non-mileage metered basis and may also be referred to as a limousine. 
Livery vehicle license means a license issued for a public passenger vehicle allowing the vehicle to operate as a limousine within the Village. 
Owner means any person having the use or control of one or more taxicabs or livery vehicles as herein defined. 
Owner, applicant or licensee means every person, firm or corporation having the use or control of one or more taxicabs or livery vehicles as herein defined, including an association of taxicab owners or livery owners, together with all partners, shareholders, officers and directors where a firm or corporation is involved. 
Public passenger vehicle means taxicabs and livery vehicles used for transportation of passengers for hire. 
Public passenger vehicle license means a taxicab vehicle license or a livery vehicle license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Taxicab means any public passenger vehicle equipped with a taximeter and used for the carriage of passengers for hire to or from destinations as directed by such passenger(s) and any vehicle registered as a taxicab by the Secretary of State. 
Taxicab operator's license means a license issued to the driver of a taxicab that is eligible to operate as a taxicab within the Village. 
Taxicab vehicle license means a license issued for a public passenger vehicle which allows the vehicle to operate as a taxicab within the Village. 
Taximeter means any mechanical or electrical device attached to a taxicab that records and indicates a charge or fare in dollars and cents measured by distance traveled or waiting time or both. 
Taximeter testing means a taximeter service center designated by the Village manager to conduct testing, certification and sealing of taximeters required by this chapter. 
Vehicle testing station means those facilities designated by the Village manager pursuant to this chapter that conduct the safety inspections required or provided for by this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 19.1; Ord. No. 4684, § 1, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 4902, § 2, 8-1-2006) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 94-2. - Licensing and enforcement. 
The licensing of taxicab operators, livery operators, public passenger vehicles, the examination of applicants for chauffeur's licenses and issuance of chauffeur's licenses to operate said vehicles, and the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, shall be under the control and supervision of the Village manager. The Village manager shall have the authority to designate such persons as deemed necessary to perform the duties that are under the control and supervision of the Village manager. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 2, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-3. - Licenses required. 
(a)  Taxicab service operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate a taxicab service within the corporate limits of the Village without having first obtained a taxicab operator's license. Each taxicab operator's license shall specify the maximum number of taxicabs that may be operated by the taxicab service. 
(b)  Livery service operator. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or operate a livery service within the corporate limits of the Village without having first obtained a livery service operator's license. Each livery service operator's license shall specify the maximum number of limousines that may be operated by the livery service. 
(c)  Taxicab vehicle license. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to solicit business, to accept for transportation any passengers within the Village boundaries, or to otherwise operate as a taxicab within the Village unless the vehicle has been issued a valid Village taxicab vehicle license. 
(d)  Livery vehicle license; exception. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to solicit business within the Village, or to accept for transportation any passenger or to otherwise operate as a livery vehicle within the Village unless either: 
(1)  The vehicle has been issued a valid Village livery license; or 
(2)  Arrangements for the transportation of the passenger were made in advance by the passenger, or someone acting on the passenger's behalf. 
(e)  Chauffeur's license. Except as provided in section 94-3(f), it shall be unlawful for: 
(1)  Any person to drive or operate a public passenger vehicle within the Village unless such person currently holds a valid Village chauffeur's license; and 
(2)  Any person owning or controlling any public passenger vehicle to employ or permit any person to operate such vehicle for hire within the Village unless the driver has a valid Village chauffeur's license. 
(f)  Exceptions to licensure requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Prevent taxicabs and limousines licensed by other municipalities from entering the Village limits for the purpose of depositing passengers who were legally picked up outside the Village; or 
(2)  Taxicabs and limousines that do not stop within the Village for the purpose of picking up or depositing passengers. 
(Code 1959, § 19.13; Ord. No. 4684, § 3, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-4. - Applications for licenses. 
(a)  Application forms. Applications for all licenses required by this chapter shall be made upon forms furnished by the Village. 
(b)  Application fees. The annual fee for all licenses under this chapter shall be established by the annual fee ordinance. All fees shall be prorated if the license is issued for a partial license year. 
(c)  General application requirements. All applications for any license under this chapter shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The full name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Where the applicant is not an individual, the form and state of organization (i.e. corporation, partnership) and the name, title and telephone number of the contact person for the applicant. 
(3)  Whether the applicant has previously received licenses under this chapter. 
(d)  Additional requirements for chauffeur's license. All applications for chauffeur's licenses under this chapter shall demonstrate compliance with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  That the applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  That the applicant is not afflicted with any infirmity of body or mind which may render him or her unfit for safe operation of a public passenger vehicle as evidenced by presentation of: 
a.  the results of a medical examination, including tests for drug and alcohol consumption, that was conducted by a licensed physician not more than 13 months in advance of the date of application, and 
b.  the results of tests for drug and alcohol consumption that was conducted by a licensed physician not more than 90 days in advance of the date of application. 
(3)  That the applicant has a valid Illinois driver's license. 
(4)  That the applicant has not been convicted of a Class A misdemeanor or felony charge within the last five years, or show a previous background that indicates a tendency to act in a manner that may place the public at risk. 
(5)  That the applicant's driver's or chauffeur's license has not been suspended or revoked in any state within the last three years for any violation of law concerning the operation of a motor vehicle other than a single failure to comply with emissions testing requirements. 
(6)  That the applicant has had no more than two convictions for violation of traffic regulations governing the movement of vehicles within one year prior to the date of application. 
(7)  That the applicant has never caused, through the unlawful operation of a motor vehicle, an accident resulting in the death of any person. 
(8)  That the applicant is able to understand, communicate, read, write and speak the English language at a level of expertise sufficient to effectively function as a public passenger vehicle operator. The applicant must pass a written examination that tests the applicant's knowledge of the English language, local geography and traffic laws. No applicant may take the examination more than four times in any 180 day period. 
(9)  Photograph and fingerprints may be taken of all applicants and shall be required every other year. 
The Village manager may, after completion of a background check and investigation, waive some or all of the requirements of this subsection based upon the demonstration that the applicant's driving habits are not careless or reckless and that a responsible driving record has been maintained for at least five years preceding the date of application. 
(e)  Additional requirements for livery vehicle and taxicab licenses. Application for a livery vehicle or taxicab license shall be made by the owner of the vehicle upon forms furnished by the Village. Such application shall identify the vehicle owner, and contain a complete description of the vehicle or taxicab including make, model, year, color, State registration number, vehicle identification number, livery or taxicab company name, company assigned vehicle number, copy of vehicle registration card and copy of document containing evidence of required insurance. The application shall also include a copy of the vehicle inspection form from the vehicle testing station. 
(f)  Additional requirements for taxicab service operator's and livery vehicle service operator's licenses. Application for a taxicab service operator's license or a livery vehicle service operator's license shall be made by the owner, or person with legal control over, taxicabs or livery vehicles operating within the Village. Such application shall identify all vehicles proposed for use in service in the Village, including the status of licensure of such vehicles, shall identify all drivers of such vehicles, including the status of all Village chauffeur's licenses for such persons, and shall include a schedule of rates for various services offered. The application shall also provide the legal relationship of the applicant to such listed vehicles and drivers. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 4, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-5. - Term, issuance, display and transfer of licenses. 
(a)  All licenses provided for under this chapter shall be valid only for the license year for which or during which the license was issued. 
(b)  The public passenger vehicle chauffeur's license shall bear the permittee's name and photograph. Such permit shall be prominently displayed in the vehicle operated by the chauffeur at all times. 
(c)  All taxicab vehicle and livery vehicle licenses shall be permanently affixed to the front lower left windshield of the vehicle for which it is issued. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to transfer any license issued under this chapter from one person or vehicle to another. 
(e)  Any person issued a chauffeur's license must inform the Village within ten days after any change of name, address or phone number. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 5, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-6. - Renewal. 
(a)  Chauffeur's license. Any person requesting that a chauffeur's license be renewed shall submit an application to the Village prior to the date of expiration of the chauffeur's license. No chauffeur's license shall be renewed until after the Village has conducted a review of the renewal applicant's driving record and criminal background. No chauffeur's license will be renewed unless the Village manager determines that the applicant for renewal continues to meet the requirements for receiving a chauffeur's license. 
(b)  Vehicle licenses. Any person requesting that a vehicle license for a vehicle licensed under this chapter be renewed shall submit an application to the Village prior to the date of expiration of the vehicle license. No vehicle license will be renewed unless the Village manager determines that the vehicle continues to meet the vehicle license requirements. 
(c)  Operator's licenses. Any person requesting that a taxicab operator's or livery vehicle operator's license be renewed shall submit an application to the Village prior to the date of expiration. No such license will be renewed unless the Village manager determines that the operator continues to meet the taxicab operator's license or livery vehicle operator's license requirements, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 6, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-7. - Public convenience and necessity. 
(a)  No public passenger vehicle operator's license shall be issued unless the Village manager, after a hearing, shall declare that public convenience and necessity requires the operation of the proposed service for which application for license is made. 
(b)  In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the issuance of a public passenger vehicle operator's license, the Village manager shall take into consideration the following: 
(1)  Whether the demands of public convenience and necessity require the proposed or additional service within the Village. 
(2)  The financial responsibility of the applicant. 
(3)  The kind, number, type of equipment and color scheme to be used by the applicant. 
(4)  The increased traffic congestion that may result. 
(5)  Whether the safe use of the streets by vehicular or pedestrian traffic will be affected by the granting of such additional license. 
(6)  Any other relevant facts that the Village manager may deem advisable and necessary. 
(c)  No such declaration of public convenience and necessity shall be necessary for the renewal of a public passenger vehicle operator's license for the maximum number of vehicles for which the applicant has already received declaration of public convenience and necessity. 
(Code 1959, § 19.22; Ord. No. 4684, § 7, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-8. - Taxicab service and livery service. 
(a)  All public passenger vehicles shall be operated in accordance with this chapter and all other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, cedes, rules and regulations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab or limousine upon the streets of the Village unless such person and the vehicle being operated comply in all respects with the applicable state and Village laws, statutes, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations pertaining thereto. 
(c)  Every operator and chauffeur of a public passenger vehicle is required to furnish clean, comfortable, and safe service. 
(d)  Every taxicab operator and livery operator shall provide to the Village manager a schedule of rates and charges not less than ten days prior to such rates becoming effective. 
(e)  Every taxicab service and every livery service which is licensed by the Village shall keep in operation at all times regular telephone service within the Village so that a person desiring to hire a public passenger vehicle may call the taxicab or livery service. The owner of the taxicab or livery service shall list the telephone number in the local and regional telephone directories which are published for the Village by the phone company which furnishes local telephone service. 
(f)  Every taxicab service which is licensed by the Village shall operate public passenger vehicles regularly in the Village so as to meet the public demand for passenger service. They shall maintain a central place of business available for receiving telephone calls and dispatching vehicles 24 hours a day or, provide, at a minimum, telephone service consisting of an automatic answering device which refers the public to a taxicab service licensed by the Village providing the desired 24-hour service. 
(g)  Every livery service which is licensed by the Village shall operate public vehicles regularly in the Village so as to meet the public demand for passenger service. They shall maintain a central place of business available for receiving telephone calls and dispatching vehicles during normal business hours. 
(h)  Every taxicab service and every livery service which is licensed by the Village shall answer all calls received for service within the Village as soon as possible: If the service cannot be rendered within 20 minutes, it will notify the customer of such delay and given an estimated response time and all reasons for the delay. It shall be unlawful for any taxicab service or livery service which is licensed by the Village to refuse to accept a request for service anywhere within the Village at any time vehicles are available to provide the service. 
(i)  It is unlawful for any taxicab service or a livery service which is licensed by the Village to knowingly encourage or allow a vehicle to operate as a taxicab or limousine without having first obtained the appropriate type of public passenger vehicle license. It is unlawful for any taxicab service or livery service which is licensed by the Village to knowingly encourage or allow a person to operate a taxicab or limousine in violation of the previous sections of this chapter. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any taxicab or livery vehicle to be used in the perpetration of a felony, misdemeanor or violation of a Village ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 8, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 4902, § 3, 8-1-2006)  
Sec. 94-9. - Insurance. 
(a)  All taxicab and limousine services based in the Village shall carry public liability insurance for bodily injury liability and for property damage in the amount established by the annual fee ordinance. Such insurance policy shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the state of Illinois and shall be approved by the Village manager, and shall include the Village as an additional insured thereon. Evidence of insurance shall be filed with the Village manager. 
(b)  No person will be issued a Village chauffeur's license and no taxicab vehicle license or livery license shall be issued until all the requirements of the state laws concerning insurance issued to compensate any person who may suffer damage as a result of operation of the vehicle have been met. 
(c)  There shall be affixed on a conspicuous part of each public passenger vehicle a sticker which indicates that the vehicle has complied with the requirements of Sections 8-101 through 8-116 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/8-101 through 8-116). 
(Code 1959, § 19.25; Ord. No. 4684, § 9, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-10. - Public passenger vehicle requirements. 
(a)  All public passenger vehicles licensed by the Village shall meet the following criteria in addition to complying with all other requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  All applicable and valid state, municipal or county licenses and the Village public passenger vehicle license must be permanently affixed to the front lower left windshield of the vehicle for which it is issued. 
(2)  All applicable equipment must comply with the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code. 
(3)  It shall be "FULL SIZE" design or larger which includes van styles. The Village manager may determine that motor vehicles other than "full-size" or larger automobiles and vans may be licensed as public passenger vehicles in the Village, provided that all public safety, equipment and comfort concerns are met. 
(4)  All doors shall be operable. 
(5)  It shall have a compartment to contain and transport luggage or similar items. 
(6)  There shall not be any significant rust on the exterior or interior of the vehicle. 
(7)  The body and interior of the vehicle shall not have any major damage or defects. The exterior surfaces on the body of the vehicle must be painted so that colors used in different areas of the vehicle body match or provide a coordinated color scheme. 
(8)  All windows in the vehicle shall be in proper working condition and shall not contain any cracks or holes. 
(9)  All lights on the exterior and lights on the interior of the vehicle shall be in proper working condition. 
(10)  The upholstery of the vehicle shall not be ripped, torn or otherwise damaged. 
(11)  The exterior of the vehicle must be maintained in a clean condition taking into account weather conditions. 
(12)  The interior of the vehicle must be maintained in a clean condition. There shall be no litter, garbage or other debris inside the vehicle. There shall not be any pungent odors emanating from within the interior of the vehicle or from the vehicle itself. 
(13)  All mechanical components of the vehicle shall operate properly. The vehicle shall not emit any noise or fumes which are not consistent with those emitted by a vehicle that is in excellent operating condition. 
(14)  The vehicle must be equipped with an operating heater and an operating air-conditioning system. The interior of the vehicle while transporting a passenger must be maintained at a temperature that is not less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit or more than 75 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(b)  The Village manager shall have the authority to issue additional regulations which contain requirements relating to the condition in which vehicles licensed as public passenger vehicles must be maintained and operated, provided that such regulations are consistent with the provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, regulations which restrict or limit the items and materials which may be displayed on the exterior or interior of the vehicle licensed as a public passenger vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 10, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-11. - Public passenger vehicle operation. 
(a)  No operator of a public passenger vehicle shall carry more than the rated passenger load per vehicle. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger. 
(b)  After a public passenger vehicle has been hired by one or more persons traveling together, the operator shall not pick up other passengers. 
(c)  It is the duty of the driver of any public passenger vehicle licensed on the Village to accept as a passenger any person who seeks service provided that the person conducts himself in an orderly manner. 
(d)  No operator of a public passenger vehicle shall receive or discharge passengers in an established traffic lane of any roadway. Passengers shall be received and discharged at street curbs or on shoulders of roadways. 
(e)  The driver of a public passenger vehicle shall transport his passenger to the point of destination by the most direct route available. 
(f)  No person shall operate a public passenger vehicle within the Village who is under the influence of an intoxicating beverage or a controlled substance or who at any time within 90 minutes prior to operating such vehicle has consumed an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a public passenger vehicle to shout or call to prospective passengers, to use obscene or profane language in the presence of any passenger, to litter or to disturb the peace in any way. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any public passenger vehicles licensed by the Village to advertise for the purpose of business or commercial uses unrelated to the public passenger vehicle company. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any public passenger vehicle that transports passengers to convey toxic, hazardous or biological waste at any time. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any public passenger vehicle operator or company to use a radio frequency scanner or scanning type radio to monitor the radio frequency of competing company for the purpose of stealing the fares of the scanned company. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful for any public passenger driver or company representative to offer compensation to the employees of any business in the Village in order to direct prospective customers to that driver or company. It shall be unlawful for any person to accept or solicit compensation from a public passenger vehicle driver or company representative in return for directing prospective customers to that driver or company. 
(l)  The operator of a public passenger vehicle shall be courteous to passengers, prospective passengers and other drivers at all times. 
(m)  The operator of a taxicab may demand an advance payment of an estimated fare of the person desiring to be transported by such taxicab and may refuse to convey any person who refuses to comply with the demand. 
(n)  Any taxicab passenger paying a fare shall, upon request, be given a receipt indicating the amount paid. 
(o)  The driver of any public passenger vehicle, while posted at any location in the Village awaiting a fare, shall remain in or in close proximity to the vehicle he is operating. He may leave his vehicle unattended for a period of no longer than ten minutes. 
(p)  A public passenger vehicle which has not been issued a public passenger vehicle license pursuant to this chapter shall not stand or park on any privately owned or privately controlled property except as follows: 
(1)  A livery vehicle may stand or park on privately owed property provided that the operator of the livery vehicle is waiting for a passenger and provided that the operator shall remain in or in close proximity to the vehicle he is operating and does not leave the vehicle unattended for a period of longer than ten minutes. 
(2)  A public passenger vehicle may stand or park in a parking lot which is located on the same promises as a restaurant for a period of not longer than 30 minutes. 
(3)  A public passenger vehicle may stand or park in a parking lot which is located on the same premises as a grocery store, delicatessen or convenience food store for a period of not longer than 15 minutes. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 11, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-12. - Taxicab vehicle licenses; inspections. 
(a)  Upon original issuance, renewal or transfer of a license and before operation there under, the licensee shall present each taxicab authorized to be operated under said license to the Village manager, or his designee, for inspection. Prior to presentation, each such taxicab must have obtained evidence of satisfaction vehicular inspection from a vehicle testing station. 
(b)  Safety inspection stickers shall be displayed on the certified inspection plate on the front lower left windshield and are not transferable from one vehicle to another. A safety inspection sticker shall not be affixed to any vehicle other than the vehicle for which the sticker was originally issued. 
(c)  When a taxicab is removed from service by the owner, the taxicab vehicle license issued to that vehicle must be immediately surrendered to the Village manager. 
(d)  Taxicabs shall be inspected two times in a license year, with not less than 90 days and not more than 150 days between consecutive inspections. The license of all taxicabs not inspected as required within that period shall be subject to suspension. Such inspections shall include, but need not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Vehicle make, year and vehicle identification number; 
(2)  State license number and year; 
(3)  Village vehicle license number and year; 
(4)  Vehicle color; 
(5)  Vehicle number; 
(6)  Company name; 
(7)  Service brakes; 
(8)  Emergency brakes; 
(9)  Horn; 
(10)  Rear view mirror; 
(11)  Windshield wipers and washers; 
(12)  Headlights; 
(13)  Tail lights; 
(14)  Stop lights; 
(15)  Turn signals; 
(16)  Speedometer; 
(17)  Taximeter; 
(18)  Rates displayed; 
(19)  Steering; 
(20)  Interior condition; 
(21)  Exterior condition; 
(22)  Windows; and 
(23)  Tires. 
(e)  Any taxicab failing to pass the inspection will be given a period of five working days to allow for repairs. The taxicab cannot be used as a public passenger vehicle for hire until repairs have been completed and it passes re-inspection. If the taxicab does not pass re-inspection within the five working day period, the taxicab license may be suspended by the Village manager. 
(f)  The Village manager shall prescribe reasonable standards that taxicabs must satisfy to pass the inspections required by this chapter, which standards shall be designed to assure that taxicabs licensed by the Village are mechanically dependable, safe, clean and satisfy the requirements of this chapter. 
(g)  Any time a taxicab is involved in an accident that causes damage that may affect the safety of present or perspective passengers, it must be taken out of service immediately, repaired and reported to the Village. Before such vehicle may be returned to service, it must be certified at a Village designated safety inspection station and re-inspected by the Village. 
(h)  The owner of any vehicle for which a Village taxicab license has been issued must keep thorough and complete records related to the maintenance of the vehicle and make such records available upon request of the Village manager or his designee. The maintenance records shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The type of maintenance work performed; 
(2)  The location where the maintenance work was performed; 
(3)  The date the maintenance work was performed; and 
(4)  The mileage of the vehicle when the maintenance work was performed. 
The owner must also maintain, for a period of not less than two years, all work orders, receipts and other documents relating to any maintenance work performed on the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 12, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-13. - Taxicab stands. 
(a)  The Village manager shall designate taxicab stands in the number and location deemed appropriate. Each such taxicab stand shall be appropriately marked by signs erected by the Village. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle other than a licensed taxicab in any taxicab stand. A licensed taxicab may be parked in any cabstand while such taxicab is in the charge of its driver on duty awaiting a fare. 
(b)  The Village manager shall have the authority to create on public property and, with the permission from the owner, on private property, taxicab stands where cabs licensed by the Village may wait for passengers. The Village manager may limit the number of taxicabs permitted to use a taxicab stand at any given area. 
(c)  Rules of conduct at taxicab stands shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Taxicabs entering a taxicab stand or line shall take the rear positions. Overcrowding taxicab stands or lines is prohibited. 
(2)  While taxis occupy designated taxicab stands, no other taxi shall bypass the taxicab line and accept passenger for service. 
(3)  The first cab in line shall be eligible for the first available fare, unless a passenger indicates a preference for another cab in that line. 
(4)  No taxicab shall accept a load along side of, in front of, or adjacent to an established occupied taxicab stand. 
(5)  Livery vehicles shall not park in taxicab stands. 
(6)  Public passenger vehicle drivers shall not sleep or lounge while posted in a taxicab stand. 
(7)  There shall not be more than two occupants in any vehicle posted at a taxicab stand. 
(Code 1959, § 19.9; Ord. No. 4684, § 13, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-14. - Taximeters. 
(a)  No taxicab shall be issued a Village taxicab vehicle license until its taximeter is tested, sealed, and certified to be accurate. 
(b)  No taxicab shall operate for hire in the Village unless the taximeter is accurately recording the fare to be charged. 
(c)  The taximeter will be located so that its face can be seen by any passenger riding in the taxi. 
(d)  Each taximeter will display a "vacant" sign when the taxicab is engaged. 
(e)  Adequate illumination shall be provided for the face of the taximeter so that it may be read by the passenger whenever the vehicle is in operation. 
(f)  The Village manager may designate an official taximeter testing center. 
(g)  No person operating or owning any taxicab shall transfer any taximeter to any other vehicle unless the meter is inspected, reprogrammed and certified at the authorized taximeter testing center. 
(h)  If a taxicab has service performed on or changes made to the transmission, any drive train component, or the size of the tire, the owner of the taxicab must have the taximeter inspected, reprogrammed and certified at the authorized taximeter testing center. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to have more than one taximeter in any taxicab. 
(j)  Any person convicted of tampering with or otherwise manipulating a taximeter will be subject to a fine as established in this code. In addition the public passenger vehicle chauffeur's license of such person will be revoked for a second offense. 
(k)  The Village manager shall have the authority to require that taximeters be recertified on a semiannual basis. The Village manager shall also have the authority to require that a taximeter be recertified any time the Village manager has reason to believe that the taximeter may not be accurate or that there may have been tempering with or an unauthorized adjustment made to the taximeter. 
(l)  Any taxicab which has a taximeter found to be in violation of any provisions of this chapter may be immediately removed from service. 
(Code 1959, § 19.20; Ord. No. 4684, § 14, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-15. - Fixing of rates. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licensed under the provisions of this chapter to conspire among themselves or with other persons to fix or control rates for public passenger vehicles within the Village. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for free and uncontrolled rates. Any scheme, device or other subterfuge employed by any person to evade this purpose shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and grounds for revocation. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 15, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-16. - Rates of fare. 
Every taxicab operator and livery operator shall furnish safe and adequate service at equitable and accurate rates within the Village as may be required to meet the public demand for taxicab and livery service. The following information must be prominently and accurately displayed in the interior of each taxicab and clearly visible to all passengers at all times: 
(1)  The entire schedule of rates and charges for services provided and recorded by the taximeter; 
(2)  All nonmetered service charges imposed, including, without limitation, waiting time, premium service hours or days and excess baggage; 
(3)  The telephone number where service complaints will be received; and 
(4)  The chauffeur's permit of the on duty operator. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 16, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-17. - Taxicab license sticker and display. 
(a)  A taxicab vehicle license issued by the Village shall be in the form of an adhesive sticker which shall contain the official license number of the public passenger vehicle. 
(b)  Taxicab vehicle licenses shall be of a distinctly different color and/or design every year. Taxicab vehicle licenses must be affixed to the lower left portion of the windshield of the vehicle for which the license has been issued. 
(c)  A taxicab vehicle sticker is not transferable to any vehicle other than the vehicle for which it has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 17, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-18. - Vehicle identification. 
(a)  Every taxicab licensed in the Village shall bear on all sides of the vehicle in a color contrasting to that of the vehicle itself the name and phone number of the company which it serves. The lettering shall be a minimum of two inches in height and ¼ inch brush stroke. 
(b)  The identification number assigned to the taxicab by the company shall be affixed to the exterior of the vehicle on all sides of the vehicle. These letters must be a minimum of two inches in height and ¼ inch brush stroke. 
(c)  No taxicab shall be painted or labeled so as to be similar to the vehicles of any other person or business which has been issued a Village taxicab operator's license. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 18, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-19. - Livery vehicle licenses; inspections. 
(a)  No livery vehicle license shall be issued for any vehicle which is not owned or affiliated with a livery service which has been licensed by the Village. 
(b)  No livery vehicle shall be licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully examined at a vehicle testing station and found to be in safe condition for passengers, of good appearance, and well painted. 
(c)  Livery vehicles shall be inspected three times a year. The license of all livery vehicles not inspected as required within that period shall be subject to suspension. Such inspections shall include, but need not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Vehicle make, year and vehicle identification number; 
(2)  State license number and year; 
(3)  Village vehicle license number and year; 
(4)  Vehicle color; 
(5)  Vehicle number; 
(6)  Company name; 
(7)  Service brakes; 
(8)  Emergency brakes; 
(9)  Horn; 
(10)  Rear view mirror; 
(11)  Windshield wiper and washers; 
(12)  Headlights; 
(13)  Tail lights; 
(14)  Stop lights; 
(15)  Turn signals; 
(16)  Speedometer; 
(17)  Taximeter; 
(18)  Rates displayed; 
(19)  Steering; 
(20)  Interior condition; 
(21)  Exterior condition; 
(22)  Windows; and 
(23)  Tires. 
(d)  Any livery vehicle failing to pass the inspection will be given a period of five working days to allow for repairs. The livery vehicle cannot be used as a public passenger vehicle for hire until repairs have been completed and it passes reinspection. If the livery vehicle does not pass reinspection within the five-working day period, the livery vehicle license may be suspended by the Village manager. 
(e)  The Village manager shall prescribe reasonable standards that livery vehicles must satisfy to pass the inspections required by this chapter, which standards shall be designed to assure that livery vehicles licensed by the Village are mechanically dependable, safe, clean and satisfy the requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  Any time a livery vehicle is involved in an accident that causes damage which may affect the safety of prospective passengers, it must be taken out of service immediately, repaired and reported to the Village. Before such vehicle may be returned to service, it must be certified at a state safety inspection station and reinspected by the Village. 
(g)  The Village manager, or his designees, shall have the authority to immediately remove from service any livery vehicle which has been designated unfit for service or unsafe. 
(h)  The Village manager may require a livery vehicle to be reinspected as a result of a complaint by any person, or if the Village manager has reason to believe that the condition of the livery vehicle may pose a threat to the safety of its passengers or has reason to believe that the livery vehicle is not in compliance with provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  Upon passing all test categories at an approved vehicle testing station, the livery vehicle will be issued a safety inspection sticker to indicate that it has been deemed street worthy. Said sticker must be prominently displayed in the lower left of the windshield. It is unlawful for any livery vehicle for which a livery vehicle license has been issued by the Village to operate without a valid safety inspection sticker displayed as required by this chapter. 
(j)  Any livery vehicle that does not pass a safety inspection for any reason shall be immediately taken out of service until the livery vehicle passes the safety inspection. 
(k)  Safety inspection stickers are not transferable from one vehicle to another. A safety inspection sticker shall not be affixed to any vehicle other than the vehicle for which the sticker was originally issued. 
(l)  When a livery vehicle is removed from service by the owner, the livery vehicle license issued to that vehicle must be immediately surrendered to the Village manager. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 19, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-20. - Penalties. 
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the fines and penalties established in section 1-16 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 20, 9-21-2004)  
Sec. 94-21. - Suspension and revocation of licenses. 
(a)  In any licensee is found guilty of violating any Village ordinance, or State or Federal law while operating a taxicab within the Village of Glenview, the Village manager may suspend or revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Prior to suspending or revoking a license, the Village manager shall conduct an informal hearing. Notice of the date and time of the hearing shall be delivered to the licensee or mailed to the licensee's last known address on file with the Village not less than five days before the date of the hearing. The licensee shall be entitled to present testimony and documentary evidence at the hearing as to why the license should not be revoked or suspended. The licensee shall have the right to cross examine any person who testifies against the licensee during the hearing. The licensee may be represented at the hearing by counsel. The decision of the Village manager shall be in writing and shall be delivered or mailed to the licensee's last known address on file with the Village. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 21, 9-21-2004; Ord. No. 4902, § 4, 8-1-2006)  
Sec. 94-22. - Immediate removal from service. 
(a)  Where this chapter provides that a public passenger vehicle shall be or may be immediately removed from service, the vehicle may be removed from service by towing by a person of the licensee's choosing or by the Village. 
(b)  If a vehicle is removed from service, the owner or operator is wholly responsible for any towing and impound charges that the Village may incur for such removal from service, unless the Village manager determines that there was no basis for removing the vehicle from service. 
(c)  If a public passenger vehicle is immediately removed from service as provided in this chapter, the vehicle is immediately removed from service, the owner of the public passenger vehicle may file a request for a hearing with the Village manager. Such request shall be filed within two business days after the vehicle is removed from service. Upon receipt of such a request, a hearing shall be scheduled before the Village manager within not more than ten days after the date such a request is received. 
(Ord. No. 4684, § 22, 9-21-2004)  
Chapter 98 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— On April 15, 2003, set out in Ordinance No. 4512, the Village Board voted to readopt the Glenview Zoning Ordinance and ratify previous zoning legislation. Sections 3 through 5 of Ordinance No. 4512 reads as follows: 
Section 3. That in the event of any inconsistency between the Glenview Zoning Ordinance and the Illinois Municipal Code or any other statute of the State of Illinois, the provisions of the Glenview Zoning Ordinance shall control, except where the legislature of the State of Illinois has expressly preempted the Village's home-rule authority under the procedures set forth in the 1970 Constitution. 
Section 4. That to the extent any zoning legislation passed by the corporate authorities, as a home rule municipality, subsequent to December 15, 1970, was inconsistent with the Illinois Municipal Code, it is hereby and herein ratified. 
Section 5. That to the extent that the Illinois Municipal Code or any other Illinois State Statute pertaining to zoning imposes restrictions, procedures, requirements, or other limitations upon the Village, those restrictions, procedures, requirements, or other limitations are replaced by the provisions of the Glenview Zoning Ordinance and such restrictions, procedures, requirements, or other limitations shall not in any way limit or restrict the Village's enforcement of the Glenview Zoning Ordinance, the Village's use of the procedures set forth in the Glenview Zoning Ordinance, or the legislative authority of the Village Board, except where such Illinois statutes expressly preempt the Village's home-rule authority under the procedures set forth in the 1970 Constitution. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; fees and charges, ch. 30; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; vegetation, ch. 86. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 98-1. - Purpose. 
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is adopted to: 
(1)  Promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of the Village; 
(2)  Conserve the values of property throughout the Village and protect the character and stability of residential, business and industrial areas; 
(3)  Promote orderly and beneficial development in accordance with the optimum development of the Chicago Metropolitan Region and in furtherance of the comprehensive plan for the development of the Village; 
(4)  Provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property; 
(5)  Lessen or avoid congestion in the public streets and highways in the Village and surrounding areas; 
(6)  Regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence and other uses, and regulate and restrict the intensity of such uses; 
(7)  Divide the Village into districts of such numbers, shapes, areas and different classes, according to the uses of land and buildings and the intensity of such uses, as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this chapter; 
(8)  Prohibit locations and uses of buildings or structures and uses of land that are incompatible with the type of development planned for specified zoning districts in the Village; 
(9)  Prevent additions to and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed under this chapter; 
(10)  Protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other dangers; 
(11)  Fix reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall conform; 
(12)  Provide for the gradual elimination of those uses that would not now be permitted in the district in which they are located and are adversely affecting the orderly and beneficial development of the Village; 
(13)  Define and limit the powers and duties of administrative officers and bodies as provided in this chapter; and 
(14)  Prescribe penalties for the violation of and methods for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 24.2.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-2. - Scope of regulations. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided: 
(1)  No building or other structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered, and no building, other structure or land shall be used, occupied, or arranged or designed for use or occupancy, except as permitted by the regulations of this chapter for the zoning district in which such building, other structure or land is located, nor shall any excavating or grading be commenced in connection with any of such matters. 
(2)  No building or other structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered to: 
a.  Have a greater height; 
b.  Accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
c.  Occupy a greater percentage of lot size; or 
d.  Have a narrower or smaller rear yard, side yard, front yard or other open space, 
than is specified by the regulations of this chapter that are applicable in the district in which such building or other structure is located, except that, upon submission of proof satisfactory to the building and zoning director that an honest error has been committed in the placement of a structure not more than six inches into a required front yard, side yard or rear yard, the building and zoning director shall have the power to permit such placement. 
(3)  Not more than one principal residential building shall be located on a single lot in any district designed for single-family dwellings. 
(4)  No part of the lot size or yard, other open space or off-street parking or loading space provided in connection with any building or other structure or use in order to comply with this chapter shall, by reason of change of ownership or otherwise, be included as part of the lot size or yard, other open space or off-street parking or loading space required for any other building, other structure or use, except as specifically provided in this chapter. 
(5)  All of the lot size, and yards and other open spaces provided in connection with any building, other structure or use in order to comply with this chapter shall be located on the same lot as such building, other structure or use. 
(6)  No part of the lot size, yard, other open space or off-street parking or loading space provided in connection with any building, other structure or use, including, but not limited to, any building, other structure or use existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (April 7, 1975) or any amendment thereto, shall subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already less than, the minimum requirement of this chapter for equivalent new construction. 
(7)  This chapter is not intended to regulate the placement of poles, wires, cables, conduits, laterals, pipes, mains and valves or any other similar distributing equipment of a public utility. 
(8)  Any storage, stockpiling or accumulating of dirt or other fill, except when located on a site for which a building permit has been issued, and except that located on a parcel of land zoned for the sale of building materials, is hereby prohibited. 
(9)  No person shall elevate, or cause to be elevated, the grade of any lot or plot of ground more than four inches above the approved finished grade established and on file with the Village, or, if no grade has been established, the established grade shall be the ground elevation existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (April 7, 1975), without specific approval from the village engineer. Fill or structures shall not be placed in such a manner as to block or interfere with the free passage of surface water to a watercourse, swale or drainageway. 
(Code 1959, § 24.3.4; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-3. - Construction. 
(a)  In the construction of this chapter, the provisions and rules of this article shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly requires otherwise. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally. 
(Code 1959, § 24.15.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use means the same as defined in section 98-212. 
Alley means a dedicated public right-of-way, other than a street, that affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Alteration, structural. See the definition in this section of the term Structural alteration. 
Animal hospital and veterinary clinic mean a building, or portion thereof, in which the principal use is the care or treatment of domestic companion animals under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. 
Animal kennel means any establishment or premises wherein or whereon any number of animals are kept for the purpose of sale or rental, or in connection with the boarding, handling, training, care or breeding of such animals for which any fee is charged. Household pets whose handling, training, care or breeding is incidental to the status of household pets are hereby excluded from this definition. 
Apparel store means a store selling new clothing for men, women or children at retail. 
Appliance repair means the repairing and servicing of common household appliances, such as washing machines, television sets, power tools, electric razors, radios and refrigerators. 
Appliance sales means the sale of common household appliances, such as washing machines, television sets, power tools, electric razors, radios and refrigerators, and the repair of the same types of appliances as are sold on the premises where such repairs are incidental or accessory to the sale of such types of appliances. 
Arbor means a latticework bower or archway with no more than two posts or colonnades. 
Architectural lighting means outdoor lighting directed at buildings, facades, structures, monuments and other architectural features. 
Area of sign means the same as defined in section 98-333(9). 
Assisted living units means any premises within a continuing care retirement community in which food, shelter, or personal assistance or supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours for one or more adults who are not relatives of the operator and who require assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet or medication prescribed for self-administration, but do not require hospitalization or care in a skilled nursing facility. 
Auto accessory store means a store engaged primarily in the business of selling tires, batteries, seat covers and other automobile accessories. 
Automobile repair and washing means the repairing and servicing of motor vehicles, including body work, and the washing of motor vehicles. 
Automobile sales means the sale or rental of new and used automobiles and other motor vehicles in operating condition, including the storage of automobiles and other vehicles in operating condition and the repair and servicing of such vehicles. 
Automobile service station means a building or other structure and surrounding land used for the storage and sale of petroleum fuel primarily to passenger vehicles and for accessory uses, such as the sale of lubricants, accessories or supplies, the incidental washing of motor vehicles and the performing of minor repairs. 
Average horizontal footcandle means the average level of illuminance for a given situation measured at ground level with the light meter placed parallel to the ground. 
Awning means a rooflike cover that is temporary in nature and that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements. 
Bakery, retail, means a store engaged in the sale at retail of breads, cakes, cookies and other similar items, including the baking of such items on the premises, but excluding the baking of such items for delivery to wholesale customers or for door-to-door sale or delivery to retail customers. 
Banks and financial institutions means commercial banks, currency exchanges, savings and loan associations, brokerage offices and other similar financial institutions, but not including loan offices, finance companies and pawnshops. 
Basement means that portion of a building that is greater than one-half story below the average existing grade, as measured at the four corners of the building or structure located nearest to the corners of the lot. 
Bay addition means an extension of interior floor space which protrudes from the façade of a structure whether with or without a foundation which includes open space from the finished floor to the ceiling without a window seat, bench, shelf, or other barrier internal to the space which obstructs the floor area. 
Bay window means an oriel, bow or similar addition which protrudes from the facade of a structure and shall include a window seat, bench, shelf, or other barrier internal to the space obstructing the floor area of the addition from the ceiling, and shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of section 98-213(b). 
Beam means a concentrated shaft of light. 
Beverage distributors means warehouses for the storage and distribution of beer, soft drinks and other beverages, but not including bottling plants and similar industrial uses. 
Block means the land adjoining one side of a street between two consecutive junctions of such street with streets, railway rights-of-way or waterways crossing or meeting such side of such street. 
Board means the same as defined in section 98-43(a). 
Brewpub means a full-service restaurant where beer is brewed or manufactured on the premises, with the primary distribution being in the adjoining full-service restaurant. 
Building means any covered structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. 
Building, principal. See the definition in this section of the term Principal building. 
Bulb means a source of electric light. 
Bulk regulations means regulations controlling the size of buildings or other structures and the relationships of buildings, structures and uses to each other and to open areas and lot lines. Bulk regulations include regulations controlling: 
(1)  Maximum height. 
(2)  Minimum lot size. 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. 
(5)  Minimum size of yards and setbacks. 
Bus means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
Business and professional offices means the office of an engineer, doctor, dentist, attorney, real estate broker, insurance broker, architect or other similar professional person, and any office used primarily for accounting, correspondence, research, editing or administration. 
Candela means a unit of luminous intensity commonly referred to as "one candle power." 
Canopy means any structure, movable or stationary, attached to and deriving its support from framework or posts, or other means independent of a connected structure for the purpose of shielding a platform, stoop or sidewalk from the elements. 
Changeable copy sign, manual, means a sign on which copy is changed manually in the field (i.e., reader boards with changeable letters, numbers or pictorial panels). 
Club, private. See the definition in this section of the term Private club. 
Compatible retail use means a business establishment which is compatible with the central shopping area of the Village. A particular business establishment is compatible with the shopping area if locating the particular business establishment in the shopping area will: 
(1)  Increase interchange of customers with other business establishments in the shopping area; and 
(2)  Not create: 
a.  Dead spots where a shopper loses interest in going further; 
b.  Driveways or other physical breaks in the sidewalk which are larger than required to provide necessary off-street parking and loading; 
c.  Traffic hazard, noise, odor, unsightliness or other pedestrian-inhibiting qualities; or 
d.  Heavily increased nonshopper traffic. 
The presence or absence of competition between the particular business establishment and surrounding establishments shall not be considered a factor in determining compatibility. 
Conditional use means a use which is limited to public and quasi-public uses affected with the public interest, or uses which may have unique, special or unusual impact upon the use or enjoyment of neighboring property, meeting reasonable conditions and standards, and permitted only after a public hearing. 
Continuing care retirement community (CCRC) means a planned residential development intended for individuals 62 years of age or older, or couples at least one member of which is 62 years of age or older. The CCRC shall be distinguished from other forms of residential development by the fact that it shall include a licensed nursing care facility as an integral part of the development. The licensed nursing home component shall be developed and created in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Illinois Administrative Code as such provisions are administered and enforced by the relevant agencies. The CCRC shall also provide facilities for varying degrees of assisted living for residents and other such accessory uses that may be appropriate for a CCRC. The form of business structure of the development (i.e. rental, endowment, condominium, etc.) is irrelevant to a determination that it is a CCRC. 
Cooking space means an area used for food preparation including the use of kitchen appliances including stoves, ranges, ovens, microwaves, refrigerators, freezers, mixing equipment, blenders, and similar appliances but shall exclude secondary beverage service areas improved with only bar counters, sinks, compact refrigerators, freestanding freezers, dishwashers, and/or wine cellars. 
Corner lot means a lot which adjoins the point of intersection or meeting of a street or two or more streets and in which the interior angle formed by the street lines is 135 degrees or less. If the street lines are curved, the angle shall be measured at the point of intersection of the extensions of the street lines in the directions which they take at the intersections of the street line with the side lot line and with the rear lot line of the lot. If the street line is curved at its point of intersection with the side lot line or rear lot line, the tangent to the curve at that point shall be considered the direction of the street line. 
Craft brewery means an establishment where beer is manufactured in quantities not exceeding those prescribed by the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 for a Craft Brewer's License. The establishment may include a tasting room where beer manufactured onsite is served. Craft breweries granted conditional uses in the Downtown, B-1, B-2, B-3, and MURC districts shall manufacture less than 157,500 gallons annually. 
Cutoff fixture means a fixture that provides a cutoff (shielding) of the emitted light. 
Day care center means any State licensed child facility receiving three or more children for daytime care during all or part of the day. Such term includes facilities commonly referred to as "infant and toddler centers," "child care centers," "day nurseries," "private kindergartens" and "play groups," and includes after school programs for young school-age children and centers or workshops for mentally or physically handicapped children. 
Day care home means a family home which receives up to a maximum of eight children under the age of six between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. The maximum number of 12 children includes the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of 12 years. Such facility must be licensed by the State department of children and family services (DCFS). If the family home is licensed by DCFS as a group day care home, then an additional four children who are attending school full time may be accepted in the day care home, provided that all licensing standards of DCFS are met. All day care homes shall comply with the rules and regulations of the State fire marshall's office. For all day care home licensees existing in the Village as of March 6, 2007, the maximum number of children under the age of six shall remain 12. 
Depth, lot. See the definition in this section of the term Lot depth. 
Disability means a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities or impairs their ability to live independently, or a record of having such impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current use of or addiction to a controlled substance. 
Downtown frame neighborhood means the limits of the area depicted on figure 6 of the Village comprehensive plan and is generally described as those properties zoned as the RT-8 district or R-18 district and located within the area bounded by Grove Street on the north; Waukegan Road on the east; Linneman Street (east of the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Railroad tracks) on the south; and Washington Street on the west. 
Dry cleaning and laundry depot means an establishment or business operated or maintained for the pickup and delivery of dry cleaning and/or laundry without the maintenance or operation of any laundry or dry cleaning equipment or machinery on the premises. 
Dry cleaning plant means an establishment in which clothing and other fabrics are dry cleaned professionally and shall comply with the following restrictions: 
(1)  The hours of operation shall be from 7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m., Monday—Saturday; 
(2)  The facility would not do work for other dropoff locations; 
(3)  There shall be no outside storage of cleaning solvents or residue; 
(4)  All equipment used in the process of cleaning will not emit any odors to the exterior of the building; 
(5)  There shall be no more than one vehicle used in connection with the business; 
(6)  When applying for or renewing a business license, a report from a trained maintenance representative shall be submitted, certifying that the equipment meets factory standards and that all operators have been properly trained on the use of the equipment. 
Dry cleaning, self-service, means an establishment providing facilities with which customers may dry clean their own clothes or other fabrics. 
Dwelling, multiple-family. See the definition in this section of the term Multiple-family dwelling. 
Dwelling, single-family. See the definition in this section of the term Single-family dwelling. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a residential building or residential portion of a building which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use by one family, and which includes one indoor cooking space and lawful sanitary facilities reserved for the occupants thereof. 
Eave height means, for a peaked roof, the vertical height, measured at the four most distant corners of a building, between the lowest point of the roof covering material and the average existing grade, and for a flat roof, the vertical height, measured at the four most distant corners of a building, between the highest point of the parapet and average existing grade. For purposes of this definition, the term "average grade" means the existing grade prior to commencement of construction, including demolition, as measured at the four corners of the building or structure located nearest the lot corners. 
Efficiency means a measure of the effective or useful output of a system compared to the input of the system. 
Elderly means: 
(1)  A family, the head of which, or his spouse, is 62 years of age or older; 
(2)  The surviving members of any family described in subsection (1) of this definition living in the same unit with the deceased member of the family at the time of his death; 
(3)  A single person who is 62 years of age or older; or 
(4)  A physically handicapped, nonelderly person between the ages of 18 and 62 years, having a physical impairment which is expected to be of a long continued and indefinite duration, is a substantial impediment to his ability to live independently and is of a nature that such ability could be improved by more suitable housing conditions. Where a senior citizen's housing facility, as defined from time to time in this Code, contains units specifically designed for the occupancy of the physically handicapped, a person shall be permitted to occupy the unit with the physically handicapped nonelderly person, if such occupancy is certified by a licensed physician's certification and approved by any governmental body, if such approval is required to comply with any contractual obligations with that governmental body, to be essential to the care and well-being of the physically handicapped person. 
Family means either: 
(1)  An individual or two or more persons, related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or 
(2)  A group of not more than four persons, who need not be related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; 
plus, in either case, usual domestic servants. 
Family community residence means a single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of five—eight unrelated persons, plus paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency either living with the residents on a 24-hour basis or present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the dwelling, and couples with the zoning regulations for the district in which the site is located. 
Fence means a freestanding barrier device constructed of metal, masonry, composition or wood, or any combination thereof, and designed for exclusion, confinement or screening, provided such device shall not be electrically charged and, except with respect to restricted areas of public utilities and potentially dangerous installations or enclosures protecting livestock, barbed wire shall not be used in or adjacent to any residential district. 
Floodlight means a luminaire intended to illuminate a large area by "flooding" it with light, and which can produce light above the luminaire. A floodlight concentrates the light output into a direct beam in a particular direction by using a reflector or a refractor. 
Floor area means the area, measured at floor level, contained between the exterior wall surfaces of a building or other structure or, in the case of rooms, between the exterior wall surface of the building and the center of the enclosing partitions, or between the centerlines of partitions where no exterior wall is affected. (See also section 98-293.) 
Floor area ratio (FAR) means the floor area of a structure, divided by the lot area on which the structure is located. The area (square footage) of noninhabitable spaces, such as the attic, basement and garage, shall not constitute floor area for purposes of determining floor area ratios. 
Foodstore means a store which sell foods, fresh or frozen, and other items commonly sold in connection therewith, and including, but not limited to, stores commonly referred to as "dairy stores," "delicatessens," "fruit and vegetable markets," "groceries," "health food stores," "nut shops" and "supermarkets." Sales must be made at retail on the premises, but not for consumption on the premises. 
Footcandle means the basic unit of illuminance striking a horizontal plane. Footcandle measurement is taken with a light meter. One footcandle is approximately equal to the illuminance produced by a light source of one candela in intensity, measured on a surface at a one foot distance from the source. 
Fountain and similar water feature means an ornamental structure from which one or more jets of water are pumped into the air and shall be deemed to include sculptures and statuary with such features, cascades, waterfalls, and similar accessory uses which do not achieve minimum thresholds for classification as pools or pool systems per chapter 18. 
Frontage means the length of a front lot line. 
Front lot line. See the definition in this section of the term Lot line, front. 
Front wall. See the definition in this section of the term Wall, front. 
Front yard. See the definition in this section of the term Yard, front. 
Frozen food locker means an establishment primarily devoted to furnishing facilities for the storage of frozen foods. 
Full-cutoff fixture means a fixture that allows no emission above a horizontal plane through the fixture. 
Fully shielded means a luminaire constructed and installed in such a manner that all light emitted by it is projected below the horizontal. 
Gatehouse means an enclosed building or shelter, the sole and only purpose of which shall be to house a gate attendant for security purposes. 
Glare means the sensation produced by a bright source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. The magnitude of glare depends on such factors as the size, position, brightness of the source, and on the brightness level to which the eyes are adapted. 
Ground sign means any sign placed upon or supported by the ground independently of the main building or structure on the property. Signs on accessory structures shall be considered ground signs. 
Group community residence means a single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of nine—15 unrelated persons with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a 24-hour basis or present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the dwelling, and complies with the zoning regulations for the district in which the site is located. 
Headend facility means the signal reception, control and processing equipment used to distribute signals by means of coaxial cable to franchised cable system subscribers and users. Such equipment may include antennas and towers, TVRO equipment and accessories, receivers, processing equipment, modulators and demodulators, scramblers and descramblers, preamplifiers and amplifiers, monitors, signal combiners and microwave earth stations. 
Height, maximum, means a horizontal plane above the average of the existing grade (the average grade prior to commencement of construction, including demolition, as measured at the four corners of the building or structure located nearest the lot corners) of the ground at the height shown in the district regulations of which no part of any building or structure shall project through such plane, except: 
(1)  Chimneys, flues, stacks, fire escapes, gas holders, elevator enclosures, penthouses, ventilators, skylights, water tanks and similar roof structures needed to operate and maintain the building on which they are located may extend 12 feet above the portion of the roof on which they are located. 
(2)  For flagpoles, water towers and tanks, steeples, monuments, cupolas, silos and barns. 
(3)  For television reception antennas or dishes specifically designed for residential application, but only to a height of 12 feet above the roof upon which they are located or the maximum height listed in the district bulk requirements, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Freestanding telecommunications antennas or towers shall be no taller in height that the distance, in lineal feet, from the base of such tower to any adjacent lot line which abuts a residential lot or property zoned residential. 
Helicopter means any rotary wing aircraft which depends principally, for its support and motion in the air, upon the lift generated by one or more power-driven rotors, rotating on a substantially vertical axis. 
Heliport, helipad and helistop mean any area of land, water or structural surface which is designed, used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are designed, used or intended to be used for a heliport, helipad or helistop building or other facilities which have received a certificate of approval from the division of aeronautics of the State department of transportation, or any area designed, used or intended to be used by any helicopter which has received a certificate of registration as a special purpose aircraft from such division of aeronautics. 
Holiday lighting means temporary lighting with small individual low wattage bulbs. 
Home center means a store engaged in the retail sale of hardware, power tools, paneling, roofing materials and light lumber materials, such as molding, doors, windows and trim. 
Hospice means a licensed facility providing residential care for terminally-ill patients that includes skilled nursing care for the management of pain and acute and chronic symptoms. 
Hospital means an institution composed of one or more structures dedicated to medical care and treatment, and which includes facilities devoted to surgery, and one or more of the other medical specialties, emergency treatment, and medical and scientific research. 
Hotel. See the definition in this section of the terms Motel and hotel. 
Hotel, extended stay, means a business establishment in which shortterm or longterm lodging to temporary guests is provided to the public for compensation, with the sole ingress and egress to the rooms through an inside lobby supervised at all hours. Each unit may include food storage and a cooking facility designed for daily, weekly and monthly occupancy. Additional services, such as maid service, furnishing and laundering of linens, telephone and desk service and the use and upkeep of furniture, are also provided. A person shall not occupy an extended stay hotel accommodation as his domicile and/or place of permanent residence for the purpose of attending local schools or to receive park or library services. 
Identification sign means the principal sign identifying the business conducted on the premises. 
Illuminance means the amount of light falling on a surface, typically measured in footcandles and correlates with the perception of brightness by the human eye. 
Infill lot means any lot which is bounded on any front, side, or rear by a lot with an existing residence. 
Internet service establishment means a business establishment of which its primary or ancillary activity is providing for the on-site use of personal computers to the public for access to the internet, including but not limited to access to certain software, e-mail, and internet games, excluding games of chance or skill for money or other thing of value, or wagering upon the result of any game, contest, political nomination or election in violation of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/28-1 et seq. 
Landscape lighting means outdoor lighting directed at trees, shrubs, plants, flower beds, fountains, gardens and other natural or landscaped features. 
Laundry means an establishment in which clothing and other fabrics are laundered professionally. 
Laundry depot. See the definitions in this section of the terms Dry cleaning and Laundry depot. 
Laundry, self-service, means an establishment providing facilities with which customers may launder their own clothes or other fabrics. 
Light source means any device serving as a source of illumination. 
Light pollution means any adverse effect by manmade light. Often used to denote urban sky glow. 
Light trespass means light falling where it is not wanted or needed, typically across property boundaries. Spill light or obtrusive light. 
Lodginghouse means a business establishment which provides sleeping and living quarters, but not individual cooking facilities, in immovable structures, on a weekly or monthly basis. 
Lot means a parcel of land which is described and made a part of a plat of a subdivision that has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds or registrar of titles of the county, that is designated by its owner or developer at the time of applying for a permit for construction of a new building, enlargement of an existing building (excluding work performed solely on the interior of the building), exterior building additions, garages, accessory structures, parking lots and generally any other improvement which would be reflected on a plat of survey as a tract of land, all of which is to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership. The division of any lot or parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds description shall not be considered as a lot by the Village. 
Lot, corner. See the definition in this section of the term Corner lot. 
Lot coverage means the percentage of a lot which, when viewed directly from above, would be covered by a building or any part thereof, excluding projecting roof eaves. 
Lot depth means the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line. 
Lot line means the lot boundary line. (See also the definitions in this section of the terms Lot line, front, Lot line, rear, and Lot line, side. 
Lot line, front, means a street line forming the boundary of a lot. For a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the narrowest of the two frontage dimensions. In the case of two equally dimensioned frontages, the front lot line shall be along the street with more lots. For a lot bounded by two nonintersecting streets (through lot), the lot lines along such streets shall each be deemed as a front lot line for the purpose of this chapter. 
Lot line, rear, means the lot line that is most distant from, and is, or is most nearly, parallel to, the front lot line. If a rear lot line is less than 15 feet in length, or if the lot comes to a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be at least 15 feet in length, lying wholly within the lot, parallel to the front lot line. 
Lot line, side, means a lot line which is neither a front lot line, nor a rear lot line. 
Lot size means the area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines. For determining lot size for use in the formulas contained within subsections 98-101(b)(3) and 98-101(b)(4), any land area contained within any recorded roadway easement or ingress and egress easement shall be excluded from the area comprising the horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and rear lot lines. 
Lot width means the distance on a horizontal plane between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at the minimum front yard setback established by applicable provisions of this chapter. 
Lumen means a unit of luminous flux used to measure the amount of light that is produced by a light source. It quantifies the amount of light energy produced by a lamp. 
Luminaire means the complete lighting fixture, including the bulb and the assembly that holds the bulb (or lamp) in a lighting system, as well as reflecting elements, shielding elements, cover glass or lenses, the ballast, and the housing. 
Main floor means the floor of a building which is closest to the level of the ground in front of the building. 
Maximum building size (MBS) means the cumulative total square footage of a building, based on the outside dimensions of the building, including related accessory buildings, such as attached or detached garages, whether above or below grade, guesthouses and pool houses, and bay additions, excluding sheds, detached gazebos, open porches, bay windows, basements and attics. Calculation of square footage shall be measured at a point no greater than six feet above the floor surface of each story. When calculating the MBS, the area of the lot shall be: 
(1)  The lot size, as defined in this chapter; or 
(2)  For lots in which the length of the lot is greater than three times the width of the lot, an area calculated by multiplying the lot width by three times the lot width. 
Maximum height. See the definition in this section of the term Height, maximum. 
Mortuary means a funeral home or chapel. 
Motel and hotel mean a business establishment in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation, with ingress and egress to the rooms through an inside lobby supervised at all hours. A motel or hotel provides services, such as maid service, furnishing and laundering of linens, telephone and desk service, and the use and upkeep of furniture. Such terms shall not include cooking facilities in any of the lodging rooms. 
Mounting height means the distance from level ground to the lowest light-emitting part of the luminaire. 
Multiple-family dwelling means a residential building containing two or more dwelling units. 
Nonconformity means an existing use, building or structure which fails to comply in some respect with the use or bulk regulations applicable to new uses, buildings or structures in the district in which it is located. 
Noxious matter means material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic well-being of individuals. 
Nursery school means any child care facility which receives more than eight children for daytime care for all or part of the day. 
Nursing home means an institution for the care of children, the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but not including facilities for surgical care. 
Odor threshold means the lowest concentration of odorous substance in the air which will produce an odor sensation. 
Office. See the definition in this section of the term Business and professional offices. 
Open off-street parking means any parking space provided wherein the vehicle, when parked, is not enclosed by walls and a roof. Off-street parking spaces located in open sided structures, such as carports or other shelters, shall constitute open off-street parking. 
Outdoor parking means the parking of any standing vehicle not completely enclosed by roofed and walled structures. 
Outdoor storage means a completely screened area where materials, products, goods and refuse relating to the principal permitted use are stored. Such term shall not include the sales, servicing, maintenance, assembly, processing, compounding, packaging, manufacturing or advertising of such materials within the storage area. 
Particulate matter means dust, smoke or any other form of air-borne pollution in the form of minute separate particles. 
Pergola means a structure comprised of three or more posts or colonnades supporting an open roof of girders, with or without cross-rafters or open trellis roofing. 
Perimeter wall means an accessory use comprised of either a masonry or stone barrier established around the perimeter of an interior space, but excluding retaining walls or walls of a building, and may be situated within a required yard or setback subject to the provisions of section 98-213(b). 
Permanent cosmetics, microblading, micropigmentation, and similar personal care services. The practice of placing ink or other pigment into the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to puncture the skin for the purpose of permanent cosmetic restoration or enhancement of the dermis for re-pigmentation. This category of services does not include other forms of body art such as body piercing or the adornment of the body with letters, images, drawings, or other illustrations. The use is also commonly known as dermal implantation, microstroking, eyebrow embroidery, and long-time/long-lasting makeup. 
Permitted obstructions in required yards means accessory uses that may be situated within a required yard or setback subject to the provisions of section 98-213(b). 
Pet shop means any establishment or premises where the business of buying, selling or dealing in birds, dogs, cats or other small animals or household pets, and for domestic purposes, is conducted, operated, managed or carried on. 
Physicians office building means a structure devoted to providing office space for doctors of medicine and related professionals. 
Photometrics means technical test reports that indicate light distribution and performance from a luminaire. 
Principal building means a nonaccessory building in which is conducted a principal use of the lot on which the building is located. 
Principal use means the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. 
Private club means an association organized and operated not for profit, or persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases the premises, and the use of such premises being restricted to such members and their guests. The affairs and management of such association are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting. The serving of food and meals on such premises is not prohibited, provided, adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests is not prohibited, provided, it is secondary and incidental to the promotion of some other common objective of the organization, and, further provided, that such sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with all applicable federal, State, county and local laws. 
Private country club means a premises used primarily as a golf club, with a minimum regulation 18-hole golf course facility, organized and maintained as a corporation not for profit and operated solely for and by members paying annual dues and conducted and managed by a board of directors or similar body chosen by such members. Accessory uses compatible with the primary use are permissible if such uses are in a category of social, recreational, educational and/or athletic purposes. (Also see the definition in this section of the term Private club for food and liquor provisions.) 
Rear lot line. See the definition in this section of the term Lot line, rear. 
Rear wall. See the definition in this section of the term Wall, rear. 
Rear yard. See the definition in this section of the term Yard, rear. 
Recreational equipment means temporary or permanent accessory structures, devices, or other equipment used to facilitate sport, exercise, a hobbycraft, or pastime. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle originally designed or permanently converted and used for living quarters or human habitation and not used as a commercial vehicle, including any house car, house trailer, camper or private living coach. 
Refuse and junk mean waste (including products used or spent, trash, refuse, scrap, junk (including wrecked motor vehicles), garbage, ashes, rubbish, dregs or leavings, whether in containers or not (except litter containers placed for the convenience of the public), and which is caused, allowed or permitted on the lot by an occupier thereof. 
Residential building means a building, all or part of which contains one or more dwelling units, including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings, but excluding hostelries, house trailers, lodginghouses, dormitories, sororities and fraternities, nurses' residences, sanitariums, nursing homes and convalescent homes. 
Restaurant, carry-out food service means a business which is accessory to a full service restaurant or commercial retail establishment which sells food or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design or method of operation includes serving foods or beverages in edible containers or in paper, plastic, Styrofoam, or other disposable containers. This does not include mobile food vendors regulated by Chapter 38, Article III, or temporary uses regulated by Article 6, Part 5 of this Chapter. 
Restaurant, delivery food service means a business whose principal purpose, or which is accessory to a full service restaurant or limited service restaurant, is to provide delivery of food or beverages for immediate consumption and which has three or more delivery vehicles. 
Restaurant, full service means a business whose principal purpose is the sale and on-site consumption of food or beverages, where items are ordered from an individual menu and served by wait staff on non-disposable tableware. This shall not include a limited service restaurant or convenience food mart. 
Restaurant, limited service means a business whose principal purpose is the sale of food or beverages where the food or beverages which is paid for before consumption, or are ordered from a fixed menu board, or are served in non-disposable containers, or paper, plastic, Styrofoam, or other disposable containers for immediate consumption on or off the premises. 
Restaurant, drive-in food and beverage service means any business engaged in the sale of food and/or beverages as a primary or accessory use which is designed or intended to enable a customer, without exiting a motor vehicle parked on or moving through the premises, to transact business with a person outside the motor vehicle to patrons remaining in a vehicle. 
Screening means structures or evergreen vegetation maintained for the purpose of concealing from view the area behind such structures or evergreen vegetation. 
Self-storage miniwarehouse facility means separate storage units of varying sizes leased, rented or owned by the general public on an individual basis. Such term shall exclude storage of explosives, fats, oils, gasoline or other fuel and may include not more than one on-site residential unit for an operator or site manager. 
Senior citizen See the definition in this section of the term Elderly. 
Senior citizen housing facility means new construction of multifamily dwelling units or remodeling of existing multifamily dwelling units, designed for and intended to be occupied and used solely by elderly persons and families, provided that such persons and families shall have an income not in excess of the amounts which may be established by the board of trustees by resolution. 
Setback means the distance between a reference line, which shall be a public or private right-of-way or easement, whichever shall be applicable, and a building, or portion thereof, on the lot in question. In the case of a lot adjoining a public or private street right-of-way, the setback shall be the difference between such right-of-way line and the building closest to the right-of-way on the lot. In the case of an unrecorded easement, the building and zoning director shall determine the setback in a manner which will provide a reasonably consistent setback. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, an adult cabaret, an adult media store, an adult motion picture theater, an adult novelty store, an adult theater, a nude model studio or a sexual encounter center, as more fully provided in article XXIII of chapter 22. 
Shield means full or partial control of a light fixture's output to minimize or prevent the direct view of the light-emitting surface from an adjacent property. 
Side lot line. See the definition in this section of the term Lot line, side. 
Side wall. See the definition in this section of the term Wall, side. 
Side yard. See the definition in this section of the term Yard, side. 
Sign means any writing (including letters, words or numerals), pictorial representation (including illustrations or decorations), emblem (including devices, symbols or trademarks), flag, banner, streamer, pennant, string of lights or display calculated to attract the attention of the public, or any other figure of similar character which is: 
(1)  A structure, or any part thereof, or a portable display, or is attached to, painted on or in any other manner represented on a building or other structure or on the ground; 
(2)  Used to announce, direct attention to or advertise; and 
(3)  Not located inside a building. 
Holiday related lighting or structures shall not constitute signage when displayed in accordance with section 98-217(7). 
Sign area means the same as defined in section 98-333(9). 
Sign, window, means any writing (including letters, words, or numerals, but excluding signs described in section 98-332(b)(4)), pictorial representation (excluding illustrations or decorations of a civic, holiday, religious, political or other noncommercial theme), emblem (including devices, symbols, or trademarks), flag (except as permitted in section 98-332(b)(1)), banner, streamer, pennant, string of lights, or display calculated to attract the attention of the public, or any other figure of similar character which: 
(1)  Is a structure or any part thereof, or a portable display, or is attached to, painted on, or in any other manner represented on interior storefront glass; 
(2)  Is used to announce, direct attention to or advertise; and 
(3)  Is located within 48 inches of the storefront glass as measured from the interior window pane of the glass. 
Single-family dwelling means a residential building containing one dwelling unit only. 
Single ownership means ownership by an individual, partnership, corporation, cooperative or condominium having control over exterior maintenance of buildings and grounds. 
Sky glow means illumination of the night sky by electric lights, as in an urban area. 
Specialty school means a school offering instruction in languages, arts, business skills, trades, crafts and other specialties, but excluding any instruction involving the use of heavy machinery or any instruction conducted outdoors. 
Sports court means an accessory use comprised of any natural or artificial surface used to facilitate sport, exercise, a hobbycraft, or pastime. 
Sports complex means a single building or multiple buildings containing facilities for multiple sports uses and located on a single site. A sports complex may contain athletic facilities for, but shall not be limited to, an ice center, aquatic center, racquet sports center, sports practice facility, etc., as well as accessory uses. Sports complexes shall predominantly be used for the provision of athletic facilities and not the public display of athletic contests. However, seating for the viewing of athletic contests may be provided in accordance with limits on maximum seating applicable in each district in which such use is authorized. 
Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. 
Street means a private or public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access to property abutting such private or public right-of-way, except driveways to buildings. 
Street line means a line forming the boundary of a public or private right-of-way for an existing or dedicated street. 
Structural alteration means any change, other than incidental repairs, which would prolong the life of supporting members of a building or other structure, such as bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders. 
Tasting room means a room accessory only to a craft brewery in which beer is available for sampling and purchase. 
Tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products have the meanings ascribed to them in Section 1 of the State of Illinois Prevention of Tobacco Use by Persons under 21 Years of Age and Sale and Distribution of Tobacco Products Act. Land uses deemed to be comprised of the sale of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products include any retail establishment that derives more than 80 percent of its gross revenue from the sale of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. Land uses deemed to be comprised of the use of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products include any business offers for use tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business where smoke from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited which further qualifies for an exemption from the State of Illinois Smoke Free Illinois Act. 
Toxic matter means material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts. 
Trailer means a vehicle without motive power in operation, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
Training school means a building, the primary use and purpose of which is the training of individuals in business skills and trades, but excluding any training involving the use of heavy machinery or any training conducted outdoors, and, provided further, that the use and training set forth in this definition is not independent of, but is subordinate to and serves, a principal building or principal use, the location of which is not in excess of one-half mile from the training facility. 
Transitional means an area in which the existing use has resulted in a state of arrested development compared to developments in other areas within a one-half mile radius and concerning which a determination, after public hearing, has been made that the public interest would be better served if the area be rezoned to RT-8. Evidence of arrested development shall include the lack of proper and adequate public utilities, unpaved streets or undeveloped lots. 
Trellis means a frame or structure of latticework comprised of no more than two posts or colonnades. 
Truck means a motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
Undeveloped lot means a lot which is devoted to some use, but on which no building or structure has been erected, provided that used car lots, public parking lots or lots devoted to similar uses, on which are located only buildings which are merely accessory to the use of the open land, shall also be considered undeveloped lots. 
Uniformity ratio means a ratio that describes uniformity of luminance across an area. The uniformity ratio shall be a ratio of the average-to-minimum luminance. 
Uplight means light projected above the horizontal. 
Use means any purpose for which a building, other structure or tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied, and also includes any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land. 
Vibration means the periodic displacement of earth. 
Wall, front, means that portion of the structure, excluding the attached garage, which is equal to or greater than 50 percent of the front elevation of the residence. For structures other than single-family residences, the front wall is the wall of a building which is nearest to, and most nearly parallel to, the front lot line of the lot on which the building is located. 
Wall, rear, means the wall of a building which is nearest and most nearly parallel to the rear lot line of the lot on which the building is located. 
Wall, side, means any wall of a building, other than a front wall or a rear wall. 
Wall packs means compact, commercial lights that mount on the side of a wall of a building. 
Wall sign means a sign placed on a wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes merely the supporting structure, or in which the wall forms the background surface. 
Warehouse means a structure or building adapted for hire for the storage and receipt of goods and merchandise as contrasted to separate storage units of varying sizes leased, rented or owned by the general public on an individual basis. A warehouse shall exclude the storage of explosives, fats, oils, gasoline or other fuel, and may include not more than one on-site residential unit for an operator or a site manager. 
Width, lot. See the definition in this section of the term Lot width. 
Window area means the gross surface area of the glazed or otherwise nonopaque portion (doors or fenestrations) of a wall. 
Yard means open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except for accessory uses and other structures to the extent provided per article IV. 
Yard, front, means a yard extending along the full length of a front lot line and back to a line drawn parallel to the front lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard. When a lot fronts onto two nonintersecting streets (through lot), the front yard shall be determined to be on the street to which all of the houses along that block are oriented, and the opposite yard shall be treated as a rear yard. Children's playhouses and/or playground equipment may be located in the rear yard of a through lot, subject to the provisions of section 98-47. When a rear yard on a through lot abuts a front yard of a lot fronting on the opposite side of a right-of-way, all detached accessory structures shall meet the minimum front yard setback, excluding requirements for accessory structures, of the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
Yard, rear, means a yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line, except as qualified in the definition in this section of the term Yard, side, and back to a line drawn parallel to the rear lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required rear yard. 
Yard, side, means a yard extending along a side lot line and back to a line drawn parallel to the side lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the width of the required minimum side yard, but excluding any area encompassed within a front yard or rear yard, except that, for corner lots, the side yard adjacent to the street shall encompass the rear yard to the rear lot line. Dimensions of minimum side yards specified in the district regulations of this chapter refer to the required width of each side yard, rather than to the total width of both side yards, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1959, § 24.15.2; Ord. No. 4000, § 2, 11-3-1998; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4554, § 3, 8-5-2003; Ord. No. 4556, §§ 6—8, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 4588, § 6, 11-4-2003; Ord. No. 4817, § 3, 12-6-2005; Ord. No. 4959, § 2, 3-6-2007; Ord. No. 5182, § 2, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 5369, § 2, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 5394, § 4, 11-16-2010; Ord. No. 5444, § 4, 4-21-2011; Ord. No. 5579, § 3, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 5704, § 2, 9-17-2013; Ord. No. 5716, § 2, 11-5-2013; Ord. No. 5747, § 2, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 5793, § 2, 5-6-2014; Ord. No. 5886, § 2, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 6058, § 2, 12-6-2016; Ord. No. 6228, § 2, 12-4-2018; Ord. No. 6279, § 5, 9-3-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-5. - Interpretation. 
(a)  Minimum requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare. 
(b)  Overlapping or contradictory regulations. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the use of land or buildings are either more or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive shall govern. 
(c)  Private agreements. This chapter is not intended to abrogate, annul or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or legal relationship; provided, however, that where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants or other private agreements or legal relationships, the regulations of this chapter shall govern. 
(d)  Unlawful uses. No building, structure or use which was not lawfully existing on June 29, 1964, shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and to the extent and in any respect that such unlawful building, structure or use is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter, such building, structure or use remains unlawful under this chapter. 
(e)  Nonlicensing chapter. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to be a consent, license or permit to use any property or to locate, construct or maintain any building, structure or facility or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation or activity. 
(Code 1959, § 24.15.3; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-6. - Separability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of trustees of the Village that the several provisions of this chapter are separable, in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of this chapter. 
(2)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property, building or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of such provision to any other property, building or structure. 
(Code 1959, § 24.15.4; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-7. - Retroactive effect. 
(a)  Existing building permits Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building or other structure if: 
(1)  A building permit for such building or other structure was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (June 29, 1964); 
(2)  Such permit had not, by its own terms, expired prior to such effective date; 
(3)  Such permit was issued on the basis of an application showing complete plans for proposed construction; 
(4)  There has been a substantial change of position, expenditures or incurrence of obligations by the permit holder in reliance on such permit or in reasonable expectation of its issuance; 
(5)  Such change of position, expenditures or incurrence of obligations was made prior to published or actual notice of a proposed amendment to this chapter, which amendment would have made illegal the issuance of such permit; and 
(6)  Construction pursuant to such permit is completed prior to the expiration of the permit. 
(b)  Occupancy certificates. When a building or structure is completed under a permit to which subsection (a) of this section applies, an occupancy certificate shall be issued in accordance with the zoning regulations in effect at the time the building permit was issued. 
(Code 1959, § 24.15.5; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-8. - Violations; penalties. 
A person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25.00, nor more than $500.00. Each day such violation or failure to comply is permitted to exist after notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1959, § 24.14.13; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Secs. 98-9—98-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 98-41. - Vestment. 
The administration of this chapter is hereby vested in the following three offices of the Village: 
(1)  The director of development. 
(2)  The zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  The plan commission. 
(Code 1959, § 24.14.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 2, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-42. - Director of development. 
The director of development or the duly designated and acting deputy shall: 
(1)  Enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Approve and issue all occupancy certificates and make and maintain records thereof. 
(3)  Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter. 
(4)  Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments and conditional uses, variations, appeals and applications therefore, and records of hearings thereon. 
(5)  Prepare, and cause to be published on or before March 31 of each year, a map showing the existing zoning uses, divisions, restrictions, regulations and classifications in effect on the preceding December 31. 
(6)  Issue a written permit, or denial thereof, with reasons in writing, within 15 days from the date of the acceptance of the application. If the permit or denial thereof is not issued within 15 days, the applicant may appeal directly to the board of appeals, which shall order the issuance of the permit or denial thereof, with reasons in writing. Prior to issuing any permit for any new construction or for any alteration which would increase the exterior dimensions of an existing structure, which construction or alteration would be located within 5,000 feet of the boundary of an airport (except a heliport) or would extend more than 50 feet above the ground level, the director of development shall require a satisfactory showing either that: 
a.  The proposed construction would not require notification to the administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency pursuant to 77 CFR tit. 14, ch. 1, subch. E (Notice of Construction or Alteration Affecting Navigable Airspace), effective December 12, 1962, as amended from time to time; or 
b.  Such notification regarding such proposed construction or alteration has been made to the administrator as provided in 77 CFR tit. 14, ch. 1, subch. E, § 77.17. 
(7)  Cause to be published on or before January 1 of each year the rules of the zoning board of appeals and plan commission in effect as of that date. 
(8)  Receive, file and forward to the zoning board of appeals for action all applications for variations, and the records in all appeals, and receive, file and forward to the plan commission for action all applications for conditional uses, planned developments, and amendments. 
(9)  To the extent that the director of development exercises any powers granted to him under subsection 98-2(2), he shall submit within 30 days thereafter a written report to the Village manager for transmittal to the board of trustees and the zoning board of appeals. 
(10)  Provide such clerical, technical and consultant assistance as may be required by the zoning board of appeals and/or the plan commission and other Village officials in the exercise of their duties related to this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 24.14.2; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 3, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-43. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5636, § 2(c), adopted Feb. 19, 2013, repealed § 98-43, which pertained to zoning board of appeals and plan commission and derived from code 1959, § 24.14.3; Ord. No. 4512, adopted Apr. 15, 2003; Ord. No. 4769, §§ 2, 3, adopted June 21, 2005; and Ord. No. 5351, §§ 4, 5, adopted June 15, 2010.  
Sec. 98-44. - Zoning certificates. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no building permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by an employee of the Village unless the application for such permit has been examined by the director of development and has affixed to it or stamped thereon a certificate of the office of the director of development that the proposed building or structure complies with all of the provisions of this chapter. Any permit or occupancy certificate issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(b)  Every application for a building permit shall have affixed to it the certificate of a registered architect or structural engineer licensed by the State, or of an owner-designer, certifying that the building or structure and the proposed use thereof comply with all of the provisions of this chapter. Within 15 days after the receipt of such application with the certificate attached thereto, the director of development shall affix a zoning certificate to the building permit, provided, all relevant provisions of this chapter are complied with, or the director of development shall refuse to issue a zoning certificate and shall advise the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the refusal. 
(Code 1959, § 24.14.4; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 6, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-45. - Plats. 
Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat showing the design and layout of all off-street parking facilities and, in addition to the information required by chapter 18, such other information as may be required by the director of development for the proper enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 24.14.5; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 7, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-46. - Occupancy certificates. 
(a)  No building, or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (June 29, 1964), and no addition to a building existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (June 29, 1964) shall be occupied, and no land vacant on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (June 29, 1964) shall be used for any purpose, until an occupancy certificate has been issued by the office of the director of development. No change in a use in any business, commercial or industrial district shall be made until an occupancy certificate has been issued by the office of the director of development. Every occupancy certificate shall state that the use or occupancy complies with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Every application for a building permit shall also be deemed to be an application for an occupancy certificate. Every application for an occupancy certificate for a new or changed use of land or building, where no building permit is required, shall be made directly to the office of the director of development. 
(c)  No occupancy certificate for a building, or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (June 29, 1964) shall be issued until construction has been completed and the premises has been inspected and certified by the office of the director of development to be in full and complete compliance with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning certificate was based. No addition to a building existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived (June 29, 1964) shall be occupied and no new use of a building in any business, commercial or industrial district shall be established until the premises has been inspected and certified by the office of the director of development to be in full and complete compliance with all the applicable standards of the zoning district in which it is located. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate may be issued to be valid for a period not to exceed six months from the date of such issuance during the completion of any addition or during partial occupancy of the premises. An occupancy certificate shall be issued or written notice shall be given to the applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued, not later than 14 days after the office of the director of development is notified, in writing, that the building or premises is ready for occupancy. 
(Code 1959, § 24.14.6; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 8, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-47. - Variations. 
(a)  Purpose. The zoning board of appeals shall vary the regulations of this chapter only in the specific instances set forth in this section, where the board makes a finding of fact, based upon the standards prescribed in this section, that the application of the strict letter of the regulations of this chapter will create practical difficulties or hardship for the owner, lessee or occupant of land, buildings or structures. 
(b)  Application and notice of hearing. A complete application for a variation, including all information as shall be required from time to time by the village, shall be filed with the director of community development, who shall forward a copy of the application to the zoning board or appeals. No more than 60 days after the filing of such application, a hearing shall be held on the application. Notice of such hearing shall be published at least once, not more than 30 days, nor less than 15 days before the hearing, in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the village. The published notice may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as the zoning board of appeals by rule may provide. 
Where the director of community development has administrative discretion, a notice of request for administrative relief shall be sent to all adjacent property owners as the zoning board of appeals by rule may provide allowing 15 days for response. If there is no response, the director of community development may grant administrative relief where applicable. If an adjacent property owner responds with any concern regarding said administrative relief, the director of community development shall forward the request to the zoning board of appeals for disposition in the form of a standard variation application. 
(c)  Standards. 
(1)  The board shall not vary the regulations of this chapter, as authorized by subsection (d) of this section, unless it shall make a finding of fact, based upon the evidence as presented to it in each specific case, that the: 
a.  Particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical condition of the specific property involved would result in a practical difficulty or hardship upon or for the owner, lessee or occupant, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulation were carried out. 
b.  Conditions upon which the petition for a variation is based are unique and would not be generally applicable to other property within the same zoning classification. 
c.  Alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property. 
d.  Granting of the variation will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located. 
e.  Proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase congestion in the public streets, increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety. 
f.  Variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. 
(2)  If all of the standards set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section cannot be met, yet an identifiable overriding public benefit can be realized by the granting of the requested variation, the zoning board of appeals shall forward a written recommendation, including a specific finding of fact of overriding public benefit, to the board of trustees for final disposition. 
(3)  The board may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards set forth in this subsection (c) to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and better to carry out the general intent of this chapter. 
(4)  For modifications to existing residential buildings on existing conforming lots upon which all bulk regulations of the applicable district have been met, the director of community development may allow, as an exception, a structure to encroach upon a front yard up to 12 inches, and upon a side or rear yard by up to six inches, without the necessity of a variation from the zoning board of appeals, provided proper notification has been given to adjacent property owners in accordance with subsection (b), and provided the standards for variations listed in subsection (c)(1) have been met. 
(d)  Commercial and industrial uses. The procedures provided for in this section with respect to the grant of variations to lots which are located within the B-1, B-2, B-3, D-D, H-1, MURC, SLE, I-1, or I-2 zoning district, or lots which are located in the R-1, R-1.3, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 or P-1 district and are utilized for commercial or industrial uses shall not apply. In lieu thereof, the procedures contained within subsection 98-50(b) shall apply to applications for variations to commercial and industrial lots. 
(e)  Authorization. Variations from the regulations of this chapter shall be recommended by the board only in accordance with the standards set forth in subsection (c) of this section, and may be granted only to: 
(1)  Vary the applicable bulk regulations, including yard, lot size, height and density requirements. 
(2)  Vary any of the regulations contained in article V of this chapter pertaining to nonconformities. 
(3)  Vary any of the regulations contained in article VI of this chapter pertaining to off-street parking and loading. 
(4)  Vary any of the regulations contained in article VII of this chapter pertaining to signs. 
(5)  Vary from the height and location with regards to fences, as listed in article IV of this chapter pertaining to accessory uses and home occupations. 
(6)  Vary any of the regulations contained in section 98-213(b)(6) pertaining to treehouses. 
(7)  Vary any of the regulations contained in section 98-213(a)(3) pertaining to children's playhouses and/or playground equipment. 
(8)  Vary any of the regulations contained in section 98-382 pertaining to lighting. 
(f)  Vote necessary for variance. The concurring vote of four members of the zoning board of appeals shall be necessary to grant a variation. Variance approval granted by the zoning board of appeals shall be established in accordance with the period set forth in section 54-2, unless a longer period of time is expressly authorized by the zoning board of appeals or by further zoning board of appeals action, if the applicant demonstrates that there are circumstances, difficulties or practical hardships which make compliance with the original time period unreasonable. 
(g)  Preannexation agreements and planned development zoning. 
(1)  The procedures provided for in this section with respect to the granting of variations to a petition or petitioners for such variations, who or which have also entered into a preannexation agreement with the Village and a planned development zoning ordinance, shall not apply insofar as the granting of such variation by the zoning board of appeals as provided for in this section where the approved preannexation agreement and a planned development zoning ordinance specify the granting of such variation. 
(2)  The granting or denial of such a request for a zoning variation may, when requested, be made by corporate authorities when the petitioner therefore also has pending before such corporate authorities a request to annex its property to the Village in the form of a preannexation agreement or rezone its property to a planned development. 
(3)  The approval for such variation by the Village, if granted, shall be contained in the preannexation agreement, when it is entered into between the parties thereto and in the planned development zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the zoning board of appeals from granting or denying variations which are not specified in the preannexation agreement and the planned development zoning ordinance. 
(h)  Abandonment or discontinuance of a use benefited by variation. In any district, a lawfully approved variation benefiting a use that is abandoned or discontinued for a period exceeding three months shall no longer be valid unless substantial attempts to resume the use are undertaken within such three-month period. All subsequent uses of the property shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1959, § 14.7; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, §§ 9—11, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5352, § 6, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5747, § 3, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 6091, § 4, 8-1-2017)  
Sec. 98-48. - Appeals. 
(a)  Scope and commencement. An appeal from a decision of the office of the director of development relative to the interpretation of this chapter may be taken to the zoning board of appeals by any person, firm or corporation, or officer, department, board or bureau affected by such decision. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the board by general rule, by filing with the director of development a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The director of development shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. 
(b)  Action. 
(1)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the decision appealed from unless the director of development certifies to the zoning board of appeals after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board or a court of record on application, on notice to the director of development and on due cause shown. 
(2)  The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the interested parties and shall render a written decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. 
(3)  With the concurring vote of four members, the board may affirm or reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the decision from which the appeal was taken, and to that end, the board shall have all the powers of the director of development with respect to such decision. 
(4)  The director of development shall maintain complete records of all actions of the board relative to appeals, and shall report to the Village manager, who shall keep the board of trustees informed, on a current basis, of the disposition of each case. 
(Code 1959, § 24.14.8; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 12, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-49. - Amendments. 
(a)  Authority. The regulations imposed and the districts created under the authority of this chapter may be amended by ordinance from time to time in the manner provided by section 11-13-14 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(b)  Initiation. Amendments may be proposed by the board of trustees, the zoning board of appeals, the plan commission or any resident of or owner of property in the Village. 
(c)  Application; notice of hearing. A complete application for an amendment, including all information as shall be required from time to time by the Village shall be filed with the office of the director of development, who shall forward a copy of the application to the plan commission. A hearing shall be held by the plan commission on the application not more than 120 days after the filing of such complete application and such hearing shall be conducted in accordance with subsection 98-43(d). Notice of such hearing shall be published at least once, not more than 30, nor less than 15 days before the hearing, in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the Village. The published notice may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as the commission by rule may provide. 
(d)  Plan commission's report. Following such hearing, and within 180 days after the filing of the application for amendment with the director of development, the plan commission shall transmit to the board of trustees a written report giving their findings and recommendations for action to be taken by the board of trustees in regard to the application. If no such report is transmitted within 180 days of the filing of the application, the plan commission shall be deemed to have recommended that the application be denied, unless the petitioner has, prior to the expiration of such 180 days, requested and has been granted a stipulated extension of time by the plan commission. 
(e)  Board of trustees' action. After receiving the report of the plan commission, the board of trustees may enact the amendment by adoption of an ordinance with or without change, reject the amendment or refer it back to the plan commission for further consideration. If no action is taken by the board of trustees within 180 days of the date upon which the findings and recommendations of the plan commission are made and filed with the board of trustees, it shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(f)  Application following denial. Any zoning amendment application which has been denied, either through action or through no action of the board of trustees, may not be proposed again for a period of two years from the date of the board of trustees' action. 
(Code 1959, § 24.14.9; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 13, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5352, § 7, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-50. - Conditional uses. 
(a)  Classifications. The following types of uses of land, buildings and structures which, because of their unique characteristics, can only be properly classified in any particular district upon consideration in each case of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location, are declared to be conditional uses: 
(1)  Public, government buildings, buildings primarily devoted to religious worship located in a residential district or buildings operated in the public interest by not-for-profit corporations, including art galleries, post offices, libraries, museums or senior citizen housing facilities. 
(2)  Public utility facilities, such as electric substations, gas regulator stations, telephone transmission equipment structures, microwave relay towers, water reservoirs or pumping stations and other similar facilities. 
(3)  B-3 district uses permitted in the B-2 general business district only as a conditional use, not normally compatible with or having a unique, special or unusual impact upon the use, enjoyment or value of neighboring property. 
(4)  B-1 limited business district (except dwelling units), B-2 general business district and B-3 general service district uses permitted in the I-2 light industrial district only as a conditional use not, normally compatible with or having a unique, special or unusual impact upon the use, enjoyment or value of neighboring property. 
(5)  Heliports in the H-1 hospital and medical district and I-1 limited commercial district only as a conditional use, not normally compatible with or having a unique, special or unusual impact upon the use, enjoyment or value of neighboring property. Heliports are prohibited in all other districts. 
(6)  Education specialty schools/tutoring/athletic/training in the R-18 residential district only as a conditional use for a period not to exceed five years, not normally compatible with or having a unique, special or unusual impact upon the use, enjoyment or value of neighboring property. 
(7)  Outdoor dining not in accordance with the requirements established by section 98-202 shall be permitted only as a conditional use subject to the provisions of this section. 
(8)  Animal hospitals, with any animal related activities conducted outside of a completely enclosed building, in the B-2 general business district only as a conditional use. 
(9)  Off-street parking lots as a principal use in all residential districts, except the R-E residential district, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Such parking is solely limited to federal, State or local governmental uses, including school and park districts, or buildings devoted primarily to religious worship. 
b.  The parking lot shall be located in the same zoning district as the use it serves. 
c.  The parking lot shall comply with all applicable bulk regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
d.  Alternatives to such parking are not reasonably available. Such alternatives shall include, but not be limited to, other parking resources in the vicinity, the use of a shuttle bus and the scheduling of activities to minimize competing parking demand by other uses in the vicinity. 
(10)  Recreational vehicles, as defined in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, in any single-family residential district only as a conditional use. 
(11)  Educational institutions, private or public, K-12, without dormitory accommodations, in any residential district, except the R-E district, only as a conditional use. 
(12)  Telecommunication service facilities (TCSF), as defined in section 78-4, only as a conditional use located in the D-D, B-1, B-2, B-3, MURC, SLE, PD, H-1, I-1, 1-2, P-1, and residentially zoned properties that have a conditional use for buildings primarily devoted to religious worship. 
(13)  In the D-D downtown development district, the following will be permitted only as a conditional use: 
a.  Along the Glenview Road Corridor: 
1.  Any retail, office, or service use greater than 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Lodging houses, bed and breakfast, guest house. 
3.  Specialty school. 
4.  Recreational. 
b.  Along the Waukegan Road Corridor: 
1.  Any retail, office, or service use greater than 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Townhouse/rowhouse. 
3.  Lodging houses, bed and breakfast, guest house. 
4.  Municipal. 
c.  Along a secondary street frontage: 
1.  Any retail, office, or service use greater than 5,000 square feet. 
2.  Townhouse/rowhouse. 
3.  Lodging houses, bed and breakfast, guest house. 
4.  Municipal. 
(14)  Indoor theaters/cinemas only as a conditional use within the I-2 Light Industrial District. 
(15)  Self-storage miniwarehouse facilities in the B-2 general business district only as a conditional use, provided that no outside storage of any kind is permitted and the site is adjacent to or within an area of compatible uses. Landscaping, decorative fencing, building materials and lighting will be strictly controlled. 
(16)  Drive-through facilities will be permitted as a conditional use for drugstores within the D-D, Downtown District, B-2 general business district and B-3 general service district for the principal purpose of selling prescription drugs and in no instance tobacco products or alcoholic beverages. 
(17)  Any personal automobile, van, truck, or sport utility vehicle, or other motorized vehicle with a "D" license plate designation or higher may be allowed in any residential district as a conditional use granted pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(18)  Electronic changeable message sign permitted only as a conditional use in the B-2 general business district, shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Such sign shall not be visible from a road or highway other than an interstate highway; 
b.  Such sign shall be located on a lot of no less than 25 acres, or lots of adjoining tracts of land under the same owner that when combined total no less than 25 acres. 
c.  One electronic sign per lot, or business or property owner (whichever is less) is allowed. This sign shall count as one of the permitted ground signs per lot. 
d.  Such signs shall be no more than 300 square feet, including the screen. 
e.  Such sign shall be part of a monument style sign that is no more than 25 feet high. If any text is proposed on the base of the monument, it is counted toward the maximum 300 square feet. The appropriateness of sign height shall be determined as part of the conditional use. 
f.  Such sign shall be located not less than 50 feet from an interstate highway; shall be located at least 500 feet from a residential district; and shall be located not less than 500 feet from any other electronic changeable message sign; 
g.  Such sign shall have a static display that shall not change more than once per 24-hour period; 
h.  Such sign shall have a blank screen between images that shall occur for not less than two seconds and the blank screen shall have a black background; 
i.  Such sign's illumination shall be no more than 2.0 foot-candles at the property line, and such sign's lighting intensity shall be restricted to 1,000 nits during the day (dawn to dusk) and 500 nits during the night (after dusk); 
j.  Such sign shall have an ambient light monitor that automatically adjusts the brightness level based on ambient light conditions consistent with the provisions of this section; 
k.  Such sign shall have text/characters/images that are more illuminated than the background; 
l.  Such sign shall have a default design that will freeze the image in one position if a malfunction occurs; 
m.  Such sign shall not include animated, flashing, scrolling, intermittent or full-motion video elements; 
n.  Such sign shall not emit sounds; 
o.  Such sign shall meet all state and federal requirements for signs adjacent to interstate highways; 
p.  Such sign shall have a static display that shall not change more than once per 24-hour period; 
q.  Such sign shall have a blank screen between images that shall occur for not less than two seconds and the blank screen shall have a black background; 
r.  Such sign's illumination shall be no more than 2.0 foot-candles at the property line, and such sign's lighting intensity shall be restricted to 1,000 nits during the day (dawn to dusk) and 500 nits during the night (after dusk); 
s.  Such sign shall have an ambient light monitor that automatically adjusts the brightness level based on ambient light conditions consistent with the provisions of this section; 
t.  Such sign shall have text/characters/images that are more illuminated than the background; 
u.  Such sign shall have a default design that will freeze the image in one position if a malfunction occurs; 
v.  Such sign shall not include animated, flashing, scrolling, intermittent or full-motion video elements; 
w.  Such sign shall not emit sounds; 
x.  Such sign shall meet all state and federal requirements for signs adjacent to interstate highways. 
(19)  Hospices, permitted in the I-2 light industrial district only as a conditional use, not normally compatible with or having a unique, special or unusual impact upon the use, enjoyment or value of neighboring property. 
(20)  Mobile home communities, permitted in the R-1 residential district only as a conditional use, not normally compatible with or having a unique, special or unusual impact upon the use, enjoyment or value of neighboring property. All mobile home developments shall comply with the following conditions and standards: 
a.  Every mobile home development shall contain a minimum area of ten acres; 
b.  The density of any mobile home development shall be not more than eight units per acre; 
c.  Every mobile home development shall be required to comply with the terms of its approval as originally adopted and any subsequent amendment; 
d.  Off-street parking shall be required in all mobile home developments in accordance with the terms of its approval and as provided in this chapter; 
e.  There shall be an open space of at least 25 feet adjacent to the sides of every mobile home and 15 feet adjacent to the rear of every mobile home. Every mobile home shall be set back at least 25 feet from a right-of-way line. All accessory structure and attachments including, but not limited to, garages (attached and detached), carports, canopies, porches, decks or storage sheds, shall be considered as part of the mobile home for the purpose of computing distances for the open space and setback requirement. Parking spaces shall not, however, be considered part of the mobile home for open space or setback requirements; 
f.  The developer of a mobile home development must provide a minimum of six percent of the gross area of the development for recreational facilities. Neither setbacks nor open space requirements shall be included within the recreational facility requirements; 
g.  Each mobile home within the mobile home development shall be provided with its own area of land which shall not be less than 3,500 square feet; 
h.  Each mobile home development shall be fully landscaped in an attractive, permanent manner, subject to appearance commission review and approval; 
i.  Street lighting shall be in conformity with the provisions of chapter 62; 
j.  Each mobile home development shall have sanitary, storm and water mains in conformity with the provisions of chapter 82; 
k.  Overhead electric and telephone wiring shall be prohibited, and all such cables shall be underground in accordance with accepted building practices; 
l.  Each mobile home unit shall be connected to the sanitary sewer and water main systems of the development; 
m.  No mobile home development shall be so located that the drainage of the development area will endanger any water supply. All such developments shall be well-drained and shall be located in an area free from ponds, swamps and similar places in which mosquitoes may breed. No wastewater from mobile homes shall be deposited on the surface of the ground; 
n.  Reserved. 
o.  Every mobile home development shall be in the charge of a responsible attendant or caretaker at all times whose duty it shall be to maintain the development, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. 
p.  Reserved. 
q.  A mobile home development shall contain only mobile homes which comply with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act (42 USC 5401 et seq.) as may be from time to time amended. Each mobile home shall contain not less than 600 square feet of floor space or more than 1,800 square feet of floor space. . 
r.  All mobile home units shall meet the wind design load requirements of NFPA 225 (2005) Model Manufactured Home Installation Standards or of the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Code of Federal Regulations, Title 24, Part 280), as may from time to time be amended. 
s.  No mobile home shall exceed one-story in height. 
t.  Every mobile home shall be placed upon a permanent foundation with wheels, tongues and hitch removed, and shall be attached to the foundation in accordance with the provisions of chapter 18. 
u.  Buildings and structures accessory to mobile homes. Accessory buildings and structures in mobile home developments are regulated as follows: 
1.  Canopies and awnings constructed of metal may be attached to an existing or new mobile home provided that an open space of five feet exists between any adjacent unit or appurtenance. 
2.  Porches and decks may be attached to existing or new mobile homes if the attachments are constructed of fire resistant materials. Wood is considered fire resistant if treated with an acceptable fire resistant process. An open space of five feet is required between porches and/or decks and any adjacent unit or appurtenance. 
3.  Storage sheds may be replaced or installed so long as they are constructed of fire resistant materials and an open space of five feet is provided at sides and ends of the shed. 
4.  New detached garages are prohibited. 
5.  Carports may be attached to existing or new mobile homes so long as an open space of ten feet from the side of the carport to an adjacent mobile home or of five feet to an adjacent appurtenance is provided and five feet of open space is provided at the ends. Carports shall be designed and constructed to withstand lateral and horizontal forces in accordance with village building codes. Exterior wall and roofing materials shall be fire resistant (e.g., aluminum, masonry, metal, non-asphalt shingles, etc.) 
6.  Attached garages may be constructed so long as an open space of ten feet from the side of the garage to an adjacent mobile home or five feet to an adjacent appurtenance is provided and five feet of open space is provided at the end. Construction of an attached garage shall conform to the requirements of this Code. 
7.  Cabanas and room additions are not permitted. 
8.  Each individual mobile home shall have an enclosed exterior storage area which shall conform to all applicable health and safety codes. Each storage area shall be not less than 40 or more than 150 square feet in area. 
(21)  Subject to site plan approval pursuant to section 54-81, Drive-through facilities ("Drive-throughs ") shall be permitted as a conditional use, in the D-D Downtown Development District, subject to the following requirements in addition to other applicable requirements of section 98-50: 
a.  Drive-throughs are preferred to be ancillary to a primary business, but may be a principal use. 
b.  Drive-throughs are limited to one curb cut onto Glenview Road per use, per street frontage, and must secure a secondary access from a public alley or secondary street. Uses on Waukegan Road are preferred to have no more than one curb cut onto Waukegan Road per use per street frontage; however, a second curb cut may be permitted onto Waukegan Road subject to site plan approval. 
c.  A site plan must demonstrate that any vehicle queue associated with the drive-through will not extend into or upon the public right-of-way. 
d.  The site plan must demonstrate that vehicle queues associated with the drive through and/ or on-site circulation which impedes or obstructs access to any required off-street parking stalls or traffic aisles is minimized. 
(22)  Registered medical cannabis cultivation centers and medical cannabis dispensing organizations. 
(23)  Restaurants, with hours of operation that exceed the hours set forth in Chapter 38. 
(24)  Craft breweries shall only be considered for conditional use if the brewery's annual production of beer is less than 157,500 gallons in the following districts: Downtown, B-1, B-2, B-3 and MURC. 
(25)  New land uses, expansions, or increases in intensity of existing land uses, and buildings, building expansions, and/or other structures in the P-1 Public Lands district. 
(26)  Businesses comprising the use of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products. 
(b)  Authorization. After conducting a public hearing on applications for conditional uses, the plan commission shall transmit to the board of trustees a written report giving their findings and recommendations for action by the board of trustees in the same manner as required as set forth in section 98-49(d) and for action by the board of trustees as set forth in section 98-49(e). 
(c)  Application. A complete application for a conditional use, including all information as shall be required from time to time by the Village shall be filed with the director of development. The director of development shall process such application in the manner prescribed in section 98-49(c) for amendments to this chapter. 
(d)  Standards. 
(1)  A conditional use shall be recommended to the Village Board of Trustees by the plan commission upon a finding that: 
a.  The proposed conditional use at the particular location is necessary or desirable for the public convenience, and it will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of property already permitted in the immediate vicinity, nor will it diminish or impair property values in the neighborhood, nor will it affect a significant change in the character of the neighborhood. 
b.  The location and size of the conditional use, the nature and intensity of the operation involved or conducted in connection with such use, the size of the site in relation to such use and the location of the site with respect to streets giving access to the use shall be such that it will be in harmony with present development and the appropriate and orderly future development of the district in which it is located, as well as other abutting districts. 
c.  The location, nature and height of buildings, walls and fences, and the nature and extent of the landscaping on the site shall be such that the use will not unreasonably hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent and nearby land and buildings. 
d.  Parking areas shall be of adequate size for the particular use, properly located and suitably screened from adjoining residential uses, and the entrance and exit drives shall be laid out so as to prevent traffic hazards and nuisances, and minimize traffic congestion in the area. 
e.  A use which is permitted in another district by conditional use shall comply with all applicable bulk regulations of the district in which the use is located. 
f.  Heliports shall also meet the following standards: 
1.  The Federal Aviation Administration shall have conducted an aeronautical study to determine the effect of the proposed heliport, helipad or helistop on the safe and efficient use of the navigable airspace by aircraft and found no objection to the proposed heliport, helipad or helistop. 
2.  The layout and design of heliport, helipad or helistop, including approach and departure path, shall conform to the published Safety Rules and Regulations of the Division of Aeronautics, State of Illinois, Department of Transportation governing Restricted Landing Areas—Heliport, as then currently adopted. Any approval for a heliport, helipad or helistop granted by the plan commission shall be given initially on a tentative basis only, and final approval is to be granted only upon evidence that such division of aeronautics has issued an order authorizing the applicant to proceed with construction of the heliport, helipad or helistop in accordance with plans approved by the division of aeronautics; provided, however, that any waiver of such rules and regulations granted by such division of aeronautics shall be subject to approval of the plan commission. No permit for the construction of a heliport, helipad or helistop shall be given until such an order has been issued by the division of aeronautics. 
3.  No portion of a touchdown area shall be closer than 250 feet to a residential lot line. 
4.  Hours of operation in the I-1 zone district shall be from 8:00 a.m.—6:00 p.m., Monday—Friday, unless otherwise further restricted in the conditional use permit. 
5.  The location, nature and height of security fences, berms and other security and noise attenuation structures shall be required so as to minimize impact and maximize safety on adjacent and nearby land and buildings, consistent with the safe use of the heliport. 
6.  Use of the heliport shall fully and at all times comply with any specific requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration or State department of transportation stipulated and in the certificate of approval or operation issued to the user of the heliport by such agencies. 
g.  Parking lots as principal uses shall also be designed, installed and utilized so as to minimize the potential impact on adjacent properties arising from the following: 
1.  Noise. 
2.  Hours of operation and season considerations. 
3.  Proximity to adjacent uses. 
4.  Lighting. 
5.  Security. 
(2)  If the plan commission finds that the application cannot meet the standards set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section, it shall recommend the denial of the application by the Village Board of Trustees, and shall issue a written statement indicating the particular reasons why the application fails to meet the standards. 
(e)  Conditions and restrictions. The plan commission shall recommend the application of such conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a conditional use, including, but not limited to, provisions for off-street parking and loading, as it shall find necessary to secure compliance with the standards established in subsection (d) of this section. The Village Board of Trustees may impose any and all conditions it deems necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the standards set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Board of trustees' action. After receiving the report of the plan commission, the board of trustees may enact the conditional use by adoption of an ordinance with or without change, reject the conditional use or refer it back to the plan commission for further consideration. If no action is taken by the board of trustees within 180 days of the date upon which the findings and recommendations of the plan commission are filed with the board of trustees, it shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(g)  Application following denial. Any conditional use application which has been denied, either through action or no action of the board of trustees, may not be proposed again for a period of two years from the date of the board of trustees' action. 
(h)  Commencement, discontinuance and abandonment. 
(1)  A lawfully established conditional use shall be established within the time period set forth in section 54-2, unless a longer period of time is expressly authorized by the board of trustees or by further board of trustees action if the applicant demonstrates that there are circumstances, difficulties or practical hardships which make compliance with the original time period unreasonable. Failure to complete construction within the term of the building permit shall cause such conditional use to lapse, and, provided further, failure to comply with all applicable conditions established in connection with approval of such conditional use shall also cause such approval to lapse and be void. 
(Code 1959, § 24.14.10; Ord. No. 3947, § 3, 2-17-1998; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4742, § 3, 3-1-2005; Ord. No. 4891, §§ 6, 7, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 5068, § 3, 1-8-2008; Ord. No. 5182, § 4, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 5351, §§ 14—20, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5352, § 8, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5367, § 3, 7-20-2010; Ord. No. 5419, § 2, 1-4-2011; Ord. No. 5444, § 3, 4-21-2011; Ord. No. 5651, §§ 4, 5, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 5716, § 4, 11-5-2013; Ord. No. 5748, § 5, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 5757, § 2, 1-21-2014; Ord. No. 5886, § 3, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 6159, § 2, 5-1-2018; Ord. No. 6279, § 6, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 98-51. - Annexed land. 
All land which may be annexed to the Village shall be automatically classified in the R-1 residential district. If no application for reclassification of the property has been filed within 90 days, the plan commission shall on its own motion schedule a public hearing on the advisability of the zoning classification of the property. If, following such hearing, the commission believes the R-1 residential classification is improper, the commission shall transmit to the board of trustees a written report giving their findings and recommendations for proposed reclassification of the property; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to land affected by a valid annexation agreement adopted pursuant to article XI, division 15.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code. 
(Code 1959, § 24.14.11; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-52. - Application fees for appearance before the zoning board of appeals. 
Fees for matters under the jurisdiction of the zoning board of appeals are as provided in Chapter 30-1. 
(Code 1959, § 24.14.12; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5113, § 13, 6-17-2008)  
Secs. 98-53—98-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 98-81. - Established. 
The Village is hereby divided into the following generally described districts: 
(1)  R-1 residential district (see section 98-101). A district designed for single-family dwellings at a density not exceeding one dwelling unit per acre. 
(2)  R-1.3 residential district (see section 98-109). A district designed for single-family dwellings at a density not exceeding 1.33 dwelling units per acre, specifically not less than 32,670 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(3)  R-2 residential district (see section 98-102). A district designed for single-family dwellings at a density not exceeding two dwelling units per acre, specifically not less than 21,780 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(4)  R-3 residential district (see section 98-103). A district designed for single-family dwellings at a density not exceeding three dwelling units per acre, specifically not less than 14,520 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(5)  R-4 residential district (see section 98-104). A district designed for single-family dwellings at an approximate density of four dwelling units per acre, specifically not less than 10,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(6)  R-5 residential district (see section 98-105). A district designed for single-family dwellings at a density not exceeding five dwelling units per acre, specifically not less than 8,712 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(7)  R-6 residential district (see section 98-110). A district designed for single-family dwellings at a density not exceeding approximately six dwelling units per acre, specifically not less than 7,500 feet per dwelling unit. 
(8)  R-18 residential district (see section 98-106). A district designed for multiple-family dwellings at a density not exceeding 18 dwelling units per acre, specifically not less than 2,400 square feet per dwelling unit. 
(9)  RT-8 residential district (see section 98-107). A district designated for multiple-family dwellings, wherein the area is considered transitional at a density commensurate with the amount of area being developed in accordance with section 98-107(b)(2). 
(10)  R-E residential district (see section 98-108). A district designed for single-family dwellings at a density not exceeding one dwelling unit per two acres, specifically not less than 87,120 square feet per dwelling unit, and intended for use within environmentally significant areas. 
(11)  B-1 limited business district (see section 98-131). A district designed to permit only those retail uses which are compatible with the residential uses existing in close proximity to such district. 
(12)  B-2 general business district (see section 98-132). A district designed to permit commercial uses of a type compatible with the existing commercial character of a major arterial highway, such as Waukegan Road. 
(13)  B-3 general service district (see section 98-133). A district designed primarily to supplement areas served by the central and general business district, with a variety of necessary services and goods incompatible with the uses permitted in the B-1 central business district and not allowed therein, and not normally compatible in the B-2 general business district and thereby permitted in that district only by conditional use and after a public hearing. 
(14)  H-1 hospital and medical district (see section 98-134). A district designed to permit the orderly development of an area which will provide the people of the Village with a hospital and ancillary medical treatment facilities and provide an area in which related activities can be located and operated with a minimum amount of inconvenience to surrounding areas. 
(15)  D-D downtown development district (see article XII, section 98-575). This Code focuses on the creation of mixed-use, walkable neighborhoods, and emphasizes building "form," "public realm," and high-quality site and building design. It is intended to set the foundation for a vital, attractive downtown by encouraging streets, blocks, and buildings that are pedestrian-oriented, have a mix of uses, contain architectural diversity, and offer additional opportunities to live, work, and shop in the Village. 
(16)  I-1 limited commercial district (see section 98-161). A district designed to permit limited types of administrative, research, public utility service and business organizations which do not detract from the predominantly residential character of the Village. 
(17)  I-2 light industrial district (see section 98-162). A district designed to permit industrial uses which meet the strict performance standards of this chapter. 
(18)  MURC mixed use retail center district (see section 98-136). 
a.  The MURC district is an important commercial center having a traditional town center character that promotes its unique geographic location and setting, adjacent amenities and transportation linkages. Such district will consist of smaller scale facilities (as compared to the S/L/E district) for sports, recreation, wellness, entertainment, retail and cultural activities, with a variety of supporting professional office and residential uses. Such district will have a pedestrian-oriented character, with buildings located near the front property line and with building fronts oriented to the street. Development within the MURC district will include uses that supplement ground-floor sports, leisure, retail, service and entertainment uses, with retail, office, residential and other program uses for the remaining floors. Parking may be shared, where possible. 
b.  Development shall focus on the provision of active ground-floor uses, day and evening activities, and allow safe and convenient pedestrian and vehicular circulation. Window display areas are strongly recommended at the ground level of all business establishments to maintain customer interest. To emphasize the pedestrian orientation of the district, drive-through uses have been prohibited. 
(19)  S/L/E sports/leisure/entertainment district (see section 98-137). The S/L/E district is intended as a location for the generally larger scale sports, recreation, wellness, entertainment and cultural activities, with ancillary office and retail services. Such facilities may have supporting retail only when accessory to another permitted use. Such district is envisioned to be predominantly vehicular, yet should include pedestrian and bicycle accommodations that promote circulation through and beyond the S/L/E district. Development may range from large, subregional uses to small scale uses programmed for day and evening activities and accommodating related visitors and traffic. Shared parking shall be encouraged where uses are complementary. 
(20)  P-1 public lands district (see section 98-98-181). A district designed to recognize existing or planned public/governmental use of land or the use of land to provide public utilities. Such district is also contemplated to provide, in the event of present or proposed use for other than such purposes, a reasonable means of reevaluating the proper zoning of these areas. 
(21)  PD planned development district (see section 98-491). A district designed to permit the most advantageous development, in the public interest, of large tracts of land in harmony with the comprehensive plan of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 24.3.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 21, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-82. - Zoning map. 
(a)  The boundaries of the districts listed in section 98-81 are as indicated on the zoning map of the Village, a copy of which is on file in the office of the village clerk in the Village Hall and is identified on its face as a part of this chapter, and such zoning map, with all notations, references and other matters thereon, is as much a part of this chapter as if such notations, references and other matters were specifically set forth in this section. 
(b)  It is the intent of the board of trustees that the entire area of the Village, including all land and water areas, rivers, streets, alleys, railroads and other rights-of-way, be included in the districts established by this article. Any area not shown on the Village zoning map as being included in any district shall be deemed to be in the P-1 public lands district. 
(Code 1959, § 24.3.2; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-83. - Boundaries. 
If uncertainties exist with respect to the intended boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  The district boundaries are the centerlines of streets or alleys unless otherwise indicated, and where the designation of a boundary line on the zoning map coincides with the location of a street or alley, the centerline of such street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of such district. 
(2)  Where the district boundaries do not coincide with the location of streets or alleys, but do coincide with lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of such district. 
(3)  Where the district boundaries do not coincide with the location of streets, alleys or lot lines, the district boundaries shall be as indicated on the zoning map. 
(Code 1959, § 24.3.3; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-84. - Use table. 
A list of permitted, conditional, and accessory uses in the Glenview Municipal Code is set forth in the table in this section. Uses marked "P" are permitted uses. Uses marked "C" are conditional uses. Uses marked "A" are accessory uses. Blank cells within the table indicate that the use is not permitted within the District. 
This table shall supersede existing use definitions and existing alternate permitted and conditional use zoning classifications included within the chapter 98, article III and article XII. 
	Zoning District 
(P = Permitted Use, C = Conditional Use, Blank = Not Permitted) 
Principal Use 	Down- 
town Glenview Road and Wauke- 
gan Road (ground floor: Red Blocks — Figure 2.5 D-D code) 	Down- 
town Code — Upper floors Red Blocks and other D-D blocks (Figure 2.5) 	B-1 
(Main 
Floor) 	B-1 
(Not 
Main 
Floor) 	B-2 	B-3 	MURC 	S/L/E 	H-1 	I-1 	I-2 	Planned Development 	P-1 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-5 	R-6 	R-1.3 	R-E 	RT-8 	R-18 
Air conditioning and heating, sales and service establishments 					P 	P 					C 												
Amusement and family entertainment establishments, indoor 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			C 												
Amusement and family entertainment establishments, outdoor 					P 	P 		P 		C 	C 												
Animal hospitals (all activities indoors) 					P 	P 					C 												
Animal Hospitals (some activities outdoors) 					C 	P 					C 												
Animal kennels, indoor and outdoors 					C 	P 					C 												
Animal day care and training establishments 					C 	P 					C 												
Animal (pet) stores, including pet grooming 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Apparel and accessory stores, retail 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 			C 												
Aquatic parks 					C 	P 		P 			C 												
Arboretums and botanical gardens 								C 															
Archery ranges — Indoor 	C 	C 			P 	P 	P 	P 			C 												
Archery ranges — Outdoor 								P 															
Art galleries or studios 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			C 												
Art, dance, music or other fine arts schools 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			C 												
Arts and crafts or hobby stores 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Athletic training facilities, martial arts instruction, fitness centers, or gymnasiums 	P 	P 			P 	P 		P 			P 												
Auction rooms 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			C 												
Auditoriums or theaters for the performing arts 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			C 												
Automotive fuel stations 					C 	P 					C 												
Automotive repairs 					C 	P 					P 												
Automotive sales and/or rentals 					C 	P 					C 												
Automotive washing or detailing 					C 	P 					P 												
Bakeries or other food processor, commercial 											P 												
Bakeries, retail 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Banks, credit unions and financial institutions 		P 			P 	P 					C 												
Banquet facilities 					P 	P 		P 			C 												
Batting cages 					C 	P 		P 			C 												
Beverage distributors, commercial 											P 												
Bicycle sale, rental or repair 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Billiard parlors 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Bowling alleys 			P 		P 	P 	P 	P 			C 												
Building and construction material, sales 											P 												
Call Centers 				P 	P 	P 					C 												
Catering establishments 	P 		P 		P 	P 					C 												
Chiropractic offices 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Cinemas/indoor movie theaters 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 			C 												
Cinemas/outdoor movie theaters 					C 	P 		P 															
Clothing or costume rental shops 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	C 												
Commercial offices 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 												
Commercial radio and television transmitting towers 											P 												
Compounding, processing and blending chemical products 											P 												
Community residences, family 														P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Community residences, group 														C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Continuing care retirement communities 												P 											
Conference centers and exhibition halls 						P 	P 	C 		P 	C 												
Copy shops, retail 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			C 												
Courier and delivery services, retail 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 																
Courier and delivery services, warehouse and distribution 											P 												
Craft brewery 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 				P 	C 											
Day care centers and pre-schools 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 				C 												
Day care homes 														P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Department stores 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Drive-through uses, other 	C 	C 			C 	C 					C 												
Drugstores and pharmacies 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 				C 												
Drugstores and pharmacies, with drive-through 	C 				C 	C 					C 												
Dry cleaning and laundries, retail 	P 		P 		P 	P 	P 				C 												
Dry cleaning and laundries, plants 											P 												
Dwelling units, multi family 		P 		P 			P 					P 										P 	P 
Dwelling units, multi family — management offices and/or superintendent's quarters 		P 	P 				P 			P 	P 												
Dwelling units, single family 													C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Education specialty schools/tutoring 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												C 
Educational institutions, private or public, K-12 								P 						C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 			C 	C 
Equestrian centers/polo fields 								P 															
Equipment rental establishments 					P 	P 					C 												
Exterminating services 					P 	P 					C 												
Flea markets 					C 	P 					C 												
Florists 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Foodstores 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 				C 												
Fortunetellers 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					C 												
Funeral services, cemetery 					P 	P 					C 												
Funeral services, funeral home or mortuary 		P 			P 	P 					C 												
Funeral services, monument sales 					P 	P 					C 												
Gifts, stationery, cards, books and specialty retail stores 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Golf courses, academies 					C 	P 		P 			C 		C 										
Golf driving ranges, indoor, swing nets 	P 	P 			C 	P 		P 			C 		C 										
Golf driving ranges, outdoor 								C 			C 		C 										
Health and beauty personal services 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Health clubs and fitness centers 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		C 												
Heliports 									C 	C 													
Home furnishing, appliance and decorating stores 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Home improvement stores 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Hospices 									P 		C 												
Hospitals and trauma centers 									P 														
Hotels 								P 				P 											
Hotels, extended stay 												P 											
Household appliance repair businesses 					P 	P 					C 												
Ice centers, roller rinks, indoor 					P 	P 		P 			C 												
Ice centers, roller rinks, outdoor 					C 	P 	P 	P 			C 		C 										
Ice cream, yogurt and confections 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Libraries 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 				C 		C 										
Liquor stores 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					C 												
Loan offices, currency exchanges and finance companies 		P 		P 	P 	P 					C 												
Locksmith shops 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					C 												
Lodging houses and bed and breakfast establishments 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 																		
Machine shops and metal products manufacturing establishments 					C 	P 					P 												
Manufactured or mobile home communities 														C 									
Manufacturing, packaging, fulfillment, processing facilities 											P 												
Massage therapy establishments 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Media production centers/studios 					P 	P 	P 				P 												
Media sales and rental, video stores 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Medical and dental offices 		P 		P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 												
Medical cannabis cultivation centers and medical cannabis dispensing organizations 											C 												
Medical clinics, urgent or immediate care 					P 	P 				P 	P 												
Medical service and research centers, laboratories 			P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 												
Miniature golf establishments, indoor 		P 			P 	P 	P 	P 			C 												
Miniature golf establishments, outdoor 								P 															
Monasteries, convents or retreat houses 															P 						P 		
Museum/science or discovery centers 	P 	P 						P 		P 													
Musical instrument stores and instruction 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Nurseries 					C 	P 					C 												
Nursing homes or assisted living facilities 																						P 	P 
Office supply stores 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Optical goods sales 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Outdoor athletic fields (baseball, softball, soccer, etc.) 								P 															
Outdoor dining-accessory 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 			C 		P 										
Paintball establishments, indoor 								C 															
Paintball establishments, outdoor 								P 															
Parking lots or structures, principal use 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		C 		C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 
Parking structures and lots incidental or accessory to permitted uses 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 												
Pawnbrokers 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Permanent cosmetics, microblading, and micropigmentation 		C 		C 	C 	C 			C 	C 	C 												
Pet supply stores 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Photographic studios, commercial 					C 	P 				P 	P 												
Photographic studios, retail 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Physical therapy establishments 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	C 												
Picture framing stores or services 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Printing and publishing businesses, retail 	P 	P 			P 	P 	P 			P 	C 												
Printing and publishing businesses, commercial 					P 	P 				P 	P 												
Private clubs 		P 		P 	P 	P 				P 	C 	P 										P 	P 
Private country clubs, including 18-hole golf course on premises 														P 									
Public, government buildings 					C 	P 				C 	C 		P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Public parks, playgrounds, forest preserves 							P 	P 					P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Public utility facilities 										P 	P 		P 										
Racetracks/drag strips 								P 															
Recreational vehicles, boats, ATVs, cargo or other similar, sales or rental 					C 	P 					C 												
Recreational vehicles, private ownership or storage 														C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
Religious worship, buildings primarily devoted to religious worship 														C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Research laboratories 										P 	P 												
Restaurants, full service; brewpubs 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		C 	P 											
Restaurant, carry-out food service 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 	C 											
Restaurant, delivery, food service 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	C 				C 	C 											
Restaurant, limited service 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 	P 											
Restaurant, drive-in food and beverage service 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 					C 	C 											
Retail stores, other 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Sale of Tobacco, Electronic Cigarettes, and/or Alternative Nicotine Products 			P 	P 	P 	P 					C 												
Self-storage miniwarehouse facilities 					C 					P 	P 												
Senior citizen housing facilities 												P 		C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
Sexually oriented businesses 											P 												
Shooting ranges/galleries-indoor 						C 		P 			C 												
Sign painting or fabricating 					P 	P 					C 												
Sledding hills 								P 															
Spas and wellness centers 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 			C 												
Sports complexes, recreational centers and arenas indoor/outdoor 								P 															
Sports equipment sales 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Swimming and diving facilities, indoor 					C 	P 		P 			C 												
Swimming and diving facilities, outdoor 					C 	P 		P 			C 												
Tailors and dressmakers businesses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Taxidermists 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				C 												
Telecommunications service facilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 										
Tennis, racquetball and handball centers, outdoor 					C 	P 		P 			C 												
Tennis, racquetball and handball centers, indoor 					C 	P 		P 			C 												
Theatrical equipment rentals 					P 	P 				P 	C 												
Ticket offices 		P 			P 	P 	P 			P 	C 												
Training centers 										P 			P 										
Transportation stations 	P 				C 	P 					C 		P 										
Upholstering, weaving and mending establishments 					P 	P 	P 				C 												
Use of Tobacco, Electronic Cigarettes, and/or Alternative Nicotine Products 					C 	C 																	
Warehouse and storage facilities 										P 	P 												
Wholesale establishments 					P 	P 					P 												
 
(Ord. No. 5651, § 2, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 5715, § 2, 11-5-2013; Ord. No. 5716, § 3, 11-5-2013; Ord. No. 5757, § 3, 1-21-2014; Ord. No. 5886, §§ 4, 5, 1-6-2015; Ord. No. 6200, § 2, 11-8-2018; Ord. No. 6228, § 3, 12-4-2018; Ord. No. 6279, § 7, 9-3-2019)  
Secs. 98-85—98-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL 
 
Sec. 98-101. - R-1 residential district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-1 residential district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit. 
(3)  Private country clubs which include the operation of a regulation 18-hole golf course on the premises. 
(4)  Family community residences, provided, an application for occupancy is filed with the village manager or his designee. An occupancy permit will be granted, provided, the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sponsoring agency is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes as may be required. 
b.  The family community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence. 
c.  All other applicable codes and ordinances are met. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the R-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building and eave height. Maximum building and eave heights are based on lawfully established side yard setbacks, or, in the case of existing residences, the actual side yard setbacks as included in the following table: 
Roof and Eave Height Restrictions 
Zoning District 	Required Side Yard Setback 
(feet) 		Actual Side Yard Setback 
			=20 feet 	=15 feet 	=12 feet 	=10 feet 	=7.2 feet 	<7.2 feet 
R-1 	15 	Roof 	35 	33 	32 	32 	30 	28 
		Eave 	23 	23 	21 	21 	20 	20 
R-1.3 	15 	Roof 	35 	33 	32 	32 	30 	28 
		Eave 	23 	23 	21 	21 	20 	20 
R-2 	15 	Roof 	35 	33 	32 	32 	30 	28 
		Eave 	23 	23 	21 	21 	20 	20 
R-3 	12 	Roof 		33 	32 	32 	30 	28 
		Eave 		23 	21 	21 	20 	20 
R-4 	10 	Roof 			32 	32 	30 	28 
		Eave 			21 	21 	20 	20 
R-5 	7.2 	Roof 				32 	30 	28 
		Eave 				21 	20 	20 
R-6 	6.0 	Roof 				32 	30 	28 
		Eave 				21 	20 	20 
 
(2)  Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size shall be as follows: 
a.  Buildings devoted to residences, one acre (43,560 square feet). 
b.  All other buildings and structures, two acres (87,120 square feet). 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage. 
a.  Maximum lot coverage for single-family uses shall be governed by the following: 
Lot Size 
(square feet) 	Maximum Lot Coverage 
Formula (square feet) 
Less than 10,000 	Lot size × 0.45 
10,001—14,519 	The greater of: 
a. 4,500; or 
b. [(Lot size - 10,000) × 0.40] + 4,000 
14,520—21,779 	The greater of: 
a. 5,807; or 
b. [(Lot Size - 14,520) × 0.35] + 5,082 
21,780—32,669 	The greater of: 
a. 7,622; or 
b. [(Lot size - 21,780) × 0.30] + 6,534 
32,670—43,559 	The greater of: 
a. 9,800; or 
b. [(Lot size - 32,670) × 0.25] + 8,167 
43,560—53,560 	The greater of: 
a. 10,889; or 
b. Lot size × 0.24 
53,561—63,560 	The greater of: 
a. 12,854; or 
b. Lot size × 0.23 
63,561—73,560 	The greater of: 
a. 14,681; or 
b. Lot size × 0.22 
73,561—83,560 	The greater of: 
a. 16,183; or 
b. Lot size × 0.21 
83,561—93,560 	The greater of: 
a. 17,547; or 
b. Lot size × 0.20 
93,561—103,560 	The greater of: 
a. 18,712; or 
b. Lot size × 0.19 
103,561—113,560 	The greater of: 
a. 19,671; or 
b. Lot size × 0.18 
113,561—123,560 	The greater of: 
a. 20,440; or 
b. Lot size × 0.17 
123,561—133,560 	The greater of: 
a. 21,005; or 
b. Lot size × 0.16 
133,561—143,560 	The greater of: 
a. 21,369; or 
b. Lot size × 0.15 
143,561—153,560 	The greater of: 
a. 21,534; or 
b. Lot size × 0.14 
153,561—163,560 	The greater of: 
a. 21,534; or 
b. Lot size × 0.13 
163,561 and larger 	The greater of: 
a. 21,534; or 
b. Lot Size × 0.125 
 
b.  Impervious lot coverage shall include all impervious surfaces on a given lot, except that the water surface of an in-ground swimming pool and/or a wood deck with semi-permeable membrane beneath it shall not contribute to impervious lot coverage. Detention/retention areas located on a lot shall be used when calculating lot size and impervious surfaces. 
c.  The maximum lot coverage requirements set forth in subsection (b)(3)a. of this section shall not be applicable on lots containing nonresidential buildings. However, a maximum building coverage (area of lot covered by a building) of 33 1/3 percent shall be applicable on all lots containing nonresidential buildings. Maximum lot coverage (total impervious lot coverage) for nonresidential buildings in residential districts shall be established, on a case by case basis, through the site plan review process established under chapter 18, article VII. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet; provided, however, that if there are improved lots on the block which include more than 50 percent of the total lineal footage along the block, there shall be a minimum front yard setback equal to the average front yard setback on the block or 15 feet, whichever is greater, provided that if improved lots are on both sides of and contiguous to the lot in question, the minimum front yard setback of such lot shall be the average of that of the two improved lots, or in the case of a corner lot contiguous to an improved lot, the minimum front yard setback shall be that of the improved lot, provided further, that in no event need the front yard setback be more than 50 percent of the lot depth. 
(6)  Minimum side yard setback. Minimum side yard width shall be 15 feet, provided that if a side yard adjoins a public street, there shall be a minimum side yard width and setback of 30 feet, except that if there are no more than two lots in the block facing the side street, the minimum side yard width and setback shall be 15 feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback. Minimum rear yard depth shall be 25 feet. 
(8)  Maximum building size. Maximum building size shall be calculated using the following table: 
Lot Size Range 
(square feet) 		Calculation 
(square feet) 
<5,000 	= 	2,700 
5,001—15,000 	= 	2,700 + [(lot size - 5,000) × 0.26] 
15,001—20,000 	= 	5,300 + [(lot size - 15,000) × 0.10] 
>20,000 	= 	5,800 + [(lot size - 20,000) × 0.17] 
 
(9)  Garages. On infill lots 60 feet wide or less, the front wall of an attached garage shall not extend more than ten feet beyond the front wall of the residence. 
(10)  Depth of residence. On infill lots, excluding corner lots, the depth of a residence shall be no greater than two times the width of the front elevation of the residence. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the R-1 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article IV pertaining to accessory uses and home occupations, article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. 
(d)  Conditional uses. In addition to the uses permitted by subsection (a) of this section, the following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in this R-1 residential district, subject to all the bulk requirements of such district, all applicable standards and any and all conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a conditional use as may be recommended by the plan commission under authority granted to the plan commission in section 98-50, subject to action by the board of trustees as specified in section 98-50(f). Furthermore, any addition to existing structures occupied by or constituting a conditional use, and any expansion or change in location of an established conditional use shall be authorized only in accordance with the same procedures as those required by this chapter for a new conditional use. 
(1)  Buildings primarily devoted to religious worship. 
(2)  Family community residences which do not meet the regulations applicable to such uses as a permitted use. 
(3)  Group community residences, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The sponsoring agency for such group community residence is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes; 
b.  The group community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence; and 
c.  The group community residence complies with the conditional use standards set forth in section 98-50. 
(4)  Off-street parking lots as a principal use in accordance with the requirements of sections 98-50(a) and 98-50(d). 
(5)  Public or private schools, including those determined to include day care or nursery schools or centers, without dormitory accommodations. 
(Code 1959, § 24.4.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 22, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5704, § 3, 9-17-2013; Ord. No. 5780, § 2, 4-1-2014)  
Sec. 98-102. - R-2 residential district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-2 residential district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit. 
(3)  Family community residences, provided an application for occupancy is filed with the village manager or his designee. An occupancy permit will be granted, provided, the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sponsoring agency is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes as may be required. 
b.  The family community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence. 
c.  All other applicable codes and ordinances are met. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the R-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building and eave height. Maximum building and eave heights are as set forth in section 98-101(b)(1). 
(2)  Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size shall be as follows: 
a.  Buildings devoted to residences, one-half acre (21,780 square feet). 
b.  All other buildings and structures, two acres (87,120 square feet). 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is as set forth in section 98-101(b)(3). 
(4)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 80 feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet; provided, however, that if there are improved lots on the block which include more than 50 percent of the total lineal footage along the block, there shall be a minimum front yard setback equal to the average front yard setback on the block or 15 feet, whichever is greater, provided that if improved lots are on both sides of and contiguous to the lot in question, the minimum front yard setback of such lot shall be the average of that of the two improved lots, or in the case of a corner lot contiguous to an improved lot, the minimum front yard setback shall be that of the improved lot, provided further, that in no event need the front yard setback be more than 50 percent of the lot depth. 
(6)  Minimum side yard setback. Minimum side yard width shall be 15 feet, provided that if a side yard adjoins a public street, there shall be a minimum side yard width and setback of 30 feet, except that if there are no more than two lots in the block facing the side street, the minimum side yard width and setback shall be 15 feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback. Minimum rear yard depth shall be 25 feet. 
(8)  Maximum building size. Maximum building size shall be as set forth in section 98-101(b)(8). 
(9)  Garages. Requirements governing the permissible extension of an attached garage in front of the main wall of a residence on an infill lot shall be as set forth in section 98-101(b)(9). 
(10)  Depth of residence. Requirements governing the allowable depth of a residence on an infill lot shall be as set forth in section 98-101(b)(10). 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the R-2 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article IV pertaining to accessory uses and home occupations, article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. 
(d)  Conditional uses. In addition to the uses permitted in the R-2 district, the following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-2 residential district, subject to all the bulk requirements of such district, all applicable standards and any and all conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a conditional use as may be recommended by the plan commission under authority granted to the plan commission in section 98-50, subject to action by the board of trustees as specified in section 98-50(f). Furthermore, any addition to existing structures occupied by or constituting a conditional use, and any expansion or change in location of an established conditional use shall be authorized only in accordance with the same procedures as those required by this chapter for a new conditional use. 
(1)  Buildings primarily devoted to religious worship. 
(2)  Family community residences which do not meet the regulations applicable to such uses as a permitted use. 
(3)  Group community residences, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The sponsoring agency for such group community residence is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes; 
b.  The group community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence; and 
c.  The group community residence complies with the conditional use standards set forth in section 98-50. 
(4)  Off-street parking lots as a principal use in accordance with the requirements of sections 98-50(a) and 98-50(d). 
(5)  Public or private schools, including those determined to include day care or nursery schools or centers, without dormitory accommodations. 
(Code 1959, § 24.4.2; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 23, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-103. - R-3 residential district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-3 residential district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit. 
(3)  Family community residences, provided an application for occupancy is filed with the village manager or his designee. An occupancy permit will be granted, provided, the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sponsoring agency is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes as may be required. 
b.  The family community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence. 
c.  All other applicable codes and ordinances are met. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the R-3 district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building and eave height. Maximum building and eave heights are as set forth in section 98-101(b)(1). 
(2)  Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size shall be as follows: 
a.  Buildings devoted to residences, one-third acre (14,520 square feet). 
b.  All other buildings and structures, two acres (87,120 square feet). 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is as set forth in section 98-101(b)(3). 
(4)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 70 feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet; provided, however, that if there are improved lots on the block which include more than 50 percent of the total lineal footage along the block, there shall be a minimum front yard setback equal to the average front yard setback on the block or 15 feet, whichever is greater, provided that if improved lots are on both sides of and contiguous to the lot in question, the minimum front yard setback of such lot shall be the average of that of the two improved lots, or in the case of a corner lot contiguous to an improved lot, the minimum front yard setback shall be that of the improved lot, provided further, that in no event need the front yard setback be more than 50 percent of the lot depth. 
(6)  Minimum side yard setback. Minimum side yard width shall be 12 feet, provided that if a side yard adjoins a public street, there shall be a minimum side yard width and setback of 30 feet, except that if there are no more than two lots in the block facing the side street, the minimum side yard width and setback shall be 12 feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback. Minimum rear yard depth shall be 25 feet. 
(8)  Maximum building size. Maximum building size shall be as set forth in section 98-101(b)(8). 
(9)  Garages. Requirements governing the permissible extension of an attached garage in front of the main wall of a residence on an infill lot shall be as set forth in section 98-101(b)(9). 
(10)  Depth of residence. Requirements governing the allowable depth of a residence on an infill lot shall be as set forth in section 98-101(b)(10). 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the R-3 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article IV pertaining to accessory uses and home occupations, article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. 
(d)  Conditional uses. In addition to the uses permitted in the R-3 district, the following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-3 residential district, subject to all the bulk requirements of such district, all applicable standards and any and all conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a conditional use as may be recommended by the plan commission under authority granted to the plan commission in section 98-50, subject to action by the board of trustees as specified in section 98-50(f). Furthermore, any addition to existing structures occupied by or constituting a conditional use, and any expansion or change in location of an established conditional use shall be authorized only in accordance with the same procedures as those required by this chapter for a new conditional use. 
(1)  Buildings primarily devoted to religious worship. 
(2)  Family community residences which do not meet the regulations applicable to such uses as a permitted use. 
(3)  Group community residences, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The sponsoring agency for such group community residence is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes; 
b.  The group community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence; and 
c.  The group community residence complies with the conditional use standards set forth in section 98-50. 
(4)  Off-street parking lots as a principal use in accordance with the requirements of sections 98-50(a) and 98-50(d). 
(5)  Public or private schools, including those determined to include day care or nursery schools or centers, without dormitory accommodations. 
(Code 1959, § 24.4.3; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 24, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-104. - R-4 residential district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-4 residential district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit. 
(3)  Family community residences, provided an application for occupancy is filed with the village manager or his designee. An occupancy permit will be granted, provided, the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sponsoring agency is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes as may be required. 
b.  The family community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence. 
c.  All other applicable codes and ordinances are met. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the R-4 district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building and eave height. Maximum building and eave heights are as set forth in section 98-101(b)(1). 
(2)  Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size shall be as follows: 
a.  Buildings devoted to residences, 10,000 square feet. 
b.  All other buildings and structures, two acres (87,120 square feet). 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is as set forth in section 98-101(b)(3). 
(4)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 60 feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet; provided, however, that if there are improved lots on the block which include more than 50 percent of the total lineal footage along the block, there shall be a minimum front yard setback equal to the average front yard setback on the block or 15 feet, whichever is greater, provided that if improved lots are on both sides of and contiguous to the lot in question, the minimum front yard setback of such lot shall be the average of that of the two improved lots, or in the case of a corner lot contiguous to an improved lot, the minimum front yard setback shall be that of the improved lot, provided further, that in no event need the front yard setback be more than 50 percent of the lot depth. 
(6)  Minimum side yard setback. Minimum side yard width shall be ten feet, provided that if a side yard adjoins a public street, there shall be a minimum side yard width and setback of 30 feet, except that if there are no more than two lots in the block facing the side street, the minimum side yard width and setback shall be ten feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback. Minimum rear yard depth shall be 25 feet. 
(8)  Maximum building size. Maximum building size shall be as set forth in section 98-101(b)(8). 
(9)  Front yard setbacks for undeveloped infill lots, etc. In the case of an undeveloped infill lot or when an existing principal residence is demolished and a new residence is proposed on the lot, the front wall of the new residence shall be located at a setback equal to the front yard setback that is the average setback of the residences located on the two adjacent lots. In the case of a corner lot, the front yard setback shall be equal to that of the residence on the adjacent lot. 
(10)  Garages. Requirements governing the permissible extension of an attached garage in front of the main wall of a residence on an infill lot shall be as set forth in section 98-101(b)(9). 
(11)  Depth of residence. Requirements governing the allowable depth of a residence on an infill lot shall be as set forth in section 98-101(b)(10). 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the R-4 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article IV pertaining to accessory uses and home occupations, article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. 
(d)  Conditional uses. In addition to the uses permitted in the R-4 district, the following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-4 residential district, subject to all the bulk requirements of such district, all applicable standards and any and all conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a conditional use as may be recommended by the plan commission under authority granted to the plan commission in section 98-50, subject to action by the board of trustees as specified in section 98-50(f). Furthermore, any addition to existing structures occupied by or constituting a conditional use, and any expansion or change in location of an established conditional use shall be authorized only in accordance with the same procedures as those required by this chapter for a new conditional use. 
(1)  Buildings primarily devoted to religious worship. 
(2)  Family community residences which do not meet the regulations applicable to such uses as a permitted use. 
(3)  Group community residences, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The sponsoring agency for such group community residence is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes; 
b.  The group community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence; and 
c.  The group community residence complies with the conditional use standards set forth in section 98-50. 
(4)  Off-street parking lots as a principal use in accordance with the requirements of sections 98-50(a) and 98-50(d). 
(5)  Public or private schools, including those determined to include day care or nursery schools or centers, without dormitory accommodations. 
(Code 1959, § 24.4.4; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 25, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-105. - R-5 residential district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-5 residential district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit. 
(3)  Family community residences, provided an application for occupancy is filed with the village manager or his designee. An occupancy permit will be granted, provided, the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sponsoring agency is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes as may be required. 
b.  The family community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence. 
c.  All other applicable codes and ordinances are met. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the R-5 district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building and eave height. Maximum building and eave heights are as set forth in section 98-101(b)(1). 
(2)  Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size shall be as follows: 
a.  Buildings devoted to residences, one-fifth acre (8,712 square feet). 
b.  All other buildings and structures, two acres (87,120 square feet). 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage. Maximum lot coverage is as set forth in section 98-101(b)(3). 
(4)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 60 feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet; provided, however, that if there are improved lots on the block which include more than 50 percent of the total lineal footage along the block, there shall be a minimum front yard setback equal to the average front yard setback on the block or 15 feet, whichever is greater, provided that if improved lots are on both sides of and contiguous to the lot in question, the minimum front yard setback of such lot shall be the average of that of the two improved lots, or in the case of a corner lot contiguous to an improved lot, the minimum front yard setback shall be that of the improved lot, provided further, that in no event need the front yard setback be more than 50 percent of the lot depth. 
(6)  Minimum side yard setback. Minimum side yard width shall be 7.2 feet, provided that if a side yard adjoins a public street, there shall be a minimum side yard width and setback of 30 feet, except that if there are no more than two lots in the block facing the side street, the minimum side yard width and setback shall be ten feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback. Minimum rear yard depth shall be 20 feet. 
(8)  Maximum building size. Maximum building size shall be as set forth in section 98-101(b)(8). 
(9)  Front yard setbacks for undeveloped infill lots, etc. In the case of an undeveloped infill lot or when an existing principal residence is demolished and a new residence is proposed on the lot, the front wall of the new residence shall be located at a setback equal to the front yard setback that is the average setback of the residences located on the two adjacent lots. In the case of a corner lot, the front yard setback shall be equal to that of the residence on the adjacent lot. 
(10)  Garages. Requirements governing the permissible extension of an attached garage in front of the main wall of a residence on an infill lot shall be as set forth in section 98-101(b)(9). 
(11)  Depth of residence. Requirements governing the allowable depth of a residence on an infill lot shall be as set forth in section 98-101(b)(10). 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the R-5 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article IV pertaining to accessory uses and home occupations, article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. 
(d)  Conditional uses. In addition to the uses permitted in the R-5 district, the following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-5 residential district, subject to all the bulk requirements of such district, all applicable standards and any and all conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a conditional use as may be recommended by the plan commission under authority granted to the plan commission in section 98-50, subject to action by the board of trustees as specified in section 98-50(f). Furthermore, any addition to existing structures occupied by or constituting a conditional use, and any expansion or change in location of an established conditional use shall be authorized only in accordance with the same procedures as those required by this chapter for a new conditional use. 
(1)  Buildings primarily devoted to religious worship. 
(2)  Family community residences which do not meet the regulations applicable to such uses as a permitted use. 
(3)  Group community residences, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The sponsoring agency for such group community residence is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes; 
b.  The group community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence; and 
c.  The group community residence complies with the conditional use standards set forth in section 98-50. 
(4)  Off-street parking lots as a principal use in accordance with the requirements of sections 98-50(a) and 98-50(d). 
(5)  Public or private schools, including those determined to include day care or nursery schools or centers, without dormitory accommodations. 
(Code 1959, § 24.4.5; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 26, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-106. - R-18 residential district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-18 residential district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings under single ownership. 
(3)  Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit. 
(4)  Private clubs. 
(5)  Nursing homes. 
(6)  Family community residences, provided an application for occupancy is filed with the Village manager or his designee. An occupancy permit will be granted, provided, the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sponsoring agency is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes as may be required. 
b.  The family community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the R-18 district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum height for buildings and other structures is 35 feet. 
(2)  Lot size. Lot size shall be as follows: 
a.  Minimum. 
1.  Buildings devoted to residences, 2,400 square feet per dwelling unit, with a minimum of 6,250 square feet per lot. 
2.  Nursing homes, 871.2 square feet per bed, with a minimum of two acres (87,120 square feet) per lot. 
3.  All other buildings and structures, two acres (87,120 square feet). 
b.  Maximum. Any residential use permissible in the R-18 residential district, two acres (87,120 square feet). 
(3)  Maximum impervious lot coverage. There shall be a maximum impervious lot coverage for residential uses of 50 percent, except that for all property located in the R-18 district and located in the downtown frame neighborhood, such permitted impervious lot coverage may be increased to a maximum of 62 percent, except such maximum impervious lot coverage requirements shall not be applicable to lots containing nonresidential buildings. However, a maximum building coverage (area of lot covered by a building) of 40 percent shall be applicable to all lots containing nonresidential buildings. Maximum lot coverage (total impervious lot coverage) for nonresidential buildings in residential districts shall be established, on a case by case basis, through the site plan review process established under chapter 18, article VII. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be as follows: 
a.  Buildings devoted to multifamily residences shall have a minimum lot width of 80 feet, except multifamily buildings may be placed on lots with less than the 80-foot minimum width otherwise required only through the planned development process. Compliance with the standards applicable to other planned developments is not required, provided, the applicant demonstrates that an additional adjacent lot width is not reasonably available, and, provided further, that the proposed development is designed to maximize its compatibility with surrounding development. In evaluating the reasonable availability of adjacent lot width, the plan commission shall not consider economic hardship, but shall, instead, consider the physical availability of contiguous vacant land and the age, use and condition of any existing structure on adjacent property. In evaluating the compatibility of the proposed planned development with surrounding development, the plan commission shall consider current or anticipated traffic flows, density, building arrangement, building orientation, building location, location of access drives, location and amount of open space, including available detention, and landscaping. 
b.  Buildings containing all other uses shall have a minimum lot width of 50 feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet; provided, however, that if there are improved lots on the block which include more than 50 percent of the total lineal footage along the block, there shall be a minimum front yard setback equal to the average front yard setback on the block or 15 feet, whichever is greater, provided that if improved lots are on both sides of and contiguous to the lot in question, the minimum front yard setback of such lot shall be the average of that of the two improved lots, or in the case of a corner lot contiguous to an improved lot, the minimum front yard setback shall be that of the improved lot, provided further, that in no event need the front yard setback be more than 50 percent of the lot depth. 
(6)  Minimum side yard setback. Minimum side yard width on each side of the lot shall be as follows: 
a.  Lots 110 feet wide or wider, 12 feet. 
b.  Lots between 50—110 feet in width, six (6) feet, plus one-tenth of a foot for each foot by which the lot width exceeds 50 feet, for example: 
Side yard width, in feet 	6 + (lot width in feet - 50) / (10) 
 
Provided, however, that if a side yard adjoins a public street, there shall be a minimum side yard width and setback of 30 feet, except that if there are no more than two lots in the block facing the side street, the minimum side yard width and setback shall be 12 feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback. Minimum rear yard depth shall be 25 feet. 
(8)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be a maximum floor area ratio of 0.5, except that for all property located in the R-18 district and located in the downtown frame neighborhood, the floor area ratio may be increased to a maximum of 0.65. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the R-18 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article IV pertaining to accessory uses and home occupations, article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. 
(d)  Conditional uses. In addition to the uses permitted in the R-18 district, the following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-18 residential district, subject to all the bulk requirements of such district, all applicable standards and any and all conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a conditional use as may be recommended by the plan commission under authority granted to the plan commission in section 98-50, subject to action by the board of trustees as specified in section 98-50(f): 
(1)  Training schools. 
(2)  Buildings primarily devoted to religious worship. 
(3)  Family community residences which do not meet the regulations applicable to such uses as a permitted use. 
(4)  Group community residences, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The sponsoring agency for such group community residence is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes; 
b.  The group community residence is not located closer than 300 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence; and 
c.  The group community residence complies with the conditional use standards set forth in section 98-50. 
(5)  Off-street parking lots as a principal use in accordance with the requirements of sections 98-50(a) and 98-50(d). 
(6)  Public or private schools, including those determined to include day care or nursery schools or centers, without dormitory accommodations. 
(Code 1959, § 24.4.6; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 27, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-107. - RT-8 residential district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the RT-8 residential district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings under single ownership. 
(3)  Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit. 
(4)  Private clubs. 
(5)  Nursing homes. 
(6)  Hospitals. 
(7)  Family community residences, provided an application for occupancy is filed with the village manager or his designee. An occupancy permit will be granted, provided, the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sponsoring agency is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes as may be required. 
b.  The family community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence. 
c.  All other applicable codes and ordinances are met. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the RT-8 district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum height for buildings and other structures is 35 feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot size. Lot size shall be as follows: 
a.  For buildings devoted to residences, the following densities per lot of record will apply: 
1.  Where a one acre or less lot of record will be proposed for improvement, 5,445 square feet per residential unit. 
2.  More than one and not more than two acres, 4,356 square feet per residential unit. 
3.  More than two and not more than four acres, 3,630 square feet per residential unit. 
4.  Over four acres, 3,100 square feet per residential unit. 
b.  Nursing homes, 871.2 square feet per bed, with a minimum of two acres (87,120 square feet) per lot. 
c.  All other buildings and structures, two acres (87,120 square feet). 
(3)  Maximum impervious lot coverage. There shall be a maximum impervious lot coverage for residential uses of 50 percent, except that for all property located in the RT-8 district and located in the downtown frame neighborhood, such permitted impervious lot coverage may be increased to a maximum of 62 percent, except such maximum impervious lot coverage requirements shall not be applicable to lots containing nonresidential buildings. However, a maximum building coverage (area of lot covered by a building) of 40 percent shall be applicable to all lots containing nonresidential buildings. Maximum lot coverage (total impervious lot coverage) for nonresidential buildings in residential districts shall be established, on a case by case basis, through the site plan review process established under chapter 18, article VII. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 50 feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback. Minimum front yard depth shall be 30 feet; provided, however, that if there are improved lots on the block which include more than 50 percent of the total lineal footage along the block, there shall be a minimum front yard setback equal to the average front yard setback on the block or 15 feet, whichever is greater, provided that if improved lots are on both sides of and contiguous to the lot in question, the minimum front yard setback of such lot shall be the average of that of the two improved lots, or in the case of a corner lot contiguous to an improved lot, the minimum front yard setback shall be that of the improved lot, provided further, that in no event need the front yard setback be more than 50 percent of the lot depth. 
(6)  Minimum side yard setback. Minimum side yard width on each side of the lot shall be as follows: 
a.  Lots 110 feet wide or wider, 12 feet. 
b.  Lots between 50—110 feet in width, six (6) feet, plus one-tenth of a foot for each foot by which the lot width exceeds 50 feet, for example: 
Side yard width, in feet 	6 + (lot width in feet - 50) / (10) 
 
Provided, however, that if a side yard adjoins a public street, there shall be a minimum side yard width and setback of 30 feet, except that if there are no more than two lots in the block facing the side street, the minimum side yard width and setback shall be 12 feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback. Minimum rear yard depth shall be 25 feet. 
(8)  Maximum floor area ratio. There shall be a maximum floor area ratio of 0.5, except that for all property located in the RT-8 district and located in the downtown frame neighborhood, the floor area ratio may be increased to a maximum of 0.65. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the RT-8 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article IV pertaining to accessory uses and home occupations, article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. 
(d)  Conditional uses. In addition to the uses permitted in the RT-8 district, the following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the RT-8 residential district, subject to all the bulk requirements of such district, all applicable standards and any and all conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a conditional use as may be recommended by the plan commission under authority granted to the plan commission in section 98-50, subject to action by the board of trustees as specified in section 98-50(f): 
(1)  Buildings primarily devoted to religious worship. 
(2)  Family community residences which do not meet the regulations applicable to such uses as a permitted use. 
(3)  Group community residences, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The sponsoring agency for such group community residence is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes; 
b.  The group community residence is not located closer than 300 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence; and 
c.  The group community residence complies with the conditional use standards set forth in section 98-50. 
(4)  Off-street parking lots as a principal use in accordance with the requirements of sections 98-50(a) and 98-50(d). 
(5)  Public or private schools, including those determined to include day care or nursery schools or centers, without dormitory accommodations. 
(Code 1959, § 24.4.7; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 28, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-108. - R-E residential district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-E residential district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parks and forest preserves. 
(3)  Monasteries, convents or retreat houses. 
(4)  Open space consisting entirely of vegetative cover which is accessory to a permitted use located outside the R-E zone. 
(5)  Family community residences, provided an application for occupancy is filed with the village manager or his designee. An occupancy permit will be granted, provided, the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sponsoring agency is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes as may be required. 
b.  The family community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence. 
c.  All other applicable codes and ordinances are met. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the R-E district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum height for buildings and other structures is 35 feet or 2½ stories, whichever is less. 
(2)  Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size shall be as follows: 
a.  Buildings devoted to residences, two acres (87,120 square feet). 
b.  Monasteries, convents or retreat houses, three acres (130,680 square feet). 
(3)  Maximum total site coverage of environmentally significant areas. See section 98-101(b)(3) for maximum lot coverage requirements. 
(4)  Maximum total site coverage of primary areas. Within a primary area, there shall be a maximum total site coverage of 12.5 percent, including all structures, roadways, driveways, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. Any ponds or other existing wetlands on the site shall be excluded from the computation of site coverage, except that wetlands created and/or restored by approved development activity shall be included in such computation. 
(5)  Minimum lot width. There shall be a minimum lot width of 150 feet. 
(6)  Minimum front yard setback. There shall be a minimum front yard depth and setback of 50 feet, as measured from the nearest public or private right-of-way. 
(7)  Minimum side yard setback. There shall be a minimum side yard on each side of the lot of 25 feet. 
(8)  Minimum rear yard setback. There shall be a minimum rear yard depth of 50 feet. 
(9)  Maximum building size. See section 98-101(b)(8) for maximum building size requirements. 
(10)  Garages. See section 98-101(b)(9) for requirements governing the permissible extension of an attached garage in front of the main wall of the residence on an infill lot. 
(11)  Residence setback on infill lots. See section 98-101(b)(10) for requirements governing the allowable depth of a residence on infill lots. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the R-E district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article IV pertaining to accessory uses and home occupations, article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs, article VIII pertaining to performance standards, article IX pertaining to soil erosion and sedimentation control, article IX pertaining to environmentally significant areas and chapter 66, article IV, division 2 pertaining to floodplains. In addition, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Before any new development takes place on any property which is zoned R-E and is located within an environmentally significant area, all development shall be subject to the regulations provided in article IX. 
(2)  All single-family residences which are in an area zoned R-E shall be considered to be surrounded by a use envelope, the outer perimeter of which shall be defined as a line 25 feet from the outer walls of the principal structure or the lot line, whichever is the lesser distance. At the time building permits are issued for new single-family residences in an R-E zone, a use envelope shall be depicted on the site plat for the purpose of these provisions. Within the envelope, the following changes below may be made without submission of any plans to the Village above and beyond what is normally required for issuance of a construction permit: 
a.  Room additions which do not increase the size of the principal structure to more than the bulk requirements of this section. 
b.  Demolition of existing structures. 
c.  Accessory uses as allowed in accordance with sections 98-213(a) and 98-213(b) only when within the specified building use envelope and additionally in compliance with the bulk regulations of section 98-214, or as provided in accordance with section 98-456(4). 
(3)  Construction activity shall be limited to a structural envelope and access way as defined in the development plans. The envelope and access way shall be located and staked out on the ground before any clearing or construction takes place. The structural envelope and access way shall be the minimum area necessary for the construction and use of the proposed improvements. This subsection shall apply to all site improvements, including all structures, parking and loading areas, driveways, pedestrian paths, and street and utility rights-of-way. 
(4)  In cases where strict adherence to the bulk regulations set forth in this section or to the provisions of chapter 66 would result in environmental damage, variations to such provisions may be granted in accordance with the provisions of article IX. 
(d)  Conditional uses. In addition to the uses permitted by subsection (a) of this section, the following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-E residential district, subject to all of the bulk regulations of the R-E district, all applicable standards and any and all conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a conditional use as may be recommended by the plan commission under authority granted to the plan commission in section 98-50, subject to action by the board of trustees as specified in section 98-50(f). Furthermore, any addition to existing structures occupied by or constituting a conditional use, and any expansion or change in location of an established conditional use shall be authorized only in accordance with the same procedures as those required by this chapter for a new conditional use. 
(1)  Buildings primarily devoted to religious worship; provided, however, that any lawfully established building primarily devoted to religious worship which existed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be considered as a lawful conditional use, but shall be governed by the requirements of section 98-50(d). 
(2)  Family community residences which do not meet the regulations applicable to such use as a permitted use. 
(3)  Group community residences, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The sponsoring agency for such group community residence is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes; 
b.  The group community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence; and 
c.  The group community residence complies with the conditional use standards set forth in section 98-50. 
(Code 1959, § 24.4.8; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 29, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 6159, § 3, 5-1-2018)  
Sec. 98-109. - R-1.3 residential district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-1.3 residential district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit. 
(3)  Family community residences, provided an application for occupancy is filed with the village manager or his designee. An occupancy permit will be granted, provided, the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sponsoring agency is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes as may be required. 
b.  The family community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence. 
c.  All other applicable codes and ordinances are met. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the R-1.3 district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building and eave heights. See section 98-101(b)(1) for maximum building and eave heights. 
(2)  Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size shall be as follows: 
a.  Buildings devoted to residences, three-quarters of an acre (32,670 square feet). 
b.  All other buildings and structures, two acres (87,120 square feet). 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage. See section 98-101(b)(3) for maximum lot coverage requirements. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 90 feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback. There shall be a minimum front yard depth of 30 feet; provided, however, that if there are improved lots on the block which include more than 50 percent of the total lineal footage along the block, there shall be a minimum front yard setback equal to the average front yard setback on the block or 15 feet, whichever is greater, provided that if improved lots are on both sides of and contiguous to the lot in question, the minimum front yard setback of such lot shall be the average of that of the two improved lots, or in the case of a corner lot contiguous to an improved lot, the minimum front yard setback shall be that of the improved lot, provided further, that in no event need the front yard setback be more than 50 percent of the lot depth. 
(6)  Minimum side yard setback. There shall be a minimum side yard width of 15 feet, provided that if a side yard adjoins a public street, there shall be a minimum side yard width and setback of 30 feet, except that if there are no more than two lots in the block facing the side street, the minimum side yard width and setback shall be 15 feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback. There shall be a minimum rear yard depth of 25 feet. 
(8)  Maximum building size. See section 98-101(b)(8) for maximum building size requirements. 
(9)  Garages. See section 98-101(b)(9) for requirements governing the permissible extension of an attached garage in front of the main wall of a residence on an infill lot. 
(10)  Residence depth. See section 98-101(b)(10) for requirements governing the allowable depth of a residence on an infill lot. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the R-1.3 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article IV pertaining to accessory uses and home occupations, article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. 
(d)  Conditional uses. In addition to the uses permitted in the R-1.3 district, the following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-1.3 district, subject to all the bulk requirements of the R-1.3 district, all applicable standards and to any and all conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a conditional use as may be recommended by the plan commission under authority granted to the plan commission in section 98-50, subject to action by the board of trustees as specified in section 98-50(f). Furthermore, any addition to existing structures occupied by or constituting a conditional use, and any expansion or change in location of an established conditional use shall be authorized only in accordance with the same procedures as those required by this chapter for a new conditional use. 
(1)  Buildings primarily devoted to religious worship. 
(2)  Family community residences which do not meet the regulations applicable to such uses as a permitted use. 
(3)  Group community residences, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The sponsoring agency for such group community residence is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes; 
b.  The group community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence; and 
c.  The group community residence complies with the conditional use standards set forth in section 98-50. 
(4)  Off-street parking lots as a principal use in accordance with the requirements of sections 98-50(a) and 98-50(d). 
(5)  Public or private schools, including those determined to include day care or nursery schools or centers, without dormitory accommodations. 
(Code 1959, § 24.4.9; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 30, 6-15-2010)  
Sec. 98-110. - R-6 residential district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-6 residential district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Parks and forest preserves not operated for profit. 
(3)  Family community residences, provided an application for occupancy is filed with the village manager or his designee. An occupancy permit will be granted, provided, the following conditions are met: 
a.  The sponsoring agency is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes as may be required. 
b.  The family community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence. 
c.  All other applicable codes and ordinances are met. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the R-6 district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building and eave heights. See section 98-101(b)(10 for maximum building and eave heights. 
(2)  Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size shall be as follows: 
a.  Buildings devoted to residences, 7,500 square feet. 
b.  All other buildings and structures, two acres (87,120 square feet). 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage. See section 98-101(b)(3) for maximum lot coverage requirements. 
(4)  Minimum lot width. Minimum lot width shall be 50 feet. 
(5)  Minimum front yard setback. There shall be a minimum front yard depth of 30 feet; provided, however, that if there are improved lots on the block which include more than 50 percent of the total lineal footage along the block, there shall be a minimum front yard setback equal to the average front yard setback on the block or 15 feet, whichever is greater, provided that if improved lots are on both sides of and contiguous to the lot in question, the minimum front yard setback of such lot shall be the average of that of the two improved lots, or in the case of a corner lot contiguous to an improved lot, the minimum front yard setback shall be that of the improved lot, provided further, that in no event need the front yard setback be more than 50 percent of the lot depth. 
(6)  Minimum side yard setback. There shall be a minimum side yard width of six feet, provided that if a side yard adjoins a public street, there shall be a minimum side yard width and setback of 30 feet, except that if there are no more than two lots in the block facing the side street, the minimum side yard width and setback shall be ten feet. 
(7)  Minimum rear yard setback. There shall be a minimum rear yard depth of 20 feet. 
(8)  Maximum building size. See section 98-101(b)(8) for maximum building size requirements. 
(9)  Front yard setback for undeveloped infill lots, etc. In the case of an undeveloped infill lot or when an existing principal residence is demolished and a new residence is proposed on the lot, the front wall of the new residence shall be located at a setback equal to the front yard setback that is the average setback of the residences located on the two adjacent lots. In the case of a corner lot, the front yard setback shall be equal to that of the residence on the adjacent lot. 
(10)  Garages. See section 98-101(b)(9) for requirements governing the permissible extension of an attached garage in front of the main wall of a residence on an infill lot. 
(11)  Residence depth. See section 98-101(b)(10) for requirements governing the allowable depth of a residence on an infill lot. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the R-6 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article IV pertaining to accessory uses and home occupations, article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. 
(d)  Conditional uses. In addition to the uses permitted in the R-6 district, the following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the R-6 district, subject to all the bulk requirements of the R-6 district, all applicable standards and to any and all conditions or restrictions upon the construction, location and operation of a conditional use as may be recommended by the plan commission under authority granted to the plan commission in section 98-50, subject to action by the board of trustees as specified in section 98-50(f). Furthermore, any addition to existing structures occupied by or constituting a conditional use, and any expansion or change in location of an established conditional use shall be authorized only in accordance with the same procedures as those required by this chapter for a new conditional use. 
(1)  Buildings primarily devoted to religious worship. 
(2)  Family community residences which do not meet the regulations applicable to such uses as a permitted use. 
(3)  Group community residences, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The sponsoring agency for such group community residence is certified and licensed by the State under the Community Living Facilities Licensing Act, 210 ILCS 35/1 et seq., and the Community-Integrated Living Arrangements Licensure and Certification Act, 210 ILCS 135/1 et seq., or other similar statutes; 
b.  The group community residence is not located closer than 600 feet to another licensed family community residence or group community residence; and 
c.  The group community residence complies with the conditional use standards set forth in section 98-50. 
(4)  Off-street parking lots as a principal use in accordance with the requirements of sections 98-50(a) and 98-50(d). 
(5)  Public or private schools, including those determined to include day care or nursery schools or centers, without dormitory accommodations. 
(Code 1959, § 24.4.10; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 31, 6-15-2010)  
Secs. 98-111—98-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BUSINESS 
 
Sec. 98-131. - B-1 limited business district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses, main floor. Main floor permitted uses in the B-1 limited business district shall include the following: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the B-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. There shall be a maximum height of 40 feet for buildings or other structures. 
(2)  Minimum lot size. There shall be a minimum lot size of 6,250 square feet. 
(3)  Minimum rear yard setback. There shall be a minimum rear yard of 20 feet, or ten feet if the rear yard is adjacent to a publicly dedicated alley. No rear yard shall be required where the lot coverage does not exceed 25 percent, where no building on the lot exceeds one story in height and where off-street space for parking and loading is provided elsewhere on the lot, except that if the rear yard of such a lot adjoins a residential district, a minimum rear yard of ten feet shall be required. 
(4)  Side yard setback. Side yards are not required, except on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, in which case there shall be a minimum side yard of ten feet unless separated by a public alley or street. If a side yard is provided, even though not required, it shall be at least three feet wide. 
(5)  Setback from public right-of-way. No building or other structure shall be closer than 40 feet from the centerline of the public right-of-way, except that if the lot adjoins Central Road west of Harlem Avenue, Glenview Road, Golf Road, Greenwood Road, Harlem Avenue, Harms Road, Lake Avenue, Lehigh Avenue, Pfingsten Road, Shermer Road, Sunset Ridge Road, Waukegan Road, Willow Road, Chestnut Avenue, Dearlove Road, Milwaukee Road, Landwehr Road, Sanders Road, Wagner Road, Winnetka Road or Washington Road, the building or other structure shall be at least 50 feet from the centerline of the public right-of-way. 
(6)  Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage meeting the following requirements may be permitted as an accessory use: 
a.  Screening shall be provided so as to ensure that the maximum obscuring effect of the outdoor storage will be achieved on a yearround basis, and so that the stored materials are not visible from the adjacent property. 
b.  Outdoor storage shall not exceed ten percent of the floor area of the principal building. 
c.  Outdoor storage shall not be located closer than 20 feet from a side or rear lot line which adjoins a residential district. 
d.  The location and construction of outdoor storage shall comply with all codes and ordinances of the Village. 
e.  Outdoor storage adjoining a public right-of-way shall be located a distance from the centerline of such right-of-way not less than 1½ times the minimum distance from such centerline required for a building or other structure and in no instance shall such outdoor storage be located in any portion of the outdoor area between the building and the right-of-way for the entire length of the right-of-way adjoining the lot. 
(d)  Standards. All of the property located in the B-1 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. Property located in the B-1 district is also subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  All business, servicing and display of goods, except for off-street parking and loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(2)  No business establishment, other than a bank or financial institution, may offer services or make sales directly to customers in automobiles. 
(3)  All businesses shall be primarily of a retail character, selling or performing services directly to the public. Wholesaling or jobbing shall be permitted only where retailing is the primary use of the premises. 
(4)  The manufacturing, processing, packaging, repair or treatment of goods shall be prohibited, except as incidental or accessory to the performance of services or the sale of goods to the public on the premises. 
(5)  If the lot adjoins a residential district, screening shall be provided at the lot line sufficient to protect, on a yearround basis, the privacy of adjoining residential uses. 
(6)  Screening on a yearround basis shall be provided to substantially maintain the privacy of the presence of refuse and junk which, without such screening, would be visible to members of the public, including those on public streets and improvements, and premises where the public is invited. 
(7)  Temporary outdoor display of goods may be permitted pursuant to the provisions of section 98-217. 
(8)  Outdoor storage may be permitted pursuant to the provisions of subsection (c)(6) of this section. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Code 1959, § 24.5.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4891, § 2, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 5351, § 32, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5420, § 4, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 5716, § 5, 11-5-2013; Ord. No. 5748, § 4, 12-10-2013) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22.  
Sec. 98-132. - B-2 general business district regulations. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. The bulk regulations applicable to the B-1 limited business district as set forth in section 98-131(c) shall also be applicable to the B-2 district. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the B-2 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. Property located in the B-2 district is also subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  No part of any building shall be used for residential purposes. 
(2)  If the lot adjoins a residential district, screening shall be provided at the lot line sufficient to protect, on a yearround basis, the privacy of the adjoining residential uses. 
(3)  All sales or display of merchandise sold or offered for sale through coin-operated vending machines occupying more than ten square feet of ground area shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(4)  Screening, on a yearround basis, shall be provided to substantially maintain the privacy of the presence of refuse and junk which, without such screening, would be visible to members of the public, including those on public streets and improvements, and premises where the public is invited. 
(5)  All business, servicing and display of goods, except off-street parking and loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except for conditional uses permitted under section 98-256 or section 98-50. 
(6)  No business establishment, other than a bank or financial institution, may offer services or make sales directly to customers in automobiles, except for conditional uses permitted under section 98-256 or section 98-50. 
(7)  Temporary outdoor display of goods may be permitted pursuant to the provisions of section 98-217. 
(8)  Outdoor storage may be permitted pursuant to the provisions of section 98-131(c)(6). 
(d)  Reserved. 
(Code 1959, § 24.5.2; Ord. No. 3947, § 2, 2-17-1998; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4588, § 2, 11-4-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 33, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22.  
Sec. 98-133. - B-3 general service district regulations. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. The bulk regulations applicable to the B-1 limited business district and B-2 general business district shall also be applicable to the B-3 general service district. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the B-3 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. Property located in the B-3 district is also subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  No part of any building shall be used for residential purposes. 
(2)  If the lot adjoins a residential district, screening shall be provided at the lot line sufficient to protect, on a yearround basis, the privacy of the adjoining residential uses. 
(3)  All sales or display of merchandise sold or offered for sale through coin-operated vending machines occupying more than ten square feet of ground area shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(4)  Screening, on a yearround basis, shall be provided to substantially maintain the privacy of the presence of refuse and junk which, without such screening, would be visible to members of the public, including those on public streets and improvements, and premises where the public is invited. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(Code 1959, § 24.5.3; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 34, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 5748, § 3, 12-10-2013) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22.  
Sec. 98-134. - H-1 hospital and medical district regulations. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the H-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. There shall be a maximum height of 35 feet for buildings and other structures; provided, however, that if the building or other structure is located more than 100 feet from the nearest lot line, the maximum height may exceed 35 feet by one foot for each 7½ feet by which the distance between the building or structure and the nearest lot line exceeds 50 feet; provided, however, that in no case shall the maximum height of the building or structure exceed 70 feet. 
(2)  Minimum front yard setback. There shall be a minimum front yard depth and setback of 100 feet. Nothing in this chapter or any amendment thereof shall operate to prevent the construction and maintenance of gatehouses, gates, gate posts and fences reasonably required for security purposes. 
(3)  Minimum side yard setback. There shall be a minimum side yard width and setback of 50 feet. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard setback. There shall be a minimum rear yard depth of 50 feet. 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage. There shall be a maximum lot coverage of 33 1/3 percent. 
(6)  Minimum lot size. There shall be a minimum lot size of 15 acres. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the H-1 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, such standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. Property located in the H-1 district is also subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  No retail sales or services shall be permitted, except as incidental or accessory to a permitted use. 
(2)  All premises shall be furnished with all-weather, hard surface walks and, except for parking areas, the grounds shall be planted and landscaped. 
(3)  If the lot adjoins a residential district, screening shall be provided at the lot line sufficient to protect, on a yearround basis, the privacy of the adjoining residential uses. All parking lots adjacent to residential areas shall be screened from such areas at the perimeter of the parking lots. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(Code 1959, § 24.5.4; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5182, § 3, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 5351, § 35, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22.  
Sec. 98-135. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5112, § 2, adopted June 17, 2008, deleted § 98-135 in its entirety. Former § 98-135 pertained to D-1 downtown business district regulations and derived from Code 1959, § 24.5.5; Ord. No. 4512, adopted Apr. 15, 2003; Ord. No. 4588, § 3, adopted Nov. 4, 2003; and Ord. No. 4891, § 3, adopted July 18, 2006. The Downtown Business District Regulations have been moved to Art. XII of this chapter to read as set out therein.  
Sec. 98-136. - MURC mixed use retail center district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the MURC mixed use retail center district, provided that none of the individual uses shall contain seating exceeding 2,500 seats: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Any use not specifically listed as a permitted, conditional or prohibited use may be authorized by the building and zoning director upon the affirmative finding that such proposed use is compatible with the intent and purpose of the MURC district as set forth in section 98-81(18). 
(6)  Residential dwelling units, above the ground floor only, up to a maximum density of 36 dwelling units per acre (1,210 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit) and subject to the underlying bulk requirements of the MURC district; provided, however, the maximum residential dwelling unit density shall not exceed 24 dwelling units per acre (1,815 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit) for all property in the MURC district located less than 200 feet from the perimeter of the MURC district. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the MURC district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. The maximum height for buildings and other structures is 45 feet or three stories, whichever is less. 
(2)  Front yard setback. A front yard depth of five feet shall be required; provided, however, that an additional five feet of front yard depth may be required by the plan commission and Village Board through the site plan review process as set forth in chapter 18, article IX. 
(3)  Minimum rear yard setback. No minimum rear yard is required. 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback. No minimum side yard is required; provided, however, that a side yard may be required by the plan commission and Village Board through the site plan review process as set forth in chapter 18, article IX. 
(5)  Landscaped setback zone. A ten-foot landscaped setback zone shall be provided on the edge of a surface parking lot that abuts a street. 
(6)  Service and loading areas. Service and loading activities must occur at the rear or side yard of retail buildings, and must be screened from public view on a yearround basis. Service areas should be located behind or to the side of commercial buildings, away from the front or addressing street. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the MURC district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, these standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations in article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. Property located in the MURC district is also subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  At least half of the ground floor facade of commercial buildings facing the front or addressing street at the town center should be devoted to entrances and store front windows. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the regulations governing the number of required off-street parking spaces as set forth in article VI, the parking requirements for uses encompassed within the permitted and conditional use classes delineated in the MURC district may be increased by the plan commission and Village Board through the site plan review process established in chapter 18, article IX. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Code 1959, § 24.5.6; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4588, § 4, 11-4-2003; Ord. No. 4891, § 4, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 5351, § 36, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22.  
Sec. 98-137. - S/L/E general sports/leisure/entertainment district regulations. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the S/L/E general sports/leisure/entertainment district, provided that none of the individual uses shall contain seating exceeding 7,000 seats: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  When a proposed use is not specifically listed as permitted, conditional or prohibited, the building and zoning director shall determine whether or not the new use is compatible with the intent and purpose of the S/L/E district as described in section 98-81(19). 
(5)  Other retail uses will be allowed when accessory to another use. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the S/L/E district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. A maximum height of 55 feet is allowed for buildings and other structures. 
(2)  Minimum front yard setback. There shall be a minimum front yard depth and setback of 50 feet. Nothing in this chapter or any amendment thereof shall operate to prevent the construction and maintenance of gatehouses, gates, gate posts and fences reasonably required for security purposes. 
(3)  Minimum side yard setback. There shall be a minimum side yard width of 25 feet, provided that, if a side yard adjoins a residential district or a public street, there shall be a minimum side yard width and setback of 50 feet. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard setback. There shall be a minimum rear yard depth of 25 feet. 
(5)  Landscaped setback zone. A ten-foot landscaped setback zone on the edge of a surface parking lot that abuts a street shall be provided. 
(6)  Service and loading areas. Service and loading activities must occur at the rear or side yard of retail buildings, and must be screened from public view on a yearround basis. Service areas should be located behind or to the side of commercial buildings, away from the front or addressing street. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the S/L/E district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, these standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations in article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. Property located in the S/L/E district is also subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Notwithstanding the requirements governing the number of off-street parking spaces required by the provisions of article VI, the parking requirements for uses encompassed within the permitted and conditional use classes delineated in the S/L/E district may be established through the site plan review process established in chapter 18, article IX. 
(2)  When a parking requirement is established through the site plan review process, the number of spaces otherwise required by article VI may be waived in part or entirely, or increased by the plan commission and Village Board. In establishing such parking requirements, the plan commission and Village Board shall consider the location of the proposed use, its anticipated hours of operation and the availability of alternate parking. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Code 1959, § 24.5.7; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4588, § 5, 11-4-2003; Ord. No. 4891, § 5, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 5351, § 37, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22.  
Secs. 98-138—98-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL 
 
Sec. 98-161. - I-1 limited commercial district regulations. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the I-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Lots having an area of ten acres or more. 
a.  Minimum front yard setback. There shall be a minimum front yard depth and setback of 100 feet. Nothing in this chapter or any amendment thereof shall operate to prevent the construction and maintenance of gatehouses, gates, gate posts or fences reasonably required for security purposes. 
b.  Minimum side yard setback. There shall be a minimum side yard width and setback of 50 feet. 
c.  Minimum rear yard setback. There shall be a minimum rear yard depth of 50 feet. 
d.  Maximum lot coverage. There shall be a maximum lot coverage of 33 1/3 percent. 
e.  Maximum building height. There shall be a maximum building height of 35 feet; provided, however, that if the building is located more than 100 feet from the nearest lot line of a residential, public land owned by school, park and forest preserve districts, the maximum height may exceed 35 feet by one foot for each ten feet by which the distance between the building and the nearest lot line of a residential, public lands or hospital and medical district exceeds 50 feet; provided, however, that in no case shall the maximum height of any building exceed 70 feet. 
(2)  Lots having an area of less than ten acres. 
a.  Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size shall be one acre. 
b.  Minimum front yard setback. There shall be a minimum front yard depth and setback, in feet, of ten times the lot size, in acres; provided, however, that in no case shall the front yard depth and setback be less than 50 feet. Nothing in this chapter or any amendment thereof shall operate to prevent the construction and maintenance of gatehouses, gates, gate posts or fences reasonably required for security purposes. 
c.  Minimum side yard setback. There shall be a minimum side yard width and setback, in feet, of five times the lot size, in acres; provided, however, that in no case shall the side yard width and setback be less than 25 feet. If a side yard adjoins a residential, public lands or hospital and medical district, the side yard width and setback shall not be less than 50 feet. 
d.  Minimum rear yard setback. There shall be a minimum rear yard depth, in feet, of five times the lot size, in acres; provided, however, that in no case shall the rear yard depth be less than 25 feet. If a rear yard adjoins a residential, public lands or hospital and medical district, the rear yard depth shall not be less than 50 feet. 
e.  Maximum lot coverage. There shall be a maximum lot coverage of 33 1/3 percent. 
f.  Maximum building height. There shall be a maximum building height of 35 feet; provided, however, that if the building is located more than 100 feet from the nearest lot line of a residential, public land owned by school, park and forest preserve districts, the maximum height may exceed 35 feet by one foot for each ten feet by which the distance between the building and the nearest lot line of a residential, public lands or hospital and medical district exceeds 50 feet; provided, however, that in no case shall the maximum height of any building exceed 70 feet. 
(3)  Subdivisions. In no case shall parcels of three or more acres be subdivided to create lots of less than three acres, nor shall parcels of less than three acres be divided to create smaller lots. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the I-1 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, these standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations in article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. Property located in the I-1 district is also subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  All operations, activities and storage shall be conducted wholly inside a building, except that storage may be maintained outside a building in side yards or rear yards if no part of the storage is less than 15 feet from any lot line of the lot on which the use is located and if such storage area is separated from other property (except property located in an I-1 or 1-2 district) and public streets by screening. 
(2)  No retail sales or services shall be permitted, except as incidental or accessory to a permitted use. 
(3)  Dispensing of gasoline from underground storage tanks on a premises shall be limited to the requirements of vehicles necessary to the conduct of a permitted use. 
(4)  Service and maintenance of vehicles shall be permitted only as is necessary to the conduct of a permitted use. 
(5)  All premises shall be furnished with all-weather, hard surface walks and, except for parking areas, the grounds shall be planted and landscaped. 
(6)  If the lot adjoins a residential district, screening shall be provided at the lot line sufficient to protect, on a yearround basis, the privacy of the adjoining residential uses. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(Code 1959, § 24.6.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4817, § 2, 12-6-2005; Ord. No. 5351, § 38, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22.  
Sec. 98-162. - I-2 light industrial district regulations. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Bulk regulations in the I-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Maximum building height. There shall be a maximum height of 35 feet; provided, however, that if the building is located more than 100 feet from the nearest lot line, the maximum height may exceed 35 feet by one foot for each ten feet by which the distance between the building and the nearest lot line exceeds 50 feet; provided, however, that in no case shall the maximum height of the building exceed 70 feet. 
(2)  Minimum front yard setback. There shall be a minimum front yard depth and setback of 50 feet. Nothing in this chapter or any amendment thereof shall operate to prevent the construction and maintenance of gatehouses, gates, gate posts and fences reasonably required for security purposes. 
(3)  Minimum side yard setback. There shall be a minimum side yard width of 25 feet, provided that, if a side yard adjoins a residential district or a public street, there shall be a minimum side yard width and set back of 50 feet. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard setback. There shall be a minimum rear yard depth of 25 feet. 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage. There shall be a maximum lot coverage of 60 percent. 
(6)  Operation, activities and storage. All operation, activities and storage shall be conducted wholly inside a building, except that storage may be maintained outside a building in side yards or rear yards if no part of the storage is less than 15 feet from any lot line of the lot on which the use is located and if such storage area is separated from other property (except property located in an I-1 or 1-2 district) and public streets by screening. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the I-2 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, these standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations in article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(Code 1959, § 24.6.2; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5182, § 5, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 5351, § 39, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22.  
Secs. 98-163—98-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PUBLIC LANDS 
 
Sec. 98-181. - P-1 public lands district regulations. 
(a)  Uses. New land uses, expansions, or increases in intensity of existing land uses in the P-1 district shall comply with the procedural requirements for conditional uses set forth in section 98-50. 
(b)  Bulk regulations. Setbacks for new buildings, building expansions, and other structures in the P-1 district shall comply with the procedural requirements for conditional uses set forth in section 98-50. 
(c)  Standards. All of the property located in the P-1 district is subject to the general standards and regulations of this chapter. To conserve space, these standards and regulations have not been reprinted in the regulations for each district. Special attention should be given to the standards and regulations set forth in article IV pertaining to accessory uses and home occupations, article V pertaining to nonconformities, article VI pertaining to off-street parking and loading, article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. 
(Code 1959, § 24.7.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 6159, § 4, 5-1-2018)  
Secs. 98-182, 98-183. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES 
 
Sec. 98-184. - Animal kennels. 
Animal kennels shall be permitted in such zoning districts as set forth in the use table in section 98-84. The following shall be the minimum standards for animal kennels: 
(1)  The area of the lot on which such use is conducted shall not be less than one and one-half acres; 
(2)  The principal portion of the boarding kennel structure must be located not less than 30 feet from the adjoining property lines; 
(3)  All outdoor exercise runs must be located not less than 15 feet from adjoining property lines; 
(4)  The lot does not adjoin any lot zoned under any of the residential districts under this chapter 
(Ord. No. 5748, § 8, 12-10-2013)  
Secs. 98-185, 98-186. - Reserved.  
Sec. 98-187. - Automotive sales and leasing dealerships. 
(a)  [ Sale or lease. ] Automotive sales and leasing dealerships means the sale or leasing of new and used automobiles and other motor vehicles in operating condition, including the storage of automobiles and other vehicles in operating condition and the repair and servicing of such vehicles. For purposes of this section, the sale or lease of motorcycles, recreational vehicles, watercraft, ATVs, cargo and trailers, or other similar dealerships shall be treated the same as automotive sales and leasing dealerships. 
(b)  [ Permitted districts. ] Automotive sales and leasing dealerships shall be permitted in such zoning districts as shown in the use table in section 98-84. 
(c)  Parking. 
(1)  Number of off-street parking spaces. Adequate off-street parking facilities shall be provided to accommodate all the motor vehicles of employees, visitors and customers, but in no case shall the number of off-street parking spaces provided be less than the following: 
a.  Automotive sales offices and showroom, one space for every 300 square feet plus one per sales employee. 
b.  Automotive service facilities, two spaces per bay plus one per service employee. 
c.  Automotive parts sales, one space per every 300 square feet. 
d.  Car wash associated with an automotive sales and leasing dealership operation, one space per car wash employee. 
(2)  Area. Parking spaces in employee and customer parking areas shall meet section 98-294(b), off-street parking standards. 
(3)  Access. All drive aisles through automotive sales and leasing dealerships including those adjacent to vehicle inventory areas, if provided, shall be accessible for emergency vehicles and shall be kept clear at all times. 
(4)  Marking. 
a.  Parking spaces in employee and customer service parking areas shall be marked on the surface of the parking area with paint or permanent marking materials and maintained in a clearly visible condition. 
b.  The extents of vehicle inventory areas shall be clearly delineated by a solid white line. 
(5)  Surfacing. Any surface intended for driving and/or parking shall be graded and paved or otherwise improved with the paving standards as specified in the Village of Glenview Engineering Standards Manual. 
(6)  Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind, except emergency repairs, shall be permitted outside of any structure on the site. 
(7)  Parking lot maintenance. Parking lot landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with the maintenance section of the Appearance Code Design Guidelines. 
(d)  Landscaping. Landscaping for automotive sales and leasing dealerships shall include no fewer than one tree per 2,000 square feet of lot area. Landscape plans for automotive sales and leasing dealerships shall be reviewed in accordance with chapter 54, appearance plan and additionally comply with the following. 
(1)  Perimeter landscaping 
a.  Automotive sales and leasing dealerships shall provide a minimum perimeter buffer yard of 5.0 feet, which shall be increased to 7.0 feet if adjacent to a parking lot with stall depths of 17 feet to allow for vehicular overhangs. The perimeter of the lot shall incorporate 50—75 percent of the required trees per subsection (d). 
b.  Perimeter yards adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (d)(1)a. however these areas shall not be required to feature perimeter trees. Perimeter yards adjacent to a public right-of-way shall feature landscaping with year round landscape interest. All plantings must be located solely on private property and allow for a clear sight triangle for drivers. 
(2)  Employee and customer parking area landscaping. 
a.  Employee and customer parking areas shall incorporate 25—50 percent of the parking lot trees required per subsection (d). If trees are included in the employee and customer parking areas, a parking island shall be required at intervals not to exceed 15 parking spaces. 
b.  The end of every parking aisle shall have a landscaped island. 
c.  The minimum size of a parking island shall be nine feet by 19 feet to insure proper growth and protection of the landscaping materials planted herein. Minimum size of an island can be nine feet by 17 feet to correspond with a nine-foot by 17-foot parking space if parking space overhangs exist. 
(3)  Vehicle inventory area landscaping. Vehicle inventory areas upon any automotive sales and leasing dealership shall be exempt from landscaping requirement of this section but these areas shall be included in the calculation of lot area as required per subsection (d). 
(e)  Signs. 
(1)  Wall identification signs. Buildings upon automobile sales and leasing dealerships used primarily for the purpose of sales, service, or leasing shall be permitted wall identification signage in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  Front wall signs. 
1.  Single brand dealership. Each elevation of a single brand automotive sales or leasing dealership facing a public or private street shall be permitted wall signage comprised of up to eight percent of the area of the entire façade facing said street, including the areas of doors and windows, provided that the total cumulative sign area of all wall identification signs on a front building elevation including blade signs and awnings shall not exceed 200 square feet. 
2.  Multi-brand dealership. Each elevation of a multi-brand automotive sales or leasing dealership facing a public or private street shall be permitted an unlimited number of wall signs comprised of up to 325.0 square feet facing said street, including the areas of doors and windows. 
3.  No individual wall identification sign shall exceed 125 square feet. 
b.  Side wall sign. 
1.  One identification sign may be permitted on any side wall. 
2.  The total area of such side wall sign shall not exceed eight percent of the entire façade, which includes doors and windows of the principal building, provided that the total area of such sign shall not exceed 125 square feet. The total permitted sign area of all wall signs also includes blade signs and awnings. 
c.  Rear wall sign. 
1.  One sign may be permitted on rear walls facing private streets or public rights-of-way where there are no primary wall identification signs in the same line of sight. 
2.  The total area of such rear wall sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the allowed front wall signage area, provided that the total area of such sign shall not exceed 72.5 square feet. 
3.  Rear wall signs may be illuminated subject to review by the Appearance Commission to prevent lighting from being directed onto surrounding property. 
4.  Rear wall signs on automotive sales and leasing dealership properties facing adjacent residential properties shall not be illuminated. 
d.  Design features for wall signs. 
1.  Signs shall be surrounded by negative space (the space around the sign) to provide for a balanced design on the building. 
2.  Signs constructed of metal and illuminated by any means requiring internal wiring or electrically wired accessory fixtures attached to a metal sign shall maintain a free clearance to grade of nine feet. If a metal sign structure or accessory fixture described in this subsection is grounded by the use of a grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors and such structure or fixture is also grounded by being bonded to a grounding electrode at the sign site, no clearance to grade shall be mandatory. 
3.  Accessory lighting fixtures attached to a nonmetal frame sign shall maintain a clearance of nine feet to the ground. 
4.  Interior illuminated box (panel) signs with translucent acrylic faces shall not be permitted. Box signs with metal or completely opaque material backgrounds shall be permitted. Letterforms or logo type shall be stencil cut through the surface and filled with back-up or push-thru acrylic forms with an interior diffuser (acrylic forms shall not be transparent). 
5.  In the instance of sign replacements, the wall surface shall be restored when the old sign is removed and the new sign (letters, logos, base, raceway, graphics, etc.) is attached to remove evidence of prior signage, such as nail holes, rust stains, discoloration from weathering, or shadowing of the old sign. 
6.  Disconnect switches for wall signs shall not be visible, in accordance with the adopted provisions of this Code. 
(2)  Ground identification signs. 
a.  Automotive sales and leasing dealerships shall be permitted one identification sign per public street frontage, single-faced or double-faced, and shall comply with the following: 
1.  Setback. The sign must be outside of the sight triangle and may not project more than 12 inches beyond the minimum setback. 
2.  Area. The area of such identification sign shall not exceed 120 square feet on either side, provided that, on a lot with a frontage greater than 120 lineal feet, the sign area in square feet may be as great as the lineal feet of frontage, but in no event greater than 180 square feet on either side. 
3.  Height. 15 feet. 
b.  Design features for ground signs. 
1.  The sign shall be constructed of similar or compatible architectural elements as the building(s). 
2.  Background panels shall be opaque surfaces, incorporating harmonious fonts. 
3.  The ground sign(s) shall prominently display the building address (with numerals) with a minimum height of six inches. 
4.  Signs shall incorporate negative space (the space around the text and graphics) to provide for a balanced design on the sign. 
5.  No metal ground sign shall be located within eight feet vertically and four feet horizontally of electric wires or conductors in free air carrying more than 48 volts, whether or not such wires or conductors are insulated or otherwise protected. 
(3)  Directional and informational signs. 
a.  Directional signs may be erected to designate entrances or exit points as well as key traffic flow points on site as determined by the automotive sales or leasing dealership. Such signs shall be no more than two square feet. Such signs are exempt from minimum setback requirements, but shall be located at least one-foot behind the lot line. Maximum height of a directional sign in a sight triangle shall be 30.0 inches. 
b.  Wall signs that serve informational purposes, such as signs designating the entrance to a service area, may not feature advertising or commercial copy. The location, size, and quantity of such signs must be approved by the Appearance Commission. Such signage will not be included in the maximum permissible identification sign area applied to front, side, and read identification signs. 
c.  Corporate logos shall not be incorporated into directional or informational signage. Corporate colors may be utilized. 
(4)  Window signs. Window signs are exempt from the permit requirement, however the following regulations apply: 
a.  Non-illuminated window signs. The total window sign area shall not exceed 25 percent of the window area, for each front, side or rear wall, provided that the cumulative area of such sign or signs shall not exceed 100 square feet per wall. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "wall" shall include any doors or other fenestrations. 
b.  Illuminated window signs. The allowable window sign area as defined herein may be illuminated, but shall not exceed 20 percent of the window area for each front, side or rear wall, provided that the total area of such sign or signs shall not exceed 20 square feet per wall. 
c.  Any message or identification (e.g., The name of the establishment or the services offered) may not be displayed more than once within the permitted total window sign area per each front, side or rear wall. 
d.  The listing of directional information (e.g., "parking in rear" or "use other door") shall be exempt from these regulations provided that the area of such a sign is no greater than three square feet. 
e.  The listing of an "open" sign, either illuminated or non-illuminated, shall be exempt from these regulations provided that the area of such a sign is not greater than three square feet. 
f.  The use of window framing (e.g. A continuous light source illuminating the perimeter of an individual window pane or a group of window panes) is prohibited. 
g.  The doors to a business establishment shall be limited to the following types of window signage; 
1.  Business name; 
2.  Hours of operation; 
3.  Phone number; 
4.  Building or tenant address; and 
5.  World wide web address or social media links. 
h.  The use of fluorescent colors or materials that are specifically designed to increase their light reflective abilities in a window sign are prohibited. 
i.  The use of dark, opaque background panels for interior illuminated sign faces or letter faces is required in order to reduce the glare or glow of such signs. 
j.  For the purposes of this section, a consistently colored or opaque covering of an entire wall or window, that does not meet the definition of a window sign, shall be considered to be part of the wall of the building and shall be regulated as such by the Appearance Code. 
(5)  Nonconforming signs. The provisions of this chapter regarding non-conforming signs, shall remain in full force and effect, with respect to signs associated with automotive sales and leasing dealerships. 
(f)  Noise. At no point on or beyond the boundary of any lot shall the sound pressure level resulting from any use or activity not specifically exempted in subsection (b) of this section, whether open or enclosed, exceed the maximum permitted decibel levels for the designated octave band set forth in the following tables. Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. The flat network slow meter response of the sound level meter shall be used. Impulsive type noises shall be measured with an impact noise analyzer, and the peak values so measured shall not exceed the sound pressure levels in the appropriate table by more than three decibels. The reference level for the decibel is 0.0002 micro bar. 
TABLE I 
(Instruments Calibrated In Octave Bands Shown In First Column) 
Octave Band Frequencies 
(Cycles Per Second) 	Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level 
(In Decibels) 
20—75 	70 
75—150 	65 
150—300 	58 
300—600 	51 
600—1,200 	45 
1,200—2,400 	39 
2,400—4,800 	34 
4,800 and over 	32 
 
TABLE II 
(Instruments Calibrated In Preferred Center Frequencies Shown In First Column) 
Octave Band Center Per Frequency (Cycles Per Second) 	Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level (In Decibels) 
31.5 	74 
63 	69 
125 	63 
250 	56 
500 	49 
1,000 	44 
2,000 	38 
4,000 	33 
8,000 and over 	32 
 
(g)  Lighting. 
(1)  Nonconformities. 
a.  Existing nonconforming lighting that was installed prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived which does not conform to the provisions shall be exempt. Previously approved photometric plans are not required to change until more than 50 percent of the lighting poles or other standards are changed. 
b.  If an addition to an existing site is proposed, only new lighting within the site plan addition or site plan change is required to meet the new ordinance. 
c.  Lighting that creates a public nuisance or hazard can be ordered removed or altered by the director of development. 
(2)  Design requirements. 
a.  Cutoff style lighting fixtures shall be installed and maintained to be horizontal to the ground so that the cutoff characteristics of the fixture are maintained. 
b.  Lighting installations shall be maintained in good repair in accordance with the most recent Property Maintenance Code in order to meet the provisions of this section on an on-going basis. 
c.  Building mounted wall packs are required to be fully shielded. 
d.  The light source of landscaping lighting shall be recessed and/or shielded to avoid adversely affecting the vision of motorists and/or pedestrians in adjacent areas. Line of sight to a light source shall not be permitted five feet or more beyond the edge of the public right-of-way or property line in a residential district by an observer viewing from a position that is level with or higher than the ground below the fixture. 
e.  All parking lot pole fixtures are required to be cutoff type with recessed lenses to limit glare and light trespass. Fixtures shall be directed below the horizontal rather than above the horizontal. 
f.  Within one hour after business hours conclude, parking lot lights shall be turned off, or the number of illuminated bulbs reduced by half, or the overall lighting intensity reduced by at least 50 percent, with the exception of automotive dealerships as specified in Table D-2. 
g.  Parking lot floodlights for area illumination are prohibited. 
h.  Light source locations shall be chosen to minimize the hazards of glare. 
(3)  Lighting standards. 
Areas of Activity 	Description 	Maximum Foot-candles 
Feature display and merchandise area (to be delineated on site plan) 	The first row of vehicles adjacent to a major/minor arterial including the area in front of the vehicle up to the property line and behind the vehicle up to the merchandise area and/or the circulation area including drive aisles. All other rows of vehicles on a lot used for general auto sales, including all areas surrounding the vehicle up to the defined circulation area including related drive aisles are also included. 	125.0 
Balance of site area during business hours 	Includes all portions of the lot dedicated to customer parking, employee parking, site entrance areas and inventory areas including related drive aisles. 	75.0 
Security lighting to be applied 1 hour after close of sales and/or service business 	The maximum average amount of light found on site within each of the areas of activity, including the feature display area, merchandise area, and circulation area one hour following the close of service hours. 	50.0 
 
(Ord. No. 5748, § 8, 12-10-2013)  
Secs. 98-188—98-194. - Reserved.  
Sec. 98-195. - Continuing care retirement communities. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Continuing care retirement community (CCRC) shall be defined in accordance with the provisions of section 98-4. 
(b)  License required; transferability; issuance restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, conduct, maintain or operate any CCRC without having first obtained a license from the Village. Such license shall be renewed annually and shall be effective from January 1—December 31. Any license issued under the terms of this article shall be nontransferable. Such license shall be issued only to a specified individual, partnership, corporation or association, and shall be issued to a specified location. 
(c)  License application; inspection. 
(1)  An application for a license under this article shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of this chapter relating to license applications. In addition, any person, acting individually or jointly with other persons, who proposes to build, own, establish or operate a CCRC shall receive a zoning approval from the Village Board of trustees as provided in this chapter. No license to operate a CCRC or annual renewal thereof shall be issued until an inspection of the facility has been conducted and certificates of approval have been issued by the development, fire, and police departments. 
(2)  All applicants for a license to operate a CCRC shall specify on the application the business structure under which it shall operate (e.g., rental, endowment lifecare, condominium, etc.). In the event of a material change in the business structure under which the CCRC is operated, the licensee will submit a new license application reflecting the change. The new license application shall be subject to review and approval or denial by the Board of Trustees in accordance with the licensing and relicensing provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  License denial, revocation, suspension or nonrenewal. 
(1)  Any application for a license may be denied, revoked, suspended or not renewed for any one or all of the following reasons: 
a.  Failure to comply with any provision of this article; 
b.  Failure to comply with sections 22-1 et seq.; or 
c.  Conviction of the applicant, or if the applicant is a firm, partnership or association, any of its officers, directors, principals and/or general partners, or if the applicant is a corporation, any of its officers or directors, or the individual designated to manage or supervise the licensed premises, of a felony or two or more misdemeanors involving moral turpitude. 
(2)  No proceeding to deny, refuse to renew, suspend or revoke a CCRC license shall be commenced on the basis of a violation of this article or a violation of any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation referred to in section this chapter, unless the Village gives written notice of such proceeding to the licensee, specifying the violations relied upon and the time, place and date that the proceedings are scheduled to commence. Notice of the violation as referred to in this subsection shall be given to the licensee or his authorized representative by personal delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, to the address shown on the licensee's most current license. The licensee shall have 30 days to remedy such violation from the date of delivery of such notice. If the notice is given by personal delivery, the date of delivery of the notice shall commence the 30-day remedy period. If notice is given by certified mail, the date of delivery for purposes of commencement of the 30-day remedy period shall be deemed to have commenced within two days after the notice has been posted in the U.S. mail. However, if such violation is such that it cannot be corrected within such 30-day remedy period, the Village shall not make a decision as to whether it will deny, refuse to renew, suspend or revoke a CCRC license if corrective action has been instituted by the licensee within such period and due proof of such corrective action is furnished to the Village and in good faith diligently pursued. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (b), if the violation is one that endangers the health and safety of any person, then and in that event, the Village shall have the right to immediately abate the violation and/or suspend the operation of the CCRC, as the case may be, and to immediately thereafter notify the licensee of such abatement and/or suspension, and provide the licensee with a due process hearing as to the abatement and/or suspension as set forth in subsection (b) within five days after written request for such hearing shall have been served upon the office of the Village manager by the licensee. 
(e)  Minimum conditions and requirements. All CCRCs shall provide, adhere to or meet the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  CCRCs shall not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, sex or national origin. 
(2)  There shall be one individual designated as the general manager, who is ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation of the facility and for delivery of programs to residents. Such person shall be qualified by education and experience. 
(3)  A services program shall be offered, including, but not limited to, the provision of hot meals, housekeeping, laundry services, social, recreational or educational programs, and minimal security measures, such as limited points of entry into the facility. One or more individuals, who may be employees, independent contractors or residents of the CCRC, shall assume responsibility for any social, recreational or educational programs offered at the CCRC and shall staff such position for at least 20 hours per week. 
(4)  Where the CCRC contains 400 units or more, excluding the licensed nursing care facility, the staffing shall include a certified social worker for a minimum of 20 hours per week. Where a CCRC contains less than 400 units, the staffing shall include a social worker for a minimum of ten hours per week. 
(5)  There must be at least two staff members on the premises 24 hours a day, seven days a week, who are qualified and assigned to: 
a.  Assist with the emergency call system; 
b.  Administer and be certified for cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (CPR); and 
c.  Summon appropriate services for quick, reliable repairs to the facility. 
(6)  Each employee, within ten days before or after the first day of employment, shall provide satisfactory evidence to the provider that he is free from communicable disease, except to the extent that denial of employment would be a violation of State or federal law. Such evidence shall include documentation of a tuberculin skin test or chest X-ray within one-year prior to employment. 
(7)  Not less than once each six months, CCRCs shall verify that residents are residing in the appropriate component of the CCRC, and written records shall be maintained regarding such findings. 
(8)  All menus and recipes served by the licensee must be approved by a registered dietitian. 
(9)  There must be table space sufficient and suitable for 50 percent of the residents of the independent living component of the community to eat at the same time. 
(10)  The following shall be required for safety and convenience: 
a.  Emergency call system outlets shall be located in the bedrooms and bathrooms of each dwelling unit, with a 24-hour monitored system in a central location on the site, approved by the fire marshal, which system may be substituted by another form of emergency call system, with the approval of the fire marshal. 
b.  All public areas, as well as five percent of the apartments, shall be planned and designed in accordance with state and federal accessibility standards. 
c.  One bathroom per unit must be equipped with: 
1.  A shower or a shower/tub unit, adaptable to handheld usage. If the bathroom contains a shower alone, it shall be equipped with a seat. 
2.  Bathrooms, including shower stalls or shower/tub units, shall be constructed so as to accommodate the installation of safety bars. 
d.  Heating and cooling controls in each dwelling unit shall meet the current housing maintenance and occupancy code requirements and be easily accessible. 
e.  Counter space for food preparation shall be provided with adequate illumination. 
f.  No gas appliances shall be permitted in the assisted living units. 
g.  The bathroom door can swing in only if it can swing out for emergencies. 
h.  A sufficient number of elevators shall be of a size to accommodate an ambulance cot that is 24 inches (610 millimeters (mm)) by 76 inches (1,930 mm) in its horizontal, open position, as approved by the fire marshal. 
i.  Electrical outlets shall be located no less than 18 inches above the floor. 
j.  Doors shall be light weight, easy open, and equipped with levers instead of door knobs. 
k.  A written emergency plan that meets the requirements of the fire marshal shall be filed with the Village. 
(11)  The licensee shall provide or arrange for regularly scheduled transportation for all residents, with access for the handicapped, to local stores, offices, and community and recreational facilities. 
(12)  Regular meetings, at least quarterly, shall be scheduled with residents. A resident advisory committee shall be established to discuss issues of concern between the residents and the provider. 
(13)  A wellness program that comports with the needs of the residents shall be provided. 
(14)  A CCRC licensee shall not implement a change in the business structure of the community unless the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  The Board of Trustees approves the change; and 
b.  All then current residents are provided notice of the contemplated change and notice of the time, date and place that the Board of Trustees schedules a meeting to consider the licensee's application for approval of a change in business structure. 
(15)  If the Board of Trustees approves a change in the business structure of the community, all residents who are entitled to notice under subsection (14)b. shall have the following options: 
a.  Exercise a right of first refusal to remain within the community under the new business structure; 
b.  Remain in the community under the business structure and form of contract that existed at the time of entry into the community until such time as the resident, in his sole discretion, determines that he desires to leave the community; provided, however, that the resident continues to meet all of the terms, conditions and requirements of his current contract and any reasonable modifications with regard to subsequent contracts which may be negotiated between the resident and the licensee; or 
c.  Remain in the community under the terms, conditions and requirements of his current contract for at least nine months from the date of receipt of notice as indicated under subsection (14)b. 
(f)  Disclosure. 
(1)  At the time of or prior to the execution of a contract to provide continuing care, the continuing care provider shall deliver a disclosure statement to the person with whom the contract is to be entered into, which shall contain all of the following information: 
a.  The name and business address of the provider and a statement of whether the provider is a partnership, corporation or other type of legal entity. 
b.  The names and business addresses of the officers, directors, trustees, managing or general partners and persons having a ten percent or greater equity or beneficial interest in the provider and a description of such persons' interest in the provider. 
c.  The location and description of the physical property of the facility, existing or proposed, and, to the extent proposed, the estimated completion date, whether or not construction has begun. 
d.  The criteria for eligibility in the community. 
e.  The mechanism by which residents may provide comments regarding the operation of the facility. 
f.  A statement of the provider's operating principles. 
g.  The services provided or proposed to be provided under contracts for continuing care at the facility. The disclosure statement shall clearly state which services are included in basic contracts for continuing care and which services are made available at or by the facility at an extra charge. 
h.  A description of all fees required of residents. The description shall include the manner by which the provider may adjust periodic charges or other recurring fees and the limitations on such adjustments, if any. 
i.  Certified financial statements of the provider, including: 
1.  A balance sheet as of the end of the two most recent fiscal years, or such shorter period of time as the provider shall have been in existence. 
2.  Income statements of the provider for the two most recent fiscal years, or such shorter period of time as the provider shall have been in existence. 
j.  If operation of the facility has not yet commenced, a statement of the anticipated source and application of the funds used or to be used in the purchase or construction of the facility. 
k.  Such other material information concerning the facility or the provider as the provider wishes to include. 
l.  A copy of the standard form of contract for continuing care used by the provider shall be attached as an exhibit to each disclosure statement. 
(2)  The provider shall file with the Village, within four months following the end of the provider's fiscal year, an annual disclosure statement, which shall contain the information required by this section for the initial disclosure statement. 
(3)  In addition to filing the annual disclosure statement, the provider may amend its currently filed disclosure statement of any other time if, in the opinion of the provider, an amendment is deemed necessary. 
(4)  The continuing care contract with the resident shall contain the following: 
a.  A procedural mechanism for transfer of the resident by the provider from an independent living or assisted living unit to a different level of care. The transfer procedure shall consist of, at a minimum, the following steps: 
1.  Except in cases of emergency or where the safety of the resident or others is endangered, the provider shall consult with the resident, the resident's designee, if any, the resident's personal physician, if any, and the community's medical director, if appropriate, before making a final decision to transfer the resident. The provider shall notify the resident or the resident's designee, in writing, of a decision to transfer (referred to in this section as the "provider notice"). Such provider notice shall be transmitted via personal delivery or certified mail. 
2.  If the resident or resident's designee disagrees with the provider's decision to transfer him from independent or assisted living to a different level of care, the following appeal procedure shall be available: 
i.  Within ten days of receipt of the provider notice, the resident or resident's designee shall notify the provider, in writing, of his disagreement with the decision to transfer (referred to in this section as the "resident notice"). Such notice shall be transmitted via personal delivery or certified mail. 
ii.  Within seven days of receipt of the resident notice, the provider shall notify the resident's personal physician, whose decision shall be final. 
b.  A provision describing the arrangements available to temporarily incapacitated independent living residents. To the extent practicable, such arrangements shall attempt to maintain residents in their independent living units. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "temporarily incapacitated" means impairment of the ability to live independently, due to a disability of a duration of 60 days or less. 
(g)  Violations; penalties. 
(1)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be fined $500.00 for the first violation, plus costs of prosecution, including attorney's fees; $1,000.00 for the second violation, plus costs of prosecution, including attorney's fees; $2,000.00 for the third violation, plus costs of prosecution, including attorney's fees; and $4,000.00 for the fourth and each subsequent violation, plus costs of prosecution, including attorney's fees. 
(2)  No fine shall be imposed until such time as a hearing is conducted under the notice and hearing provisions of this section that a violation has been committed. A violation shall be deemed to have been committed each day that such violation shall have occurred or has continued from the initial date of such violation. All remedies provided for under this section, whether by fine, license violation proceeding or any other remedy provided for under this Code, are cumulative and mutually exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 5748, § 8, 12-10-2013)  
Secs. 98-196—98-201. - Reserved.  
Sec. 98-202. - Outdoor dining. 
Outdoor dining meeting the following requirements may be permitted as an accessory use in all districts in which the principal use is permitted as set forth in section 98-84: 
Outdoor dining accessory to a permitted restaurant, including a carryout restaurant, is authorized either on a public sidewalk or on private property, subject to a license that may be issued by the Village Manager or his/her designee and subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Outdoor dining uses. 
a.  The permissible hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m.—midnight Friday and Saturday. 
b.  Tables, chairs and other equipment used in conjunction with outdoor dining shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular flow or access to the building. 
c.  The Director of Development or designee may administratively approve the appearance of outdoor dining furniture and equipment, subject to the Glen Town Center Tenant Design Criteria, which was approved by Ordinance Number 4534 on June 17, 2003. Administrative denials relating to the appearance of outdoor dining furniture and equipment may be appealed through the Appearance Commission in accordance with the standards set forth in section 98-202(3)b.3. 
d.  Outdoor dining requests are subject to a mailed notification to adjacent property owners. A mailed notice shall be sent to all adjacent property owners on a one plus one basis, allowing 15 days for response. If there is no response, the director of development may approve the outdoor dining request. If an adjacent property owner responds with a concern regarding compliance with the provisions of the outdoor dining ordinance, the director of development shall attempt to resolve the concern, or forward the case to the Plan Commission in the form of a conditional use request. 
e.  Between the dates of December 1 and March 14, tables and chairs used for outdoor dining must be stored in an indoor location not within public view, approved by the Glenview Fire Prevention Bureau. 
f.  Annual license fee shall be as required per section 30-1. 
g.  Outdoor dining that does not conform to the requirements of subsection 98-202(1)c. shall require approval through the conditional use process in accordance with section 98-50. The appearance requirements, annual license fee, hold harmless agreement, and liability insurance shall apply in all circumstances. 
(2)  Outdoor dining on a public sidewalk. 
a.  Compliance with the outdoor dining uses requirements in subsections (1)a.—f. referenced herein. 
b.  The permissible location for outdoor dining shall be between the lot lines of the restaurant's building or leased premises as if such lot lines were continued to the street or alley, including wraparound corners, provided however, that no outdoor dining shall be closer than five feet from the street edge or curb, or located within ten feet of a fire hydrant, pedestrian crosswalk, corner, bus stop or taxi stand. Minimum sidewalk clearance shall be five unobstructed feet in width, measured from the curb to any and all sidewalk tables, benches and chairs. 
c.  The licensee shall submit an agreement, in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney, indemnifying and holding the Village harmless from any cause of action which may arise as a result of an injury to a person or property resulting from the use of an outdoor dining facility on the Village right-of-way. 
d.  The licensee must provide a policy of insurance that names the Village as an additional insured in a primary and noncontributory status, with minimum liability limits of $1,000,000.00 for each occurrence and $3,000,000.00 for the general aggregate. 
(3)  Appeals. 
a.  Scope and commencement. An appeal from a decision of the office of the Director of Development or designee relative to the interpretation of the appearance of outdoor dining furniture and equipment may be taken to the Appearance Commission by any person, firm or corporation, or entity affected by such decision. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Appearance Commission by general rule, by filing with the building and zoning director a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The building and zoning director shall forthwith transmit to the Appearance Commission all of the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. 
b.  Action. 
1.  An appeal to the Appearance Commission shall stop the outdoor dining process until a decision regarding the appeal is made. 
2.  The Appearance Commission shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the interested parties and shall render a written decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. 
3.  With the concurring vote of a majority of the Appearance Commissioners, the Appearance Commission may affirm or reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the decision from which the appeal was taken, and to that end, the Appearance Commission shall have all the powers of the building and zoning director with respect to such decisions relating to the appearance of outdoor dining furniture and equipment. 
4.  The building and zoning director shall maintain complete records of all actions of the Appearance Commission relative to appeals, and shall report to the village manager, who shall keep the Board of Trustees informed, on a current basis, of the disposition of each case. 
(4)  License requirements. Failure of the licensee to comply with the requirements referenced herein may result in termination of the aforesaid license. The Village may terminate the aforesaid license at any time upon violation by the licensee of any Village ordinance. Upon such termination, at the sole option of the Village but at the sole cost and expense of the licensee, within ten days of the receipt of written notice from the Village to do so the licensee shall remove the outdoor dining equipment and cease the use granted thereby; and upon the failure of the licensee to remove same, the Village may undertake or cause the removal of said outdoor dining furniture and equipment and charge the cost of such removal to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 5748, § 8, 12-10-2013)  
Secs. 98-203—98-205. - Reserved.  
Sec. 98-206. - Sale of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products. 
Any land uses classified by the definition provided in section 98-4 of the Code as the sale of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products shall be permitted in such zoning districts as set forth in the land use table in section 98-84. In addition to the other provisions of this chapter, the following shall be additional minimum standards for the sale of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products: 
(1)  Any such land use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance provision shall be considered a legal nonconforming land use and shall be permitted to persist subject to compliance with the terms and conditions of section 98-255, Nonconforming uses of structures and land. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products within 1,000 feet of any pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or junior college or university, or day care center or day care home, or group day care home or part day child care facility, or playground, or public library, or other building used for educational or recreational programs for persons under the age of 21 years. 
(Ord. No. 6279, § 8, 9-3-2019)  
Secs. 98-207. - Reserved.  
Sec. 98-208. - Use of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products. 
Any land uses classified by the definition provided in section 98-4 of the Code as the use of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products shall be permitted in such zoning districts as set forth in the land use table in section 98-84. In addition to the other provisions of this chapter, the following shall be additional minimum standards for the use of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products: 
(1)  Any such land use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance provision shall be considered a legal nonconforming land use and shall be permitted to persist subject to compliance with the terms and conditions of section 98-255, Nonconforming uses of structures and land. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and/or alternative nicotine products within 1,000 feet of any pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or junior college or university, or day care center or day care home, or group day care home or part day child care facility, or playground, or public library, or other building used for educational or recreational programs for persons under the age of 21 years. 
(Ord. No. 6279, § 9, 9-3-2019)  
Secs. 98-209, 98-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ACCESSORY USES AND HOME OCCUPATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5579, § 4, adopted Sept. 18, 2012, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 98-211—98-217, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1959, §§ 24.8.1—24.8.10; Ord. No. 4512, adopted Apr. 15, 2003; Ord. No. 4554, § 2, adopted Aug. 5, 2003; Ord. No. 4742, § 2, adopted Mar. 1, 2005; Ord. No. 5097, § 2, adopted May 6, 2008; and Ord. No. 5239, § 2, adopted Aug. 4, 2009. 
 
Sec. 98-211. - Purpose. 
The uses of land, buildings and other structures permitted in each district are determined by the list of permitted uses for such district. In addition to such listed permitted uses, it is customary to allow certain accessory uses and home occupations. This article generally defines the types of accessory uses and home occupations which will be allowed and gives certain specific examples. 
(Ord. No. 5579, § 4, 9-18-2012)  
Sec. 98-212. - Accessory uses—When permitted; definition. 
Accessory uses are permitted in any district in connection with any use which is permitted within such district. An accessory use is a building, structure or use which: 
(1)  Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; 
(2)  Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal building or principal use served; 
(3)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants in the principal building or principal use served; and 
(4)  Is located on a lot directly adjacent to or on the same lot as the principal building or principal use served. 
(Ord. No. 5579, § 4, 9-18-2012)  
Sec. 98-213. - Same—Specific examples. 
(a)  Any of the following buildings, structures or uses may be an accessory use, provided that such buildings, structure or uses fit the general definition of the term "accessory use" as set forth in section 98-212 and comply with the bulk regulations set forth in section 98-214: 
(1)  Barbecue equipment. 
(2)  Fallout shelters, provided that such shelters shall not be used for other principal or accessory uses not permitted in the district. 
(3)  Gazebos. 
(4)  Green houses. 
(5)  Outdoor kitchens. 
(6)  Pavilions. 
(7)  Pergolas. 
(8)  Private utility infrastructure including air conditioning condensers, electric generators, vehicle charging equipment, water tanks, above ground fuel tanks, solar panels, and other similar devices. 
(9)  Silos. 
(10)  Storage tanks, except as otherwise prohibited per code. 
(11)  Sunrooms, three-season rooms, and screen houses. 
(12)  A building used primarily for religious worship may have accessory uses on the same lot as other buildings or uses owned or operated by the religious institution, including rectories, parsonages, offices, convents, schools, lunchrooms and recreation facilities; provided, however, that no industrial or manufacturing use shall be permitted as an accessory use. 
(b)  Any of the following buildings, structures, or uses may be an accessory use, provided that such buildings, structures, or uses fit the general definition of the term "accessory use" as set forth in section 98-212 and comply with the bulk regulations set forth in section 98-214, except as otherwise provided in accordance with the following conditions: 
(1)  Pet runs. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "pet run" means a designated area for the exercise and relief of dogs, cats or other animals legally owned by the residents of such dwelling. Nothing contained in this subsection shall prohibit a pet owner from allowing pets on his property, provided, such property occupied by such pets complies with all other applicable Village ordinances. 
a.  Construction. 
1.  Pet runs shall be enclosed with a fence or other enclosure approved by the building and health departments. Pet runs shall be constructed so as to permit proper filtering and/or drainage. 
2.  Pet runs may be surfaced with: 
i.  Grass; 
ii.  In whole or in part, concrete or other impervious material, the surface of which must pitch to the perimeter where a filtration bed consisting of eight inches of crushed limestone and sand, covered with a four-inch layer of gravel, has been installed; and/or 
iii.  In whole or in part, an eight-inch layer of crushed limestone and sand, covered by a four-inch layer of gravel. 
The area must be properly confined to prevent a washout of the gravel, limestone and sand. 
3.  Pet runs may not be constructed or surfaced with any absorbent material which may cause nuisance odors or the inability to maintain the area in a sanitary condition. 
4.  Pet runs shall comply with all other applicable Village ordinances. 
b.  Location. Pet runs shall be a minimum of ten feet from any property line, and shall not be located in any front yard or side yard abutting a street. 
c.  Size. If the pet run is surfaced with an impervious material, the construction thereof must comply with section 98-101(b)(3). 
d.  Sanitation. The pet runs must be cleaned at least daily or more often as necessary to prevent odors or other nuisances. 
e.  Existing pet runs. If a pet run which exists as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived (November 17, 1992) is found to be in violation of subsection (b)(1)a.1., (b)(1)a.2., (b)(1)b. or (b)(1)c., the owner or person in charge of the property shall have one year to bring the pet run into compliance with all applicable Village ordinances. The pet run shall be subject to all other subsections of this section. 
(2)  Fences. 
a.  Permit required. A building permit shall be required in conjunction with any new fence, or replacement of greater than 50 percent of the total lineal feet of an existing fence, or a series of modifications or replacements totaling greater than 50 percent of the total lineal footage of an existing fence within a 24-month period. 
b.  Orientation and number allowed. There shall be only one perimeter fence allowed per lot, and the finished side of any fence shall face the adjacent properties and/or streets/rights-of-way. Board-on-board type fencing shall be considered as finished on both sides. 
c.  Height regulations generally. Except as set forth in subsections (b)(2)e. and (b)(2)f., fence heights shall be governed by the following: 
1.  Maximum height. 
i.  New fences or fence modifications requiring a building permit: 
• Residentially zoned districts, seven feet. 
• Commercial or industrial districts, eight feet. 
ii.  Nonfront yard fences existing September 31, 1999: 
• Residentially zoned districts, eight feet. 
• Commercial or industrial districts, eight feet. 
2.  Total height. Notwithstanding the maximum heights as set forth in subsection (b)(2)c.1. or any exception set forth in this subsection (b)(2), all sections of fence, excluding the post, on any lot may have a total height that shall not exceed three inches above the prescribed maximum fence height, provided, the height of any fence section, excluding the post, shall also not exceed the space between the bottom of a section of fence and the ground beneath it, which space shall not exceed three inches, and a fence post may extend no more than a maximum of three inches above the section of fence. 
d.  Wood fencing. Wood fencing in all yards shall consist of wood boards commonly used in fence construction, and the posts shall be approximately four inches by four inches. Plywood and two-inch by four-inch construction are prohibited. 
e.  Fences in front or side yards abutting streets or other public rights-of-way in residential districts. Fences in front or side yards abutting streets or other public rights-of-way in residential districts shall comply with the following: 
1.  The maximum height shall be four feet. 
2.  The fence shall be at least 50 percent open. 
3.  Acceptable materials of construction shall include wood, wrought iron, aluminum faux wrought iron, or faux wood. 
4.  Notwithstanding subsections (b)(2)e.1. and (b)(2)e.2., the fence, or portion thereof, located in the 20 percent of the required side yard closest to the house abutting the street on a corner lot may be a five-foot high, solid fence. 
f.  Fences in rear yards abutting streets or other public rights-of-way in residential districts, excluding alleys. Fences in rear yards abutting streets or other public rights-of-way in residential districts, excluding alleys, shall comply with the following, except when a rear yard on a through lot abuts a front yard of a lot fronting on the opposite side of a right-of-way, the fence shall be constructed in accordance with subsection (b)(2)e.: 
1.  The maximum height shall be seven feet. 
2.  The fence may be solid. 
3.  Acceptable materials of construction shall include wood, wrought iron, aluminum faux wrought iron, or faux wood. 
4.  Setback for such fences shall be as follows: 
i.  A minimum setback of two feet from the property line shall be maintained adjacent to public rights-of-way, and screening along the fence shall be provided in accordance with the following: 
• Bushes or other forms of plantings which retain their foliage on a year-round basis shall be used, and shall have a minimum height of three feet. Acceptable plantings shall be confirmed through the permit review process. 
• Screening material shall be spaced ten feet on center along the entire length of the fence. 
ii.  An escrow in the amount of 110 percent of the cost of the required plantings shall be required at the time the permit is issued for the fence to ensure that the screening is provided. 
g.  Nonconformities. All conforming fences existing as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived (September 21, 1999) shall be considered legal nonconforming, except: 
1.  Residential fences over eight feet in height. 
2.  Fences constructed with plywood, two-by-fours, or wood board not commonly found in fence construction. 
h.  Waiver of fees. Any fees for variance requests of existing fencing shall be waived for a 12-month period commencing upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
i.  Craftsmanship. All fences shall be constructed, repaired, and maintained in a workmanlike manner. 
(3)  Perimeter walls constructed in a workmanlike manner of masonry or stone provided that the maximum height shall not exceed seven feet and subject to the following setbacks: 
a.  Perimeter walls which are attached to a principal structure shall not be permitted within any required yard. 
b.  Freestanding perimeter walls shall not be permitted within a front yard or side yard abutting a street, but shall be permitted in a required rear yard or interior side yard. 
(4)  A treehouse structure, except in front yards or side yards abutting a street, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The area of the treehouse shall not exceed 100 square feet. 
b.  The total height of any portion of the structure shall not exceed 20 feet from grade to the top of structure, and the lowest platform of the structure shall not exceed the lower one-third of the height of the tree on which it is mounted. 
c.  A minimum setback of ten feet is required from any property line. 
d.  Any treehouse constructed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be considered a nonconforming structure. 
(5)  A child's playhouse and/or playground equipment, except in front yards or side yards abutting a street, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The area of the playhouse or the roofed-over portion of the recreational equipment shall not exceed 100 square feet. 
b.  The total height of any portion of the structure shall not exceed 12 feet. 
c.  A minimum setback of five feet is required from any property line measured from any projecting use, including the arc of a swing or other movable portion of the playhouse and/or playground equipment. 
(6)  Private attached or detached garages or carports, or any combination thereof, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Measurement. Cumulative capacity of garages and carports upon a lot shall be determined first by the number and width of garage doors serving any attached garage and subsequently by the internal dimensions of any detached garage or carport. 
b.  Capacities. The cumulative maximum capacity of all garages and carports upon a lot, including both attached and detached structures, shall not exceed the following requirements: 
1.  Single-family dwellings, three cars. 
2.  Multiple-family dwellings, two cars per dwelling unit. 
3.  Such permitted maximum capacities shall also be regulated by the provisions of subsection 98-101(b), controlling maximum lot coverage, and if requirements of subsection 98-101(b) shall require such garage or carport to be smaller than permitted in this subsection (b), such provision shall supersede the requirements of this subsection (b) and the size of any such garage or carport shall be of such lesser size as shall be required by compliance with such provision. 
4.  Capacity of attached garages shall be determined by the number and width per door of exterior garage doors in accordance with the following door widths: 
i.  One-car attached garages. A door with a width from six feet up to 12.0 feet shall be deemed to provide capacity for one car. 
ii.  Two-car attached garages. A door with a width greater than 12.0 feet up to 18.0 feet shall be deemed to provide capacity for two cars. 
iii.  Three-car attached garages. A door with a width greater than 18.0 feet up to 30.0 feet shall be deemed to provide capacity for three cars. 
iv.  No single garage door width shall exceed a width of 30.0 feet. 
5.  Capacities of detached garages and carports shall not exceed the following clear internal dimensions as measured at the finished floor: 
i.  One-car detached garages. Floor areas up to 17.0 feet by 27.0 feet shall be deemed to provide capacity for one car. 
ii.  Two-car detached garages. Floor areas greater than 17.0 feet through 26.0 feet by 27.0 feet shall be deemed to provide capacity for two cars. 
iii.  Three-car detached garages. Floor areas greater than 26.0 feet through 35.0 feet by 27.0 feet shall be deemed to provide capacity for three cars. 
iv.  No detached garage shall exceed clear internal dimensions of 35.0 feet by 27.0 feet. 
c.  Setbacks. Setbacks for attached garages, detached garages, and carports shall be subject to the requirements of section 98-214 except a detached garage in the rear 25 percent of lot depth, shall be permitted when maintaining a distance of at least three feet to the side lot line and at least five feet to the rear lot line, except that on corner lots, the distance from the side street lot line shall be the same as required for the principal structure on the lot. When an accessory structure cannot be placed in a location which complies with the setback regulations due to an existing rear easement, the director of building and zoning may, in his discretion, grant administrative relief in accordance with the provisions of section 98-43(d)(3), and in consideration of the criteria listed in section 98-47(c) to allow placement of the accessory structure: 
1.  Within the easement, so long as the rear wall of the accessory structure is no more than ten feet from the rear lot line, the placement of the accessory structure does not encroach upon any existing utility located within the easement, and the property owner executes a hold harmless agreement acceptable to the Village related to the property owner's acceptance of sole responsibility for any damage to the accessory structure; or 
2.  Within the front 75 percent of the lot, so long as: 
i.  The entire rear wall of the accessory structure abuts the easement line, and 
ii.  The front wall of the structure does not extend into the front 75 percent of the lot by more than the depth of the easement. 
d.  Height. Attached garages, detached garages, and carports shall be subject to the following maximum building and eave heights, however no garage shall be taller than a principal structure upon a lot: 
1.  Attached garages shall be subject to the requirements of section 98-214. 
2.  Detached garages and carports in the rear 25 percent of lot depth and subject to the setback provisions of subsection (b)(6)c. shall be permitted a maximum building height of 20.0 feet and a maximum eave height of 12.0 feet except detached garages and carports abutting a public alley shall be permitted a maximum building height of 28.0 feet and a maximum eave height of 20.0 feet. 
3.  All other detached garages and carports shall be permitted a maximum building height of 20.0 feet and a maximum eave height of 12.0 feet. 
(7)  A shed, storage cabinet, or similar structure for storage incidental to a permitted use, except in front yards or side yards abutting a street, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The maximum height shall not exceed 12.0 feet. 
b.  The maximum floor area shall not exceed the following: 
1.  R-2, and R-3 districts — 150 square feet. 
2.  R-4, R-5, and R-6 districts — 120 square feet. 
3.  All other districts — 120 square feet or three-quarters of one percent of the size of the lot on which it is located, whichever is greater. 
4.  Such permitted maximum floor areas shall also be regulated by the provisions of subsection 98-101(b), controlling maximum lot coverage, and if requirements of subsection 98-101(b) shall require such shed or building for storage to be smaller than permitted in this subsection. Such provision shall supersede the requirements of this subsection. and the size of any such shed or building shall be of such lesser size as shall be required by compliance with such provision. 
c.  No such structure shall be permitted within any required yard, however, a shed or similar structure for storage incidental to a permitted use in the rear 25 percent of lot depth, shall be permitted when maintaining a distance of at least three feet to the side lot line and at least five feet to the rear lot line, except that on corner lots, the distance from the side street lot line shall be the same as required for the principal structure on the lot. When an accessory structure cannot be placed in a location which complies with the setback regulations due to an existing rear easement, the director of building and zoning may, in his discretion, grant administrative relief in accordance with the provisions of section 98-43(d)(3), and in consideration of the criteria listed in section 98-47(c) to allow placement of the accessory structure: 
1.  Within the easement, so long as the rear wall of the accessory structure is no more than ten feet from the rear lot line, the placement of the accessory structure does not encroach upon any existing utility located within the easement, and the property owner executes a hold harmless agreement acceptable to the Village related to the property owner's acceptance of sole responsibility for any damage to the accessory structure; or 
2.  Within the front 75 percent of the lot, so long as: 
i.  The entire rear wall of the accessory structure abuts the easement line, and 
ii.  The front wall of the structure does not extend into the front 75 percent of the lot by more than the depth of the easement. 
(8)  Recreational equipment, except in front yards or side yards abutting a street; however, basketball equipment and other sports goal equipment shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Two backboards and hoops, goals, or nets, shall be allowed per lot, except only one backboard and hoop, goal, or net shall be allowed within a front yard or side yard abutting a street or closer to any front lot line or side lot line abutting a street than the nearest wall of the principal residence upon the lot. 
b.  A backboard and hoop shall be set back from any front lot line, rear lot line, or side lot line abutting a street at a minimum distance equal to one-half the setback required in accordance with section 98-214. 
c.  The backboard and hoop, goal, or net, shall not be located closer than ten feet from an interior side lot line, regardless of whether the equipment is placed in a rear, side, or front yard. 
(9)  Sports courts, except in front yards or side yards abutting a street, subject to a minimum setback of ten feet to any lot line, provided that basketball equipment and other sports goal equipment comply with the requirements of subsection (b)(8). 
(10)  A private swimming pool, hot tub, spa, or pond incidental to a permitted use, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Any swimming pool, hot tub, spa, or pond, its equipment, platforms and aboveground decks, and appurtenances, except in front yards or side yards abutting a street, subject to a minimum setback of six feet to a side or rear lot line. 
b.  Any walkway or patio for inground pools shall be located a distance of not less than two feet from any lot line. 
(11)  Fountains and similar water features shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  A fountain or similar water feature shall be set back from any front lot line or side lot line abutting a street at a minimum distance equal to one-half the setback required in accordance with section 98-214. 
b.  A fountain or similar water feature shall not be located closer than 6.0 feet from any interior side, or rear lot line. 
c.  A fountain or similar water feature within 45.0 feet of any lot line shall not exceed a maximum height of six feet. The maximum height may exceed six feet by one-foot for each five feet by which the distance between the fountain or similar water feature and the lot line exceeds 45.0 feet. 
(12)  Bathhouses, except in front yards or side yards abutting a street, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The floor area of a bathhouse shall not exceed 200 square feet 
b.  The height of a bathhouse shall not exceed 15 feet. 
(13)  Open or roofed over porches or terraces (without screens), awnings, and canopies are permitted to encroach a distance of up to seven feet into a required front yard, or side yard adjoining a street. For the purposes of this subsection, a roofed over or open porch or terrace shall not include opaque walls. However, open railings with open spacing between balusters of no less than two inches are permitted to a height of 48 inches above the floor surface of the porch. 
(14)  A nonpaying guesthouse (without kitchen facilities), rooms for guests in an accessory building, or an accessory office, except in front yards or side yards abutting a street, provided that the floor area of such accessory building shall not exceed 400 square feet and the height of such accessory building shall not exceed 18 feet, and, provided that such facilities are used for the occasional housing of guests of the occupants of the principal building and not for the permanent occupancy by others as housekeeping units. 
(15)  The following permitted obstructions in required yards: 
a.  Arbors or trellises provided that the maximum height not exceed seven feet. 
b.  Bay windows, bay additions without foundations, and balconies projecting not more than 24 inches into required front, rear or side yards for a width not greater than ten feet. 
c.  Chimneys projecting into any required yard not more than 24 inches for a distance not greater than eight feet. 
d.  Eaves, gutters or downspouts projecting not more than 24 inches into required front, rear or side yards. 
e.  Flagpoles. 
f.  Hedges and other landscaping. 
g.  Monuments and pillars when not included as part of a fence or wall, subject to the following: 
1.  The maximum height shall not exceed four feet. 
2.  The maximum footprint shall not exceed two feet by two feet. 
3.  No more than two monuments or pillars shall be permitted within any required yard. 
h.  Nonmechanical laundry drying equipment, except in front yards or side yards abutting a street. 
i.  Off-street parking and loading to the extent provided in section 98-294(d). 
j.  Open terraces not over four feet above the average level of the adjoining ground, but not including a permanently roofed-over (or trellis-roofed) terrace or porch. 
k.  Statuary. 
l.  Steps, landings, and stoops not exceeding four feet in height. 
(16)  Signs as provided in article VII. 
(17)  Off-street parking and loading facilities as regulated by article VI. 
(18)  Telecommunications service facilities as regulated by chapter 78. 
(c)  None of the following shall be an accessory use: 
(1)  The following vehicles or trailers (as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code) shall not be parked or stored outdoors within a residentially zoned district: 
a.  Any commercial automobile, van, truck, sport utility vehicle, or other motorized vehicle regardless of size or license plate designation. Commercial vehicles may be identified by certain characteristics, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Lettering or logos; or 
2.  Racks used primarily for business purposes to which ladders, pipes or other equipment may be mounted; or 
3.  Open bed vehicles containing equipment or materials used primarily for, or to promote, a business purpose. 
Commercial vehicles may park on any public way within a residentially zoned district only during authorized hours of construction as set forth in section 18-44 when the operator of said vehicle is engaged in commercial activity on such property or at any time when the operator of said vehicle is responding to an emergency service call at such property. 
b.  Any personal automobile, van, truck, sporty utility vehicle, or other motorized vehicle, with a "D" license plate designation or higher, except as may be authorized pursuant to a conditional use granted in accordance with section 98-50. 
c.  Any bus, tow truck, automobile transporter, taxicab, or limousine regardless of size or license plate designation. 
d.  Recreational vehicles, and aircraft, except as authorized pursuant to a conditional use granted in accordance with section 98-50. 
e.  Boats, except that one boat, with a maximum height of ten feet above ground level and overall length of 26 feet (including hitch and bumper), may be stored in a side or rear yard. 
f.  Trailers, except a single camping trailer, with a maximum height of five feet above ground level and a maximum length of 26 feet (including hitch and bumper), may be stored in a side or rear yard. 
g.  No boat, trailer, bus, van, truck, automobile, or other type of vehicle, shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes, while parked on a residentially zoned district. The building and zoning director may, upon good cause shown, grant permission for the parking of such vehicle or vehicles for a period of time not exceeding 48 hours. 
(2)  Outdoor storage, except as specifically permitted by the district regulations. 
(3)  Private stables, except in compliance with the following restrictions: 
a.  Lot area. A minimum lot area of two acres shall be provided. 
b.  Fenced pasture land. A minimum fenced pasture area of one-acre shall be provided for each horse, excluding offspring less than eight months of age. The fence shall be sufficient to contain the pastured horses. 
c.  Location. The stable shall not be located within 100 feet of the property line. 
d.  Sanitation. 
1.  All feed shall be stored in rodent-proof containers. 
2.  Manure in excess of two cubic yards shall be removed and properly disposed of. 
3.  Manure shall be stored in containers approved by the health department, and shall have tight fitting covers. 
4.  No manure shall be stored within 100 feet of any property line. 
5.  All nuisance causing conditions shall be immediately abated. 
(Ord. No. 5579, § 4, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 5793, § 3, 5-6-2014; Ord. No. 6058, § 3, 12-6-2016)  
Sec. 98-214. - Bulk regulations. 
All accessory uses shall comply with the bulk regulations of the district in which they are located provided that no accessory use shall be setback closer to a front lot line or a side lot line abutting a street than the setback of the principal structure to that lot line; except however, some accessory uses shall be subject to additional bulk regulations, conditions, restrictions, and exemptions as provided in section 98-213(b). 
(Ord. No. 5579, § 4, 9-18-2012)  
Sec. 98-215. - Standards. 
All accessory uses shall comply with all standards applicable to the district in which they are located. No accessory use shall be established or erected prior to the establishment or erection of the principal use to which it is accessory. No existing accessory use may be expanded or extended, except in compliance with all of the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5579, § 4, 9-18-2012)  
Sec. 98-216. - Home occupations. 
(a)  There are permitted in any residential dwelling home occupations of the type frequently found in dwellings used for residential purposes. 
(b)  Any home occupation shall comply with the following standards, in addition to all of the standards applicable to the district in which it is located: 
(1)  No person shall be employed other than members of the immediate family occupying such dwelling. 
(2)  No stock in trade, except articles produced by the members of the immediate family residing on the premises, shall be displayed or sold upon the premises. 
(3)  No alteration of the principal building shall be made which changes the character thereof as a dwelling. 
(4)  No more than 25 percent of the area of one story of the principal building shall be devoted to any home occupation, except the letting of rooms to roomers or boarders. 
(5)  The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal building that is used as the residential dwelling, except that persons furnishing child care may provide outdoor recreation on the premises. 
(6)  No outdoor storage shall be permitted. 
(7)  No home occupation shall be operated in such a manner as to cause a nuisance. 
(8)  Home occupations must comply with the regulations set forth in article VII pertaining to signs and article VIII pertaining to performance standards. 
(9)  The standards for home occupations shall not apply to day care homes as defined in section 98-4. 
(c)  Permitted home occupations include, but are not limited to, the following occupations; provided, however, that each listed occupation shall be subject to the requirements of section 98-216 as well as to any limitations specifically imposed on such occupation by this section: 
(1)  Artists, sculptors, or authors. 
(2)  Day care homes. 
(3)  Dressmakers, seamstresses, or tailors. 
(4)  Lawyers, architects, engineers, realtors, insurance agents, brokers and members of similar professions. 
(5)  Ministers, rabbis, priests, imams, and other leaders of religious orders. 
(6)  Music or dancing teachers, tutors, or similar specialized instruction, provided that the instruction shall be limited to one pupil at a time, except for occasional groups. 
(7)  Physicians, dentists, or other licensed medical practitioners. 
(8)  The letting for hire of not more than two rooms for rooming or boarding use for not more than two persons, neither of whom is a transient. 
(d)  Permitted home occupations shall not in any event be deemed to include the following: 
(1)  Animal hospitals. 
(2)  Barbershops or salons. 
(3)  Beauty parlors. 
(4)  Clinics or hospitals. 
(5)  Dance schools. 
(6)  Mortuaries. 
(7)  Nursery schools. 
(8)  Private clubs. 
(9)  Renting of trailers. 
(10)  Repair shops or service establishments, except the repair of electrical appliances, computers and computer equipment, cameras, or other similar small items. 
(11)  Restaurants. 
(12)  Stables or animal kennels. 
(13)  Tourist homes. 
(Ord. No. 5579, § 4, 9-18-2012)  
Sec. 98-217. - Temporary uses. 
The following uses of land are permitted in each district, subject to the specific regulations and time limits which follow and the regulations of the district in which the use is located: 
(1)  Tents or similar temporary coverings used for weather protection of goods which must be stored outdoors because of emergency conditions, provided that such use shall continue only during the duration of the emergency, except plastic or canvas coverings (enclosures) may be permitted for the seasonal display of goods for a period not to exceed that which is allowable for the given seasonal display, and further, in compliance with the following requirements: 
a.  Such enclosure is accessory to a principal use which is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
b.  The maximum dimensions of the enclosure shall not exceed 20 feet in width, 40 feet in length and 15 feet in height. 
c.  The permitted location of such temporary enclosure on the lot shall be established by the appearance commission. 
(2)  The outdoor seasonal display and sale of Christmas trees for not more than 60 days, pumpkins for not more than 30 days and plants for not more than 90 days annually. Display of such goods need not comply with the yard requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that no goods shall be displayed within the minimum setback for the district within which the land is located and shall not be located in any residential district, except on church or school property. 
(3)  Contractors' offices and equipment sheds, containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations, accessory to a construction project, and shall continue only during the duration of such project. 
(4)  Real estate offices, containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit, incident to a new housing development, and shall continue only until the disposal of all dwelling units in the development. 
(5)  Carnivals or circuses, when operated by a local nonprofit organization, not to be located in any residential district, except on church or school property, and shall continue for a period not to exceed one week. Such uses shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the district in which the uses are located. 
(6)  Bazaars and garage sales. 
(7)  Displays of holiday related lighting, decorations, or structures for a maximum period of 60 days. Such displays shall not require the approval of the appearance commission or a building permit unless new electrical or structural work is involved in the installation or assembly of such displays. Such displays shall be permitted only on private property, but may be located in any yard except those locations which obstruct required parking or loading areas. 
(8)  Mobile storage containers in residential districts upon private property only upon a driveway and when accessory to a principal residence, and shall continue only for a period of up to five consecutive days and upon no more than ten days in any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 6058, § 4, 12-6-2016)  
Sec. 98-218. - Outdoor dining. 
Outdoor dining meeting the following requirements may be permitted as an accessory use in all districts as set forth in the use code table, section 98-84, and subject to the following requirements: 
Outdoor dining accessory to a permitted restaurant is authorized either on a public sidewalk or on private property, subject to a license that may be issued by the Village Manager and subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Outdoor dining uses. 
a.  The permissible hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and 7:00 a.m.—midnight Friday and Saturday. 
b.  Tables, chairs and other equipment used in conjunction with outdoor dining shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular flow or access to the building. 
c.  The Village Manager may administratively approve the appearance of outdoor dining furniture and equipment, subject to the Glen Town Center Tenant Design Criteria, which was approved by Ordinance Number 4534 on June 17, 2003. Administrative denials relating to the appearance of outdoor dining furniture and equipment may be appealed through the appearance commission in accordance with the standards set forth in subsection (3)b.3. 
d.  Outdoor dining requests are subject to a mailed notification to adjacent property owners. A mailed notice shall be sent to all adjacent property owners on a one plus one basis, allowing 15 days for response. If there is no response, the director of development may approve the outdoor dining request. If an adjacent property owner responds with a concern regarding compliance with the provisions of the outdoor dining ordinance, the director of development shall attempt to resolve the concern, or forward the case to the plan commission in the form of a conditional use request. 
e.  Between the dates of December 1 and March 1, tables and chairs used for outdoor dining must be stored in an indoor location not within public view, approved by the Village Fire Prevention Bureau. 
f.  The fees for outdoor dining licenses shall be as established in section 30-1. 
g.  Outdoor dining that does not conform to the requirements of subsection 98-218(1) shall require approval through the conditional use process in accordance with section 98-50. The appearance requirements, annual license fee, hold harmless agreement, and liability insurance shall apply in all circumstances. 
(2)  Outdoor dining on a public sidewalk. 
a.  Compliance with the outdoor dining uses requirements in subsections (1)a.—g. referenced herein. 
b.  The permissible location for outdoor dining shall be between the lot lines of the restaurant's building or leased premises as if such lot lines were continued to the street or alley, including wraparound corners, provided however, that no outdoor dining shall be closer than five feet from the street edge or curb, or located within ten feet of a fire hydrant, pedestrian crosswalk, corner, bus stop or taxi stand. Minimum sidewalk clearance shall be five unobstructed feet in width, measured from the curb to any and all sidewalk tables, benches and chairs. 
c.  The licensee shall submit an agreement, in a form acceptable to the Village Attorney, indemnifying and holding the Village harmless from any cause of action which may arise as a result of an injury to a person or property resulting from the use of an outdoor dining facility on the Village right-of-way. 
d.  The licensee must provide a policy of insurance that names the Village as an additional insured in a primary and noncontributory status, with minimum liability limits of $1,000,000.00 for each occurrence and $3,000,000.00 for the general aggregate. 
(3)  Appeals. 
a.  Scope and commencement. An appeal from a decision of the office of the Village Manager relative to the interpretation of the appearance of outdoor dining furniture and equipment may be taken to the appearance commission by any person, firm or corporation, or entity affected by such decision. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the appearance commission by general rule, by filing with the building and zoning director a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The Village Manager shall forthwith transmit to the appearance commission all of the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. 
b.  Action. 
1.  An appeal to the appearance commission shall stop the outdoor dining process until a decision regarding the appeal is made. 
2.  The appearance commission shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the interested parties and shall render a written decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. 
3.  With the concurring vote of a majority of the appearance commissioners, the appearance commission may affirm or reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the decision from which the appeal was taken, and to that end, the appearance commission shall have all the powers of the building and zoning director with respect to such decisions relating to the appearance of outdoor dining furniture and equipment. 
4.  The Village Manager shall maintain complete records of all actions of the appearance commission relative to appeals, and shall keep the board of trustees informed, on a current basis, of the disposition of each case. 
(4)  License requirements. Failure of the licensee to comply with the requirements referenced herein may result in termination of the aforesaid license. The Village may terminate the aforesaid license at any time upon violation by the licensee of any Village ordinance. Upon such termination, at the sole option of the Village but at the sole cost and expense of the licensee, within ten days of the receipt of written notice from the Village to do so the licensee shall remove the outdoor dining equipment and cease the use granted thereby; and upon the failure of the licensee to remove same, the Village may undertake or cause the removal of said outdoor dining furniture and equipment and charge the cost of such removal to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 5716, § 5, 11-5-2013)  
Secs. 98-219—98-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMITIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 98-251. - Purpose; classifications. 
(a)  This article establishes districts, each of which is an appropriate location only for the uses, buildings and other structures permitted therein by this article. Within such districts, however, there exist nonconformities that were lawful before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but that could not be newly constructed under the terms of this chapter. Future amendments to this chapter may be expected to create additional nonconformities. 
(b)  Recognizing the legitimate interest of those who lawfully established such nonconformities, this article is intended to permit most of such nonconformities to continue indefinitely. However, the Village desires, pursuant to the authority granted in section 11-13-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, to eventually eliminate the types of nonconformities which have the most serious adverse effect on the surrounding areas. It is also recognized and declared that nonconformities substantially and adversely affect the orderly development, maintenance, use and taxable value of other property in the district-property that is itself subject to the regulations of this article. Therefore, it is necessary and consistent with the establishment of districts to strictly regulate nonconformities and encourage that such nonconformities be brought into eventual compliance with the standards of this chapter. Accordingly, nonconformities are divided into the following four classes: 
(1)  Lots smaller than the minimum now required (see section 98-252); 
(2)  Residential buildings which meet the present use regulations, but not the present bulk regulations (see section 98-253); 
(3)  Nonresidential buildings which meet the present use regulations, but not the present bulk regulations (see section 98-254); and 
(4)  Buildings and uses which do not meet the present use regulations (see section 98-255). 
(c)  The failure of any existing use, building or structure to comply with any of the standards of this chapter, other than the use and bulk regulations of the district in which such use, building or structure is located, shall not cause such use, building or structure to become a nonconformity within the meaning of this article. 
(Code 1959, § 24.9.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-252. - Lots smaller than the minimum now required. 
(a)  Residential districts. 
(1)  In any residential district, notwithstanding regulations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a single-family dwelling, or an addition thereto, which complies with the regulations of subsection (a)(2) of this section, may be erected on a lot consisting entirely of a tract of land that: 
a.  Has less than the prescribed minimum lot size or width, or both; 
b.  Is shown by a recorded plat or deed to have been owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the creation of a lot of such size and width at such location would not have been prohibited by any zoning ordinance; and 
c.  Has continuously remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining tracts of land during the entire time that the creation of such lot has been prohibited by the applicable zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Construction permitted by subsection (a)(1) of this section shall comply with all regulations, except lot size and width, applicable to single-family dwellings in the district in which the lot in question is located; provided, however, that the following side yard requirements shall apply to lots with less than the required lot width in place of the side yard requirements otherwise applicable, but shall in no case permit a required side yard of less than six feet: 
a.  The sum of the width of the two side yards on each lot shall not be less than the smaller of: 
1.  Twenty-four percent of the width of the lot; or 
2.  The minimum total for both side yards prescribed by the bulk regulations for such district. 
b.  No side yard width shall be less than ten percent of the width of the lot and in no case less than six feet. 
c.  The width of any side yard that adjoins a public street shall not in any event be less than ten feet. 
(b)  Districts other than residential districts. 
(1)  In any district other than a residential district, notwithstanding regulations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a building designed for any permitted use, other than a multiple-family dwelling, may be erected on a lot of the type as set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(2)  Construction permitted by subsection (b)(1) of this section shall comply with all regulations, except lot size and width, applicable in the district in which the lot in question is located; provided, however, that the width of any side yard need not be greater than that derived by applying the following equation (width required = x): 
x / Actual lot width = Minimum side yard required by district regulations / Minimum lot width required by district regulations 
(Code 1959, § 24.9.2; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-253. - Nonconforming residential buildings used for a permitted use. 
In residential districts, a residential building which contains no nonconforming use, but which does not comply with the applicable bulk regulations, may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Enlargement, maintenance, repair and structural alteration. Such building may be enlarged, maintained, repaired or structurally altered; provided, however, that no such enlargement, maintenance, repair or structural alteration shall either create any additional nonconformity or increase the degree of existing nonconformity of all or any part of such building, except when an existing nonconforming single-family building is nonconforming in setback only, by no more than ten percent of the required setback, the building and zoning director may, in his discretion, allow a second floor addition in accordance with the provisions of section 98-43(d), and in consideration of the criteria listed in section 98-47(c). 
(2)  Damage or destruction. If a nonconforming residential building is damaged or destroyed by any means, it may be reconstructed within the original gross foundation area. 
(3)  Moving. No nonconforming residential building shall be moved, in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless the entire building shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located after being moved. 
(Code 1959, § 24.9.3; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-254. - Nonconforming nonresidential buildings used for permitted uses. 
In districts other than residential districts, a building or structure which is devoted to a use permitted by the applicable district regulations, but does not comply with the applicable bulk regulations, may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Ordinary repair and maintenance. 
a.  Work may be done on ordinary maintenance and repair, or on repair, replacement, installation or relocation of nonbearing walls or partitions, or fixtures, wiring or plumbing; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be deemed to authorize any violation of subsections (2)—(5) of this section. 
b.  Nothing in this subsection (1) shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of a building or other structure, other than a damaged or destroyed building or other structure subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section, in accordance with the order of a public official who is charged with protecting the public safety and who declares such building or other structure to be unsafe and orders the restoration thereof to a safe condition. 
(2)  Structural alteration. No structural alteration shall be made unless the entire building or other structure and use thereof shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Enlargement. No such building or structure shall be enlarged or added to in any manner unless such building or other structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(4)  Damage or destruction. If any such building or structure is damaged or destroyed by any means to such an extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before such damage or destruction exceeds 50 percent of the current replacement cost of the entire building or structure, exclusive of foundations, such building or structure shall not be restored unless it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. Even if such damage is 50 percent or less, no repairs or restoration shall be made unless a building permit is obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial destruction and is diligently pursued to completion. 
(5)  Moving. No such building or other structure shall be moved, in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same lot or any other lot, unless the entire building or other structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located after being moved. 
(Code 1959, § 24.9.4; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-255. - Nonconforming use of structures and land. 
Subject to the following regulations, there may be continued, as long as lawful, either a lawfully existing nonconforming use of part or all of a building or other structure, or a lawfully existing nonconforming use of an undeveloped lot. 
(1)  Ordinary repair and maintenance. 
a.  Work may be done on ordinary maintenance and repairs, or on repair, replacement, installation or relocation of nonbearing walls or partitions, or fixtures, wiring or plumbing; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be deemed to authorize any violation of subsections (2)—(8) of this section. 
b.  Nothing in this subsection (1) shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of a building or other structure in accordance with the order of a public official who is charged with protecting the public safety and who declares such building or other structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition, where such restoration will not be in violation of subsection (5) of this section. 
(2)  Structural alteration. No structural alteration shall be made unless the entire building or other structure and use thereof shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Extension, expansion, enlargement or increase in intensity. A nonconforming use shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged or increased in intensity. Such prohibited activities shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Extension of such use to any building, other structure or land area other than one occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or on the effective date of a subsequent amendment thereto that causes such use to become nonconforming. 
b.  Extension of such use within a building or other structure to any portion of the floor area that was not occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or on the effective date of a subsequent amendment thereto that causes such use to become nonconforming; provided, however, that such use may be extended throughout any part of such building or other structure that was lawfully and manifestly designed or arranged for such use on such effective date. 
c.  Operation of such nonconforming use in such a manner as to conflict with, or further conflict with if already conflicting on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or on the effective date of a subsequent amendment thereto that results in such use becoming nonconforming, any standards established for the district in which the use is located. 
(4)  Enlargement. No building or other structure that is devoted, in whole or in part, to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged or added to in any manner unless such building or other structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(5)  Damage or destruction. If any building or other structure that is devoted, in whole or in part, to a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means to such an extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before such damage or destruction exceeds 50 percent of the current replacement cost of the entire building or other structure, exclusive of foundations, such building or other structure shall not be restored unless such building or other structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. Whether the damage or destruction is more or less than 50 percent, no repairs or restoration shall be made unless a building permit is obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial destruction and is diligently pursued to completion. 
(6)  Moving. No building or other structure that is devoted, in whole or in part, to a nonconforming use shall be moved, in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other lot unless the entire building or other structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located after being moved. No nonconforming use of land shall be moved, in whole or in part, for any distance whatsoever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless such use shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located after being moved. 
(7)  Change. A nonconforming use of a building or other structure, all or substantially all of which was originally designed or intended for a use which is permitted in the district in which it is located, shall not be changed to any use other than a use permitted in the district in which the land is located. When a nonconforming use has been changed to a permitted use, it shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
(8)  Abandonment. A building, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in which it is located, which is or becomes vacant and is abandoned for a period of three months without any attempt to resume the use, shall not thereafter be occupied or used, except in a manner which conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. If a nonconforming use of an undeveloped lot is abandoned for a period of one year without any attempt to resume the use, such use shall not thereafter be renewed, and any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(9)  Nonconforming accessory uses. No nonconforming accessory use shall continue after the principal use to which it is accessory has been abolished. 
(Code 1959, § 24.9.5; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-256. - Existing conditional uses. 
Where a use existed on the date of enactment of Ordinance No. 1400 (June 26, 1964) or any amendment thereto, and is permitted by Ordinance No. 1400 or any amendment thereto only as a conditional use in the district in which it is located, such use shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a lawful conditional use in such district; provided, however, that any extension, expansion, enlargement or increase in intensity of existing business uses which, by operation of such ordinance, are converted to conditional uses, shall be required to comply with the applicable standards, bulk regulations of the district in which the use is located and related regulations as are provided for the business district zoning classification associated with the contemplated use, provided further, that this section shall not apply with respect to the utilization of outside illumination in any district and for which provision is made for its amortization under section 98-257(1). 
(Code 1959, § 24.9.6; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-257. - Time schedules for elimination of certain nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Certain lawful nonconforming uses which do not comply with the regulations of this chapter shall be eliminated or made to conform within the following time periods: 
(1)  In any district, any lawful nonconforming sign which does not comply with all the regulations of article VII shall be eliminated or made to conform within four years of annexation or from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, whichever is later. When a changeable copy sign (manual) existed within the Village on or before October 20, 1980, such sign shall be exempt from this section unless such sign is modified after such date. 
(2)  In any district, any lawful nonconforming use of an undeveloped lot shall be eliminated within two years of annexation, or the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, whichever is later. 
(3)  In any residential district, any lawful nonconforming use, other than a multiple-family dwelling, which is located in a building originally designed or intended for a use permitted in such residential district shall be eliminated within three years of annexation, or the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, whichever is later. 
(4)  In any district, any lawful nonconforming use which is abandoned for a period of three months, without substantial attempt to resume such use, shall lose such nonconforming status and may not be resumed, except in a manner conforming to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(b)  All existing non-conforming multi-family structures which are located in zoning districts currently designated as single family residential districts shall hereinafter be permitted to remain and continue as a non-conforming use under section 98-255 provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  The premises be made available for an annual inspection by a representative of the Glenview Development Department to ensure that the premises are in safe and sanitary conditions. The fee for such annual inspection shall be $10.00. 
2.  The property has not been altered or added to in a manner which would constitute an increase in the intensity of the nonconformance. 
(Code 1959, § 24.9.7; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 3292, § 1, 11-5-2009)  
Secs. 98-258—98-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 90-181 et seq. 
 
Sec. 98-291. - Purpose. 
For the convenience of persons who seek to use the facilities of the Village, it is essential that adequate parking and loading facilities be available. To prevent traffic congestion that would inconvenience all residents and visitors of the Village, it is important that parking and loading facilities be located in such a manner as to cause the least possible interruption in the orderly flow of traffic. The regulations of this article are designed to promote such goals. 
(Code 1959, § 24.10.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-292. - Off-street parking required; permit and application. 
(a)  In any district, every person constructing, structurally altering, enlarging or increasing the capacity of any structure or improving or altering the surface of the land as in the case of an existing off-street parking facility or initiating or extending any land use subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall provide off-street parking facilities in accordance with the regulations of this article. 
(b)  An application for such off-street parking facilities shall be made to the office of the building and zoning director upon forms provided for such purpose and construction shall not begin until a permit has been issued by such office. No off-street parking lot use may be instituted until, by final inspection, approval has been given and a certificate of occupancy obtained. The building and zoning director may approve conditional or temporary uses during construction. 
(Code 1959, § 24.10.2; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-293. - Number of required off-street parking spaces. 
(a)  For the purpose of determining off-street parking and loading requirements, the term "floor area" shall be defined to be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, or portion thereof, devoted to a use requiring off-street parking or loading as provided in this article. Such area shall include accessory storage areas located within selling or working space devoted to retailing activities, the production or processing of goods, or business or professional offices. However, the term "floor area" shall not include floor space devoted primarily to the housing of mechanical or electrical equipment, or storage purposes, except as otherwise noted in this article, nor floor space and ramps, aisles and maneuvering space devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities, nor basement floor space, other than the area devoted to merchandising activities, the production or processing of goods, business or professional offices, or dwelling uses. 
(b)  Adequate off-street parking facilities shall be provided to accommodate all the motor vehicles of residents or employees, visitors and customers, and the vehicles used in the conduct of any business or enterprise, but in no case shall the number of off-street parking spaces provided be less than the following: 
(1)  Automobile service stations, four parking spaces, plus one parking space for each employee, plus one parking space for each emergency vehicle or other vehicle kept on the premises. 
(2)  Bowling alleys, five parking spaces for each alley, plus such additional spaces as may be required in this section for affiliated uses, such as restaurants, etc. 
(3)  Business and commercial establishments, except such establishments otherwise specified in this section, one parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
(4)  Business and professional offices, one parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
(5)  Cartage, express, parcel delivery and freight terminal establishments, one parking space for each two employees, plus one parking space for each vehicle maintained on the premises. 
(6)  Churches, auditoriums, gymnasiums, stadiums, theaters and other places of public assembly with fixed seats, one parking space for each three seats or bench seating spaces, based upon the maximum permanent seating capacity. For the purpose of such use, parking spaces already provided to meet off-street parking requirements for business, commercial and industrial establishments, or off-street parking facilities provided by the Village, lying within 300 feet of the place of public assembly as measured along lines of public access, and that are not normally in use between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and midnight or on Sundays or holidays, and are made available for other parking, may be used to meet up to 75 percent of the total requirements for parking spaces for places of public assembly. 
(7)  Commercial nursery schools, including day care facilities, one parking space for each 350 square feet of gross floor area. 
(8)  Continuing care retirement community, one parking space for each detached single-family dwelling or multiple-family building containing not more than four dwelling units, plus one parking space per unit for each multiple-family building containing more than four dwelling units; provided, however, that up to 25 percent of such parking spaces may be landbanked until the need for such parking spaces is determined by the Village. In addition, one parking space for each three assisted care units, plus the number of parking spaces otherwise required for a nursing home located on the premises, plus three parking spaces for every five employees anticipated at the largest shift for all uses, other than the nursing home, shall be provided. 
(9)  Elementary schools, nursery schools and junior high schools, public or private, three parking spaces for each two classrooms. 
(10)  Establishments handling the sale and consumption, on the premises, of food, beverages and refreshments, one parking space for each three persons, based upon the maximum number of customers that can be accommodated at the same time in accordance with the designed capacity. 
(11)  High schools, public or private, one parking space for each five students, based upon the maximum number of students attending classes on the premises at any one time in any 24-hour period. 
(12)  Hospitals and hospices, three parking spaces for each five beds, plus three parking spaces for every five employees, other than doctors, plus one space for each doctor assigned to the staff. 
(13)  Manufacturing, production, processing, assembly, disassembly, cleaning, servicing, testing or repairing of goods, materials or products or any other industrial establishment, except those otherwise specified in this section, one parking space for each employee. 
(14)  Mortuaries, eight spaces for each area which can be used as a parlor or chapel, plus one space for each funeral vehicle maintained on the premises. 
(15)  Motels and hotels, one parking space for each sleeping room or suite, plus one additional parking space for each employee on duty at any one time, plus one parking space for each 100 square feet of meeting rooms, and bars and cocktail lounges. In addition, other uses, such as restaurants, retail sales or offices, which do not exclusively serve the establishment shall provide parking spaces on the basis of the off-street parking requirements set forth elsewhere in this chapter. 
(16)  Multifamily dwellings, two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(17)  Nursing homes, two parking spaces for the first ten beds, plus one parking space for each 20 beds after the first ten, plus one parking space for each two employees. 
(18)  Private clubs, one parking space for each two members of the staff, plus one parking space for each six club members, plus one parking space for each room which could be used to provide lodging accommodations for club members or their guests. 
(19)  Public libraries, public museums, public art galleries and other public buildings, one parking space for each 800 square feet of floor area. 
(20)  Senior citizen housing facilities, one parking space for every three dwelling units. 
(21)  Single-family dwellings, one parking space per dwelling. 
(22)  Warehouses, and storage and wholesale establishments, one parking space for each two employees. 
(Code 1959, § 24.10.3; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5182, § 6, 1-8-2009; Ord. No. 5748, § 2, 12-10-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5748, § 2, adopted December 10, 2013, set out provisions noting this section of the Code shall not be applicable to automotive sales and leasing dealership uses; provided, however, that all other standards and regulations set forth in this Code relating to automotive sales and leasing uses shall remain in full force and effect.  
Sec. 98-294. - Off-street parking standards. 
(a)  Utilization. Required accessory off-street parking facilities shall be solely for the parking of motor vehicles of patrons, occupants or employees of such uses. Nonrequired off-street parking facilities in B-1, B-2 or B-3 commercial districts, or I-1 or 1-2 industrial districts, such as that surplus to the requirements of section 98-293, or areas devoted to the standing or storage of new or used vehicles located in the front one-half of the depth of the property shall be bound by all regulations of this article, except that such areas need not be marked. 
(b)  Area. A required off-street parking area space shall be at least nine feet in width and at least 19 feet in length, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns and office or work areas. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet. 
(c)  Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway, for which a driveway permit has been obtained, of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. Each such driveway shall comply with the standards set forth in the State department of highway's booklet entitled Policy on Permits for Access Driveways to State Highways. 
(d)  Required yards. Enclosed buildings and carports containing off-street parking shall be subject to the yard requirements applicable in the district in which located. Open off-street parking areas may be located in any yard, except that: 
(1)  In any residential district, off-street parking shall not be located in any area of the front yard extended to include the area of the setback; however, the continuous storage of any vehicle upon an improved parking area, driveway or turnaround for a period of less than one month shall not be deemed to be such off-street parking. 
(2)  In any residential district on a corner lot devoted to a residential use, off-street parking shall not be located closer to the side lot line bounding a street than the minimum side yard width prescribed by the bulk regulations for the district; however, the continuous storage of any vehicle upon an improved parking area, driveway or turnaround for a period of less than one month shall not be deemed to be such off-street parking. 
(3)  In any district, on any lot devoted to a nonresidential use, if any front lot line, side lot line or rear lot line separates the lot, or is across the street or alley, from a lot in a residential district, the off-street parking shall not be located closer to such lot line than the minimum front yard depth, side yard width or rear yard depth, as the case may be, prescribed by the bulk regulations for the district in which the off-street parking area is located. 
(e)  Design and maintenance. 
(1)  Enclosures. Off-street parking spaces may be open or enclosed in a building. 
(2)  Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas and access drives, except parking spaces accessory to a single-family dwelling, shall be graded and paved or otherwise improved with bituminous concrete or portland cement concrete. 
(3)  Separation. 
a.  All open off-street parking areas, except parking areas accessory to single-family dwellings, shall be separated from public sidewalks by a strip of ground at least four feet in width, which shall be landscaped with a hedge, planting or an ornamental fence for the entire length of the parking area not more than four feet in height and provided with a six-inch high poured-in-place concrete curb on the parking lot side, extending below grade not less than 18 inches or, in lieu thereof, a steel guardrail to prevent movement of vehicles across the lot line. If a steel guardrail is used, a hedge planting is required to a height at least as high as the top of the guardrail, but in no case more than four feet in height. The hedge, along with any other planting, shall extend along the entire length of the guardrail and be of sufficient density to obscure the guardrail from view on the public sidewalk. A distance of at least 24 inches shall be provided between the sidewalk face of the guardrail and public sidewalk to allow for the shrub planting. The planting is required to be maintained to comply with the screening requirement to the continuing satisfaction of the building and zoning director. 
b.  When an open off-street parking area containing more than two parking spaces, except a parking use accessory to a single-family residence, adjoins a residential zoned district or is separated from a residential zoned district only by a dedicated street or public way, except when abutting on a dedicated public alley at the rear, an effective buffer shall be provided at the lot line to protect the privacy of the adjoining residential uses by a fence of one color or a densely planted compact hedge, not less then four feet in height, and for the entire length of the parking area, provided that, if the lot line adjoins the street or public way, the hedge, planting or ornamental fence shall not be more than four feet in height. 
(4)  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be equipped with suitable shielding or be designed to prevent glare at eye level on surrounding public or private property. 
(5)  Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind, except emergency repairs, shall be permitted on any open off-street parking area or access driveway. 
(6)  Signs. The building and zoning director may require the installation of entrance and exit signs where two drives serve a single use and only where necessary in the interest of public safety. 
(7)  Drainage. All open off-street parking areas, except parking areas accessory to single-family dwellings, shall be provided with underground drains connecting with storm sewers. Where competent engineering proof of the unreasonableness of such provision is supplied by the applicant, the building and zoning director may permit other methods whereby adequate drainage is accomplished. 
(8)  Unusable areas. All parts of open off-street parking areas which are unusable, either for parking or traffic, shall be paved or landscaped with plantings of flowers, shrubs and/or trees, which shall be continuously maintained. 
(9)  Marking. Designated parking spaces, except parking spaces accessory to single-family dwellings, shall be marked on the surface of the parking area with paint or permanent marking materials and maintained in a clearly visible condition. 
(10)  Landscaping. 
a.  Parking lot landscaping design guidelines, approved under Ordinance No. 4964 and listed as an exhibit provides clarification to the section and is referenced herein. 
b.  Surface parking lot perimeters. 
1.  The surface parking lot perimeters section of the section shall apply to all parking lots unless otherwise stated. 
2.  Surface parking lots shall have a minimum five-foot wide buffer, which shall be increased to seven feet if parking stall depth is 17 feet (allows for vehicular overhangs). The buffer shall surround the perimeter of the property, except for yards abutting residential properties, as described in subsection (3)b. 
3.  All parking lots shall be screened, for the purpose of minimizing views of parked cars from the public right-of-way, by a landscaped treatment along all property lines which abut the public right-of-way. This landscaped treatment is further described in the design guidelines, but at a minimum shall conform to the following: 
i.  Three-foot minimum height of screening, except where pre-existing trees or planned additional trees require breaks. 
ii.  Be located solely on private property and allow for a clear sight triangle for drivers. 
4.  Perimter trees. 
i.  For lots with 20 or more spaces, the perimeter of the parking lot may incorporate up to 35 percent of the required interior parking lot trees (see subsection (e)(10)c for tree requirements). 
ii.  For lots with less than 20 spaces, the perimeter of the parking lot may incorporate up to 100 percent of the required interior parking lot trees as long as those trees are placed on private property within 20 feet of the parking lot. (See subsection (e)(10)c. for tree requirements.) 
c.  Surface parking lot interiors. 
1.  Parking lot count. 
i.  Parking lots with 20 or more proposed parking spaces shall abide by the entire interior surface parking lot landscape ordinance. 
ii.  Parking lots with less than 20 parking spaces shall incorporate no less than one tree per seven parking lot spaces and shall also abide subsection c.8. 
2.  A minimum of 65 percent of the required parking lot trees shall be provided within the interior of surface parking lots. 
3.  Fifteen parking spaces is the maximum number that can be constructed before a landscaped island is proposed. 
4.  The total tree count shall be no less than one tree per five parking lot spaces. 
5.  The end of every parking aisle shall have a landscaped island, including aisles that abut any trash enclosure. 
6.  The minimum size of a parking lot island shall be nine feet by 19 feet to ensure property growth and protection of the landscaping materials planted therein. The minimum size of an island can be nine feet by 17 feet to correspond with a nine-foot by 17-foot parking space if certain conditions exist (two-foot overhang). 
7.  Parking lots with seven or more parking aisles shall include a continuous parking lot island at intervals not to exceed every four parking aisles. 
8.  Soil preparation shall be in maintained in accordance with the maintenance design guidelines of the appearance code. 
d.  Parking lot maintenance. 
1.  Parking lot landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with the maintenance section of the appearance code design guidelines. 
2.  Plants shall be regularly inspected for pests in accordance with best management practices recommended by the Illinois Landscape Contractors Association. 
3.  Plants shall be pruned and litter removed in accordance with best management practices recommended by the Illinois Landscaped Contractors Association. 
(f)  Computation of fractional spaces. When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this article results in a requirement of a fractional space, the fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded and a fraction in excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space. 
(g)  Collective provisions. Off-street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so furnished is not less than the sum of the spaces required for all such separate uses, and provided that all regulations covering the location of accessory parking spaces in relation to the use served are observed. A written agreement covering such collective use shall be filed with the building and zoning director. 
(h)  Location. All required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building or use served, or within 300 feet of the nearest point of the principal structure; provided, however, that no off-street parking facility for a business or industrial use shall be located in a residential district. 
(i)  Employee parking. Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on the premises at any one time. 
(j)  Timeframe for availability. The parking facilities required under this article shall be made available as soon after the time such facilities become required as weather conditions will reasonably permit, but in no case more than nine months after the date of the certificate of occupancy. If occupancy is obtained prior to completion of the parking facilities, a sufficient cash escrow shall be deposited with the Village to guarantee completion of the work. 
(k)  Maximum number of spaces. The total number of accessory parking spaces provided for a single-family or multiple-family dwelling shall not exceed that required by this article for such use or for any equivalent new use by more than 50 percent or four spaces, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1959, § 24.10.4; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4964, § 2, 3-20-2007; Ord. No. 5748, § 2, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 6159, § 5, 5-1-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5748, § 2, adopted December 10, 2013, set out provisions noting this section of the Code shall not be applicable to automotive sales and leasing dealership uses; provided, however, that all other standards and regulations set forth in this Code relating to automotive sales and leasing uses shall remain in full force and effect.  
Sec. 98-295. - When off-street loading berths required. 
In any district, every building which shall be built, structurally altered, enlarged or increased in capacity and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles shall be provided with off-street loading berths as required by this article. 
(Code 1959, § 24.10.5; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-296. - Number of required off-street loading berths. 
(a)  Off-street loading berths shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Auditoriums, gymnasiums, theaters, hotels and motels with sleeping rooms only, and other buildings for public assembly: 
a.  Ten thousand—100,000 square feet of floor area in such building, one loading berth. 
b.  Each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, in such building, one additional loading berth. 
Each required loading berth for a building having more than 20,000 square feet of floor area shall not be less than ten feet wide by 50 feet in length. 
(2)  Establishments for the manufacturing, production, processing, assembly, disassembly, cleaning, servicing, testing or repairing of materials, goods or products; cartage, express and parcel delivery and freight terminal establishments: 
a.  Five thousand—40,000 square feet of floor area in such building, one loading berth. 
b.  Forty thousand—100,000 square feet of floor area in such building, two loading berths. 
c.  Plus one additional loading berth for each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof. 
Each required loading berth for such a building in excess of 10,000 square feet of floor area shall not be less than ten feet in width by 50 feet in length. 
(3)  Mortuaries: 
a.  Eight thousand—100,000) square feet of floor area in such building, one loading berth. 
b.  Each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, in such a building, one additional loading berth. 
(4)  Office buildings: 
a.  Ten thousand—100,000 square feet of floor area in such building, one loading berth. 
b.  Each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, in such building, one additional loading berth. 
(5)  Retail stores, including furniture and appliance stores, repair shops or restaurants; hotels and motels containing retail shops, convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, business or professional offices or other uses; and warehouses and wholesale establishments: 
Square Feet of Floor Area 	Minimum Number and Size 
Under 5,000 	No requirements 
  5,000— 10,000 	1-10 × 25 feet 
 10,000— 25,000 	2-10 × 25 feet 
 25,000— 40,000 	2-10 × 50 feet 
 40,000—100,000 	3-10 × 50 feet 
100,000—250,000 	4-10 × 50 feet 
 
For each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, over 250,000 square feet of floor area, one additional loading berth, not less than ten feet in width by 50 feet in length shall be provided. 
(6)  Schools, hospitals, sanitariums or other similar institutional buildings and multiple-family dwellings: 
a.  Twenty thousand—200,000 square feet of floor area in such building, one loading berth. 
b.  Each additional 200,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction thereof, in such building, one additional loading berth. 
(b)  All uses, not specifically listed in subsection (a) of this section, greater than 5,000 square feet in floor area, which shall require the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, shall have off-street loading berths in accordance with the requirements of subsection (a)(5) of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 24.10.6; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-297. - Off-street loading berth standards. 
(a)  Location. All required loading berths shall be off-street and shall be located on the same lot as the building to be served. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within a required front yard or side yard. 
(b)  Area. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a required loading berth shall be at least ten feet in width by 25 feet in length, exclusive of aisles and maneuvering spaces, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. 
(c)  Access. Each required loading berth shall be served by appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will not unreasonably interfere with traffic movement. 
(d)  Surfacing. All open loading berths shall be graded and paved or otherwise improved with bituminous concrete or portland cement concrete. 
(e)  Storage, repair and service. No storage of any kind, nor motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted within any required loading berth. 
(f)  Drainage. All loading berths shall be provided with adequate drainage facilities to carry surface waters and stormwaters into storm sewers or drainage ditches. 
(g)  Space allocated. Space allocated to a required loading berth shall not be used to satisfy any requirement of this article for off-street parking spaces. 
(Code 1959, § 24.10.7; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Secs. 98-298—98-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SIGNS 
 
Sec. 98-331. - Purpose. 
Much valuable information is conveyed by certain business signs of local retail and service establishments, to the mutual benefit of both the business establishments and the public. It is the intent of this article to encourage such signs wherever they are consistent with good taste and the public safety, but to discourage signs which distract the attention of motorists or are otherwise hazardous, or which create a carnival atmosphere inconsistent with the suburban character of the Village. 
Refer to chapter 54 Planning, article III Appearance Code for additional design guideline requirements for signs. 
(Code 1959, § 24.11.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5221, § 2, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 98-332. - Permit required; exemptions. 
(a)  No sign may be painted, constructed, erected, remodeled, relocated or expanded until a sign permit is obtained in accordance with the chapter 18. No sign permit shall be issued for any sign unless the sign is accessory to a permitted use (see section 98-212) and the sign is permitted by and complies with the regulations of this article. Any sign authorized in this article, however, is allowed to contain noncommercial copy in lieu of any other copy. 
(b)  The following types of signs are exempt from the permit requirement and the regulations of this article: 
(1)  Flags or emblems of a government or a political, civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization, displayed on private property. 
(2)  Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic or similar regulatory devices, legal notices and warnings at railroad crossings. 
(3)  Memorial signs and tablets displayed on private property. 
(4)  Address numerals and other signs required to be maintained by law or governmental order, rule or regulation, provided that the content and size of the signs do not exceed the requirements of such law, order, rule or regulation. 
(5)  Small signs, not exceeding two square feet in area, displayed on private property for the convenience of the public, including signs to identify restrooms, freight entrances, etc. 
(c)  The following types of signs are exempt from the permit requirement, but must comply with all of the other regulations of this article: 
(1)  Signs permitted by sections 98-334(1), 98-334(2)a. and (2)b., and 98-337(9)a. 
(2)  Signs permitted by section 98-336. 
(3)  Signs containing noncommercial copy. 
(Code 1959, § 24.11.2; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5309, § 4, 2-16-2010)  
Sec. 98-333. - General standards. 
All signs painted, constructed, erected, remodeled, relocated or expanded shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Balloons, pennants and streamers. No balloon, pennant or streamer or any other similar sign shall be permitted. 
(2)  Illuminated signs. Signs shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting bright light upon property located in any residential district or upon any public street or park. Any illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to or across the street from any residential district, which sign is visible from such residential district, shall not be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m., except that licensed businesses for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor may illuminate their signs during hours of business permitted by applicable provisions of this Code. For the purposes of this article, the term "illuminated sign" shall include illuminated window signs. Signs shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting bright light upon property located in any residential district or upon any public street or park. 
(3)  Flashing or moving signs. No flashing sign, rotating or moving sign, animated sign or sign with moving lights or creating the illusion of movement shall be permitted. A sign whereon the current time and/or temperature is indicated by intermittent lighting shall not be deemed to be a flashing sign if the lighting changes are limited to the numerals indicating the time and/or temperature and are not more frequent than every 15 seconds. For the purposes of this article, the term "flashing, rotating, animated or moving signs" shall include flashing, rotating, animated or moving window signs. No flashing signs, rotating or moving signs, animated signs, signs with moving lights, or creating the illusion of movement shall be permitted. 
An electronic changeable message sign shall not be considered a flashing or moving sign provided that such signs shall be regulated under the conditional use process in Sec. 98-50 (18). 
(4)  Projecting signs. Two-sided blade signs shall be permitted to be mounted perpendicular to the storefront. No sign shall extend above the parapet wall of the storefront building. Blade signs shall provide a minimum clearance of four inches between the storefront and signface. Blade signs shall project a maximum of 48 inches from the storefront and shall have a maximum 44-inch width. Seven-foot, six-inch clearance shall be provided between the baseline of any sign and the sidewalk. Blade signs shall have a maximum depth of 12 inches if located at a height less than nine feet, zero inches, and a maximum depth of 18 inches if located at nine feet, zero inches or higher. 
(5)  Accessways or windows. No sign shall block any required accessway or window. 
(6)  Vacant property. No sign shall be located on vacant property, except a sign advertising the premises for sale or lease, and which meets the standards of section 98-334(2). 
(7)  Trees or utility poles. No sign shall be attached to a tree or utility pole, whether on public or private property. 
(8)  Building and electrical codes applicable. All signs must conform to the regulations and design standards of the building code as set forth in chapter 18, article III. Wiring of all electrical signs must conform to the electrical code of the Village as set forth in chapter 18, article IV. 
(9)  Sign area. The term "sign area" means the gross surface area or the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements thereof. Such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. For computing the area of any wall sign which consists of letters mounted or painted on a wall, the area shall be deemed to be the area of the smallest rectangular figure which can encompass all of the letters. Sign or window sign area shall be the gross surface area further defined as the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of such sign or window sign and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of such sign. Such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display. 
(10)  Traffic safety. No sign shall be maintained at any location where, by reason of its position, size, shape or color, it may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of or be confused with any traffic control sign, signal or device, or where it may interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(11)  Obsolete and off-premises signs. No sign shall be permitted which advertises a business which is not being presently conducted on or adjacent to the premises on which the sign is located. 
(12)  Parkway signs. No sign shall be permitted on any public street, alley or parkway or other public property, except that a sign advertising a garage sale or bazaar, not to exceed nine square feet in area, may be placed in the parkway in front of the residence for a period of time not to exceed three days. If the residence does not front on a major thoroughfare, a second sign may be placed in the parkway of the closest thoroughfare for the days of the sale. 
(13)  Digital and manual changeable copy signs. Only gasoline price signs accessory to automobile service stations will be permitted to have digital or manual changeable copy that is maintained to show current gasoline prices at all times and lighting intensity shall be restricted to 500 nits. 
(14)  Temporary special event banners. Temporary special event banners are approved administratively and shall conform to the design guidelines as set forth by the Village. Such guidelines may be amended by the appearance commission. Guidelines for banners accessory to churches, schools or nonprofit institutions are provided in section 98-336. Temporary special event banners are subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Temporary special event banners shall be displayed for no more than 14 consecutive days. 
b.  Administratively approved temporary special event banners shall be no more than 32 square feet. Banners larger than 32 square feet may request approval through the appearance commission process. 
c.  Shopping center owners/managers are permitted four temporary special event banners per year. Temporary special event banners are only permitted to be displayed in common areas or on monument signs four times per year after creating design guidelines for banner display and receiving approval from the appearance commission. 
d.  Tenants are permitted four banners per tenant space per year. No more than 20 percent of the allowed banners per each shopping center are permitted to be displayed at one time. 
e.  Grand opening banners shall be displayed for no more than 21 consecutive days. 
f.  Violations can cause revocation of approved guidelines and are subject to Section 98-8 of the Zoning Code - "Violations; penalties." 
(Code 1959, § 24.11.3; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4556, §§ 2—4, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 5009, § 7, 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 5097, § 3, 5-6-2008; Ord. No. 5068, § 2, 1-8-2008; Ord. No. 5192, § 2, 2-17-2009)  
Sec. 98-334. - Signs accessory to residential uses. 
Each sign accessory to residential uses, except as provided in section 98-333(12), shall be set back from the street line a distance of at least one-half of the required minimum setback specified in the district regulations, except for signs permitted under subsection (2)c. of this section, which shall fully comply with the minimum setback requirements for that district. No sign accessory to any residential use shall be permitted, except in compliance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Nameplates and identification signs. Nameplates and identification signs shall be permitted, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  For each single-family dwelling, there shall be permitted one nameplate, not exceeding one square foot in area, indicating the name and/or address of the occupant and, where applicable, a professional status, but shall not indicate a product or business. 
b.  For each multiple-family dwelling, there shall be permitted one nonilluminated identification sign, not exceeding five square feet in area, located near the main entrance to the building. 
c.  In connection with the construction or remodeling of a building, there shall be permitted one nonilluminated sign, not exceeding 25 square feet in area, indicating the names of any or all of the architects, engineers and contractors engaged in the construction. On corner lots, two such signs shall be permitted, one facing each street. Any sign permitted under this subsection shall be removed by the person erecting such sign, not longer than two weeks after completion of the structure indicated. 
d.  Residential subdivisions shall be permitted subdivision identification signs on private property, in accordance with the Handbook and Design Guidelines for Residential Identification Signs on Private Property, as amended, and shall be approved by the appearance commission. No more than two signs per street frontage shall be allowed. 
(2)  For sale and to rent signs. For sale and to rent signs shall be permitted, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Single-family dwellings or lots for dwelling purposes. For each lot, there shall be no more than one such sign installed in each yard adjoining an existing or dedicated street. No such sign shall exceed 12 square feet in area, nor be illuminated. Each sign must be devoted solely to the sale or rental of the property being offered and must be removed immediately upon the sale or rental of the property. Each sign must be placed only upon the property offered for sale or rent and positioned in accordance with this section. 
b.  Multiple-family dwellings. Where multiple-family dwelling units are offered for sale or rent by individual owners, there shall be no more than one such sign installed in each yard adjoining an existing or dedicated street, not to exceed 12 square feet in area and placed in accordance with this section. No more than one such sign per unit, installed within ten feet of the front door of such unit and not exceeding three square feet in area shall be permitted. No such sign shall be illuminated. Each such sign must be devoted solely to the sale or rental of the unit being offered and must be removed immediately upon the sale or rental of the unit. 
c.  More than six dwelling units or lots for dwelling purposes offered by the same person. Where more than six dwelling units or lots for dwelling purposes are offered for sale or rent by the same person, there shall be permitted one sign facing each public street providing access to the property being offered. Each such sign shall not exceed 120 square feet in area and must be devoted solely to the sale or rental of the property being offered and must be removed immediately upon the sale or rental of the last property offered at that location. 
(Code 1959, § 24.11.4; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5420, § 3, 1-18-2011)  
Sec. 98-335. - Signs accessory to parking areas. 
Signs accessory to parking areas are permitted, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  One sign may be erected to designate each entrance to or exit from a parking area, and each such sign shall be no more than two square feet in area. Such signs are exempt from minimum setback requirements, but shall be located at least one foot behind the lot line. 
(2)  One sign designating the conditions of use shall be permitted for each parking area, and each such sign shall be limited to a maximum area of nine square feet. Such signs are exempt from minimum setback requirements, but shall be screened from adjoining property. 
(Code 1959, § 24.11.5; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5748, § 2, 12-10-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5748, § 2, adopted December 10, 2013, set out provisions noting this section of the Code shall not be applicable to automotive sales and leasing dealership uses; provided, however, that all other standards and regulations set forth in this Code relating to automotive sales and leasing uses shall remain in full force and effect.  
Sec. 98-336. - Signs accessory to churches, schools or nonprofit institutions. 
Signs accessory to churches, schools or nonprofit institutions are permitted, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  There shall be not more than one sign per lot, except that, on a corner lot, two signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. No such sign shall exceed 20 square feet in area, and shall be setback from the street line a distance at least one-half of the minimum setback specified in the district regulations. 
(2)  Temporary signs, banners and displays for church, school, institutional or civic events are permitted, but must be located on property owned or controlled by the church, school, institution or civic organization and may be displayed only during a period commencing 30 days prior to the scheduled event and ending three days after the closing date of such scheduled event. 
(3)  Scoreboards shall be permitted and shall be exempt from the requirements of site plan review and appearance commission approval, within the municipal code under the following circumstances, but shall be required to obtain any applicable building permits: 
a.  No more than one scoreboard per athletic field is permitted. 
b.  The image projected by a scoreboard shall face towards the field and/or spectators. 
c.  A scoreboard which faces the street shall be located more than 250 feet from the nearest street. 
d.  A scoreboard shall be no more than 150 square feet in area. 
e.  Any stadium name plate or identification panel associated with the scoreboard shall be no more than 55 square feet in area. 
f.  Advertising shall be permitted on a scoreboard under the following conditions: 
i.  There shall be no interior illumination of the advertising and the advertising shall be static. 
ii.  The advertising shall only be directed towards the playing field. 
iii.  The advertising shall be limited to 80 square feet in area. 
g.  The total square footage of scoreboard, stadium identification, and advertising/sponsorship shall be not more than 285 square feet in area, which is to be measured consistent with the current sign area requirements. 
h.  The total height of the scoreboard, stadium identification, and advertising/sponsorship structure shall be no more than 20 feet tall. 
i.  These regulations shall not apply to scoreboards located on the interior of a building, except that any applicable building permits shall be obtained. 
(Code 1959, § 24.11.6; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5580, § 2, 9-18-2012)  
Sec. 98-337. - Signs accessory to business, commercial or industrial uses. 
No sign accessory to any business, commercial or industrial use shall be permitted, except in compliance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Front wall signs. 
a.  A building shall be permitted a primary identification wall sign. The eligible sign area is eight percent of the entire facade, which includes doors and windows. The total permitted sign area of all wall signs also includes blade signs and awnings. In addition, no individual wall sign shall exceed 125 square feet. Signs may be permitted on side and rear walls facing private streets or public rights-of-way where there are no primary identification signs in the same line of sight. 
b.  Where a single building is devoted to two or more uses, each use is allowed a primary identification wall sign. The maximum sign area shall be determined by the proportionate share of the front face, including doors and windows, of the principal tenant space occupied by each such use and applying such proportion to the total sign area permitted for the building wall. 
c.  Interior illuminated box (panel) signs with translucent acrylic faces shall not be permitted. Box signs shall only be permitted with metal or completely opaque material backgrounds. Letterforms or logo type shall be stencil cut through the surface and filled with back-up and push-thru acrylic forms with an interior diffuser (acrylic forms shall not be transparent), or backgrounds may be routed out with interior acrylic forms. 
d.  Signs shall be surrounded by negative space (the space around the sign) to provide for a balanced design on the building. 
e.  In the instance of sign replacements, the surface shall be restored when the old sign is removed and the new sign (letters, logos, base, raceway, graphics, etc.) is attached to remove evidence of prior signage, such as nail holes, rust stains, discoloration from weathering, or shadowing of the old sign. 
f.  Signs constructed of metal and illuminated by any means requiring internal wiring or electrically wired accessory fixtures attached to a metal sign shall maintain a free clearance to grade of nine feet. Accessory lighting fixtures attached to a nonmetal frame sign shall maintain a clearance of nine feet to the ground. If a metal sign structure or accessory fixture described in this subsection is grounded by the use of a grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors and such structure or fixture is also grounded by being bonded to a grounding electrode at the sign site, no clearance to grade shall be mandatory. 
g.  Disconnect switches for wall signs shall not be visible, in accordance with the adopted provisions of the National Electric Code, Chapter 18. 
(2)  Side wall signs. Side wall signs shall be permitted, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  The total area of such sign shall not exceed one-tenth of the area of the side wall, including doors and windows, of the principal building, provided that the total area of such sign shall not exceed 200 square feet. 
b.  The sign must be located on a side wall facing a side yard of 12 feet or more in width on the same lot or on a side wall facing a side street. 
c.  Side wall signs which do not violate section 98-333(4) may project not more than 12 inches into required side yards. 
d.  Signs constructed of metal and illuminated by any means requiring internal wiring or electrically wired accessory fixtures attached to a metal sign shall maintain a free clearance to grade of nine feet. Accessory lighting fixtures attached to a nonmetal frame sign shall maintain a clearance of nine feet to the ground. If a metal sign structure or accessory fixture described in this subsection is grounded by the use of a grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors and such structure or fixture is also grounded by being bonded to a grounding electrode at the sign site, no clearance to grade shall be mandatory. 
e.  Side wall signs may be gaseous tube type or may be illuminated by interior means of lighting of an intensity to prevent excessive glare, or by indirect lighting designed to flood only the area of the sign with light and to prevent light from being directed on surrounding property. 
f.  Side wall signs may be increased by 25 percent of the allowable sign area permitted in subsection (2)a. of this section, except that the total area of such signs shall not exceed 200 square feet, if such signs consist only of individual, outlined alphabetic, numeric and symbolic characters without a background, except that provided by the building surface to which they are affixed. If illuminated, such illumination shall be by internal shielded illumination, shielded silhouette lighting or shielded spotlighting, but not any lighting where the light source itself is visible or exposed on the face or sides of the characters. 
g.  Compliance with subsection (1)g. 
(3)  Rear wall signs. A sign shall be permitted on the rear wall of any principal building, subject to the following regulations: 
a.  The maximum area of such rear wall sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the maximum area permitted for a front wall sign of the same building. 
b.  Rear wall signs which do not violate section 98-333(4) may project not more than 12 inches into the required rear yards. 
c.  Signs constructed of metal and illuminated by any means requiring internal wiring or electrically wired accessory fixtures attached to a metal sign shall maintain a free clearance to grade of nine feet. Accessory lighting fixtures attached to a nonmetal frame sign shall maintain a clearance of nine feet to the ground. If a metal sign structure or accessory fixture described in this subsection is grounded by the use of a grounding conductor run with the circuit conductors and such structure or fixture is also grounded by being bonded to a grounding electrode at the sign site, no clearance to grade shall be mandatory. 
d.  Rear wall signs may be gaseous tube type or may be illuminated by interior means of lighting of an intensity to prevent excessive glare, or by indirect lighting designed to flood only the area of the sign with light and to prevent light from being directed onto surrounding property. 
e.  Compliance with subsection (1)g. 
(4)  Ground signs. Ground signs are subject to the following regulations: 
a.  Business and commercial districts. Four grounds signs shall be permitted on any lot, except those described in subsection (4)b., subject to the following regulations: 
1.  One of such four ground signs may be an identification sign, single-faced or double-faced, and shall comply with the bulk regulations of the applicable district, except that such sign may project not more than 12 inches beyond the minimum setback. The area of such identification sign shall not exceed 120 square feet on either side, provided that, on a lot with a frontage greater than 120 lineal feet, the sign area in square feet may be as great as the lineal feet of frontage, but in no event greater than 180 square feet on either side. 
2.  Multi-tenant ground signs. 
i.  Location/placement. 
a)  No sign shall be located within the clear sight triangle at an intersection, in accordance with the Village's current standard. See Diagram 1 - Clear Sight Triangle in the appendix. 
b)  Businesses shall have no more than one ground sign per public street frontage. 
ii.  Landscaping/illumination. 
a)  The sign base shall be surrounded by year-round landscaping that equals or exceeds two square feet of landscaping per one square foot of the side with the largest sign area. 
b)  Sign faces shall be constructed of an opaque surface. 
iii.  Size and design. 
a)  Signs shall not exceed 11 feet in height. 
b)  Signs shall not exceed 80 square feet in area per side. 
c)  The sign shall be constructed of similar or compatible architectural elements as the building(s). 
d)  Background panels shall be opaque surfaces, incorporating harmonious fonts. 
e)  The sign shall have a sign base with a minimum one foot height. 
f)  A sign shall prominently display the building address (with numerals) that are a minimum height of six inches. 
g)  Signs shall incorporate negative space(the space around the text and graphics) to provide for a balanced design on the sign. 
3.  All other ground signs permitted by this subsection (4), in addition to meeting the other bulk regulations of the zone district in which such signs are located, shall: 
i.  In the case of a district requiring a yard abutting any adjacent public right-of-way, be located a distance from the centerline of such right-of-way not less than one-half the width of such right-of-way, plus one-half of the required depth of such yard; and 
ii.  In the case of a district not requiring any such yard, be located a distance from such centerline not less the one and one-half times the minimum distance from such centerline required for a building or other structure. 
4.  The area of any ground sign, other than an identification sign, shall not exceed 120 square feet on either side. 
5.  No metal ground sign shall be located within eight feet vertically and four feet horizontally of electric wires or conductors in free air carrying more than 48 volts, whether or not such wires or conductors are insulated or otherwise protected. 
6.  The maximum height of any ground sign shall be 19 feet. 
b.  Industrial districts. For each lot, there shall be no more than one ground sign installed in each yard adjoining an existing or dedicated street, with a maximum of two ground signs permitted on any lot, subject to the following regulations: 
1.  The two ground signs may be single-faced or double-faced, and shall be positioned a minimum of ten feet inside the property line and out of any easements or right-of-way, and outside the driver's corner sight triangle, which is determined by the village's traffic consultant. The area of such signs shall not exceed 120 square feet on either side. Ground signs shall be landscaped pursuant to applicable design guidelines and appearance commission review and the address shall be visible on the sign. 
2.  No metal ground sign shall be located within eight feet vertically and four feet horizontally of electric wires or conductors in free air carrying more than 48 volts, whether or not such wires or conductors are insulated or otherwise protected. 
3.  The maximum height of the main body of any ground sign shall be six feet. 
(5)  Roof signs. No part of any sign shall be maintained on the roof, or in the air space over the roof, of any building or structure. 
(6)  Awnings and canopy signs. 
a.  Location/placement. 
1.  Awnings shall be designed to project over individual window and door openings and not project as a single continuous feature extending over architectural piers or arches. 
2.  The lowest point of any awning shall be a minimum of eight feet above the sidewalk or ground over which it projects. 
b.  Appearance. 
1.  Text and graphics shall comprise no more than 20 percent of the total exterior surface of the awning face and valance. 
2.  The percentage of text and graphics on an awning shall also count toward the overall tenant space's square footage allowance for signs. 
3.  Valances shall be no more than ten inches in height. 
4.  Text and graphics on a valance shall be no larger than eight inches. There shall remain one inch of negative space on the top and bottom of a valance. 
5.  Awning materials with reflective or shiny finishes are prohibited. 
c.  Construction and maintenance. 
1.  Architectural fabric, in a matte finish, suitable for outdoor use must be used and shall cover the front of the awning frame. 
2.  The awning frame shall be constructed of steel or aluminum. 
3.  Wind and snow load capacities, as determined by the product manufacturer or design professional, shall be provided to staff as part of the permit process and shall comply with applicable Village building codes. 
4.  Awnings shall not be torn, frayed, ripped, faded, or stained, soiled or dirty. When not specifically addressed by this ordinance, provisions of the Property Maintenance Code, as amended, shall apply. 
d.  Lighting. 
1.  Awnings cannot contain back-lit graphics or be backlit from the interior of the awning. 
2.  Awning soffits require appearance commission review. 
(7)  Window signs. 
a.  Window signs are exempt from the permit requirement, however the following regulations apply: 
1.  The total window sign area in a tenant space shall not exceed 25 percent of the window area, for each front, side or rear wall, provided that the total area of such sign or signs shall not exceed 100 square feet per wall. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "window area" includes the nonopaque parts of any doors or other fenestrations. 
2.  The allowable window sign area as defined herein may be illuminated, but shall not exceed 20 percent of the window area for each front, side or rear wall, provided that the total area of such sign or signs shall not exceed 80 square feet per wall. 
3.  Any message or identification (i.e., the name of establishment or the services offered) may not be displayed more than once within the permitted total window sign area per each front, side or rear wall. 
4.  The listing of an establishment's hours of operation shall be exempt from these regulations, provided that the area of such a sign is no greater than two square feet. 
5.  The listing of directional information (i.e., "parking in rear" or "use other door") shall be exempt from these regulations provided that the area of such a sign is no greater than three square feet. 
6.  The listing of an "Open" sign, either illuminated or nonilluminated, shall be exempt from these regulations provided that the area of such a sign is no greater than three square feet. 
7.  The use of window framing (i.e., a continuous light source illuminating the perimeter of an individual window pane or a group of window panes) is prohibited. 
8.  Accessible doors to a business establishment shall be limited to the following types of window signage: 
i.  Business name; 
ii.  Hours of operation; 
iii.  Phone number; 
iv.  Building or tenant address; and 
v.  World Wide Web address and shall comply with the regulations stated herein. 
9.  The use of fluorescent colors or materials that are specifically designed to increase their light reflective abilities in a window sign are prohibited. 
10.  The use of dark, opaque background panels for interior illuminated sign faces or letter faces is required in order to reduce the glare or glow of such signs. 
11.  For the purposes of this section, a consistently colored or opaque covering of an entire wall or window, that does not meet the definition of a window sign, shall be considered to be part of the wall of the building and shall be regulated as such by the Appearance Code. 
12.  Amortization of nonconforming window signs. 
b.  All window signs within the corporate limits of the Village shall be altered, removed or otherwise made to comply with the provisions of this section during the following time periods: 
1.  Noninformational window signs. Nonilluminated or illuminated non-informational window signs, including illuminated window framing, 30 days from the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
2.  Nonilluminated window signs. Those window signs as defined herein that are not illuminated by an internal light source, one year from the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
3.  Illuminated window signs. Those window signs as defined herein that are illuminated by an internal light source, two years from the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Such signs that were installed after November 5, 2002, and do not comply with the aforementioned regulations shall be removed within 30 days of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(8)  Commercial or industrial district nameplates. In commercial or industrial districts, nameplates indicating the name and corporate insignia of the building owner or occupant, address and/or product may be located on gates, gate posts and/or gate houses, provided that, in the case of multiple occupancy, one name shall be utilized for identification purposes. 
(9)  Real estate signs. Real estate signs shall be permitted, subject to the following regulations: 
Location: Shall be located on private property, out of any easements or right-of-way, and outside the driver's corner vision triangle, which is determined by the Village's traffic consultant. 
Quantity: Shall be limited to one sign per street frontage, with a maximum of two real estate signs per lot. 
Height: Shall be limited to the maximum allowed by the zoning district in which the sign is proposed. 
Appearance: Shall be subject to adopted design guidelines for real estate signs. Shall be maintained in good repair and are subject to the Village's property maintenance code, per article VII of the Municipal Code. 
Size, approval and time allowed shall be determined by the following table: 
	(9)a 	(9)b 	(9)c 
Size 	12 sf or less 	13 sq ft to 32 sf 	33 sf to 120 sf 
Approval 	Does not require a permit or staff or Commission approval, per Sec. 98-332(c) 	Requires a permit per Sec. 98-332 and Appearance Commission approval. A lot greater than 50,000 square feet that is vacant or has a valid application before a regulatory commission may be approved administratively. 	Requires a permit per Sec. 98-332 and Appearance Commission approval. 
Time allowed 	Shall be removed immediately upon the sale or rental of the property offered for sale or rent, or within one year, whichever is less. 	Shall be removed immediately upon the sale or rental of the property offered for sale or rent, or within one year, whichever is less. Extensions of time limits shall be handled administratively by Village staff. 	Shall be removed immediately upon the sale or rental of the property offered for sale or rent, or within one year, whichever is less. Extensions of time limits shall be approved by the Appearance Commission. 
 
(Code 1959, § 24.11.7; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4556, § 5, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 4924, § 2, 11-21-2006; Ord. No. 5009, §§ 2—6, 8, 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 5221, § 3, 6-2-2009; Ord. No. 5309, § 2, 2-16-2010; Ord. No. 5360, § 2, 6-15-2010; Ord. No. 5368, § 2, 8-3-2010; Ord. No. 5420, § 2, 1-18-2011; Ord. No. 5748, § 2, 12-10-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5748, § 2, adopted December 10, 2013, set out provisions noting this section of the Code shall not be applicable to automotive sales and leasing dealership uses; provided, however, that all other standards and regulations set forth in this Code relating to automotive sales and leasing uses shall remain in full force and effect.  
Sec. 98-338. - Signs accessory to automobile service stations. 
The following signs accessory to automobile service stations are permitted, in addition to the signs permitted under section 98-337: 
(1)  Racks for the orderly display of cans of engine oil for convenience in dispensing such oil may be located on or at the ends of pump islands, but shall be limited to two for each island. 
(2)  Two open, portable tire racks, not more than seven feet in height, including signs, and six feet in length, on casters, for the purpose of displaying new tire casings shall be permitted for each gasoline or tire service station. Such additional racks shall be permitted, but each such additional rack shall constitute one of the four ground signs permitted under section 98-337(4). 
(3)  Items for sale on the premises may be openly displayed within ten feet of the principal building, provided that such display must comply with all applicable bulk regulations. Products may be displayed under pump island canopies or between pumps within the area of the pump island base. 
(4)  Closed tire racks or bins may be used, but each such rack or bin will constitute one of the four ground signs permitted under section 98-337). Such bins shall be constructed entirely of metal and may be located on piers in lieu of foundations. The maximum thickness (front to back) of such closed tire racks or bins shall be five feet and the area on either side shall not be larger than would be permitted for a front wall sign located on the property. A sign may be painted on the inside and outside front door face of the closed tire rack, but shall not be painted on the sides or rear. Such racks or bins must comply with all of the bulk regulations of the district in which they are located. The minimum setback for closed tire racks or bins shall be 1½ times the minimum setback in the district in which they are located. 
(5)  Portable signs, placards, pennants, streamers, flags (except the U.S. flag), revolving placards and all other signs not specifically permitted in this article are prohibited. 
(Code 1959, § 24.11.8; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-339. - Nonconforming signs. 
Lawful nonconforming signs may be maintained, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Where any nonconforming sign projects over public property, the owner shall post with the building and zoning director a bond or indemnity policy, or a certificate thereof by the surety or insurance company with a ten-day prior notice of cancellation provision, approved by the Village Manager, in the sum of $10,000.00, conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss, cost, damage or liability of or incurred by the Village resulting from the maintenance of such sign. 
(2)  Normal maintenance, such as painting, repairing without removal, cleaning, maintaining electrical wiring and appurtenances on-site and changing or repairing fasteners, guy wires or chains, shall be permitted on any lawful nonconforming sign. 
(3)  All lawful nonconforming signs shall be eliminated or made to conform as provided in section 98-257. 
(Code 1959, § 24.11.9; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Secs. 98-340—98-370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 98-371. - Purpose. 
The land in the Village and surrounding areas is predominantly devoted to residential use. People who reside in such area have chosen the location because of the suburban atmosphere, free from objectionable noises, smoke, odors, vibrations and other irritants that are frequently found in more urban locations. The performance standards contained in this article are designed to minimize operations which would disrupt the existing suburban atmosphere. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-372. - Applicability. 
All uses established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall comply with the performance standards of this article. Any existing use which complies with the performance standards of this article on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall continue to so comply. If the operations of any lawful existing use do not comply with the performance standards of this article, such operations shall not be varied or changed in such a way as to increase the degree of such violation. The fact that the operations of a lawful existing use violate the performance standards of this article shall not of itself make such use subject to the requirements of article V relating to nonconformities. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.2; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-373. - Permit procedure. 
(a)  Before issuing any building permit, the building and zoning director shall be given information by the applicant sufficient to enable the building and zoning director to determine that all the performance standards of this article can and will be complied with at all times. At the request of the building and zoning director, the applicant shall provide the following: 
(1)  A plot plan showing the location of all present and proposed structures, drives, parking lots, waste disposal areas and other constructional features of the site, as well as all structures, streets, streams and any other significant features within 200 feet of the proposed site. 
(2)  A description of the activity to be conducted, in sufficient detail to indicate the extent to which the proposed operation will produce waste products, conditions or external effects which are regulated or otherwise limited by this article. 
(3)  A description of the type and location of any abatement devices or recording instruments used to control or measure conformity with any of the standards set forth in this article. 
(4)  Such other data and certification as may reasonably be required by the building and zoning director to reach a determination. 
(b)  All information and evidence submitted in applications to indicate conformity with the performance standards set forth in this article shall constitute a certification and agreement on the part of the applicant that the proposed use can and will conform to such standards at all times. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.3; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-374. - Noise. 
(a)  At no point on or beyond the boundary of any lot shall the sound pressure level resulting from any use or activity not specifically exempted in subsection (b)of this section, whether open or enclosed, exceed the maximum permitted decibel levels for the designated octave band set forth in the following tables. Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer manufactured according to standards prescribed by the American Standards Association. The flat network slow meter response of the sound level meter shall be used. Impulsive type noises shall be measured with an impact noise analyzer, and the peak values so measured shall not exceed the sound pressure levels in the appropriate table by more than three decibels. The reference level for the decibel is 0.0002 micro bar. 
TABLE I 
(Instruments Calibrated In Octave Bands Shown In First Column) 
Octave Band Frequencies 
(Cycles Per Second) 	Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level 
(In Decibels) 
   20—   75 	70 
   75—  150 	65 
  150—  300 	58 
  300—  600 	51 
  600—1,200 	45 
1,200—2,400 	39 
2,400—4,800 	34 
4,800 and over 	32 
 
TABLE II 
(Instruments Calibrated In Preferred Center Frequencies Shown In First Column) 
Octave Band Center Per Frequency 
(Cycles Per Second) 	Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level 
(In Decibels) 
   31.5 	74 
   63 	69 
  125 	63 
  250 	56 
  500 	49 
1,000 	44 
2,000 	38 
4,000 	33 
8,000 and over 	32 
 
(b)  The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations set forth in subsection (a): 
(1)  Noises not directly under the control of the property user. 
(2)  Noises of safety signals, warning devices, aircraft, and railroads. 
(3)  Church bells, chimes, and carillons. 
(4)  Heliports permitted as a conditional use. 
(5)  Noises of snowplowing, snowblowing, and snow removal activities. 
(6)  Noises of mosquito abatement activities. 
(7)  Noises of garbage and refuse pick-up activities. 
(8)  Noises of emergency repair and maintenance activities of public utilities and related infrastructure conducted by the Village, other government agencies, and public utility companies. 
(9)  Noises of landscaping equipment in accordance with the following: 
a.  Upon land used as parks, forest preserves, sports courts, or golf courses seven days per week from one-half-hour before sunrise or 5:00 a.m., whichever is later, until 7:30 p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier; 
b.  Upon land elsewhere in the Village from 7:00 a.m. until 7:30 p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier, from Monday thru Saturday, and from 9:00 a.m. until 7:30 p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier, on Sundays. 
(10)  Noises of construction equipment during the permissible hours of construction as specified in section 18-744(11). 
(11)  Noises of emergency standby power systems, portable gas-powered electric generators, and similar emergency standby electric generators in all districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The operation of system maintenance cycles, otherwise known as "exercising" shall be exempted for durations of up to 30 minutes per day during the permissible hours of construction as specified in section 18-744(11). 
b.  The operation of emergency standby power systems and similar emergency standby electric generators which exceed the provisions of this section shall be permitted as a primary source of electric power supply only during outage periods when electrical power supply is unavailable from a primary electrical service provider. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.4; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5784, § 2, 4-17-2014)  
Sec. 98-375. - Vibrations. 
At no point on or beyond the boundary of any lot shall the maximum ground transmitted steady state or impact vibration caused by any use or activity, except those not directly under the control of the property user, exceed a particle velocity of 0.05 inches per second for steady state vibrations or a particle of velocity of 0.10 inches per second for impact vibrations. Particle velocity is to be determined by the formula 6.28 FA, where F is the frequency of the vibration in cycles per second and A is the maximum single amplitude displacement of the vibration in inches. For the purpose of measuring vibrations, a three-component measuring system shall be used. For the purpose of this section, the term "steady state vibrations" means vibrations which are continuous or vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than 100 per minute. Discrete impulses which do not exceed 100 per minute shall be considered impact vibrations. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.5; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-376. - Smoke and particulate matter. 
The emission, from all sources within any lot, of particulate matter containing more than five percent, by weight, of particles having a particle diameter larger than 44 microns is prohibited. The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a net figure of one-half pound per acre of lot size during any one hour. Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards and roads within the boundaries of any lot shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, wetting or other acceptable means. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density greater than no. 1 on the Ringlemann Chart, as published by the U. S. Bureau of Mines, is prohibited, except that Ringlemann No. 2 will be permitted for five minutes or Ringlemann No. 3 for three minutes during any eight-hour period, for the purpose of building fires or soot blowing. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.6; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-377. - Odors. 
The emission of odors or odor-causing substances which exceed the odor threshold at or beyond the lot lines is prohibited. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.7; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-378. - Toxic and noxious matter. 
No emission which would be demonstrably injurious to human health, animals or plant life common to the region, on the ground at or beyond any lot line, will be permitted. Where such emission could be produced as a result of an accident or equipment malfunction, adequate safeguards considered standard for safe operation in the industry involved shall be taken. This shall not be construed to prohibit spraying of pesticides on public or private property. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.8; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-379. - Radiation hazards. 
The handling of radioactive materials, the discharge of such materials into the air and water and the disposal of radioactive wastes shall be in conformance with the applicable regulations of: 
(1)  The Atomic Energy Commission. 
(2)  Any instrumentality of the State. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.9; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-380. - Fire and explosive hazards. 
In addition to the requirements of chapter 34: 
(1)  Solid materials or products. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning, excluding household items in quantities customarily found in the home, is prohibited unless: 
a.  Storage, utilization and manufacture takes place within completely enclosed buildings having incombustible exterior walls; or 
b.  Storage, utilization and manufacture neither takes place within 25 feet from any lot line, nor within any required yard. 
(2)  Materials or products which decompose by detonation. 
a.  Activities involving the transportation, storage or utilization of materials or products which decompose by detonation are prohibited unless: 
1.  Such materials shall be stored or utilized in accordance with the regulations promulgated by the State with respect to explosives; and 
2.  Explicit written notice of intent to transport, store or utilize such materials shall be given to the building and zoning director prior to such transportation, storage or utilization. 
b.  Such materials shall include, but not be limited to, all primary explosives, such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and tetracene; all high explosives, such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and picric acid; propellants and components thereof, such as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, and hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks, such as magnesium powder, potassium chloride and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives, such as dynamite and nitroglycerin; unstable organic compounds, such as acetylides, tetrazoles and ozonides; strong oxidizing agents, such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid, perchlorates and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than 35 percent; and nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products, and reactor elements, such as uranium 235 and plutonium 239. 
(3)  Explosive materials and substances having a flashpoint of less than 187 degrees Fahrenheit. All activities involving the use, storage and/or disposal of explosive materials or substances having a flashpoint less than 187 degrees Fahrenheit shall be provided with adequate safety and protective devices against hazards of fire and explosion, as well as with adequate firefighting and suppression equipment and devices standard to the industry involved. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.10; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 34.  
Sec. 98-381. - Heat. 
Every use and activity shall be operated so that it does not raise the ambient temperature more than two degrees Fahrenheit at or beyond the boundary of any lot line. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.11; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-382. - Lighting. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the lighting ordinance [this section] is to provide outdoor lighting standards that will improve safety, minimize glare and light trespass and conserve energy for businesses and residents of the Village of Glenview. 
(b)  Applicability. Previously approved photometric plans are not required to comply with the requirements of this section until more than 50 percent of the existing lighting fixtures, standards, and/or elements are changed or removed. When additional lighting elements are proposed to an existing site a lighting plan shall be required to demonstrate that lighting for the entire site shall thereafter be in compliance with current ordinance requirements. 
(c)  Permit required; exemptions. 
(1)  No new lighting fixture shall be installed until a permit is obtained in accordance with the chapter 18. No permit shall be issued for any lighting unless the lighting is permitted by and complies with the regulations of this article. 
(2)  The following types of lighting are exempt from the permit requirement and the regulations of this article: 
a.  Holiday lighting is exempt from the provisions of this code, provided it is maintained in good repair. Displays of holiday related lighting are addressed by section 98-217(7). When not specifically addressed by the lighting code, provisions of the most recent Property Maintenance Code shall apply. 
b.  Flag lighting is allowed and cutoff fixtures are not required as long as shielded and/or directional fixtures are installed and aimed to minimize glare, sky glow, and light trespass. 
c.  Construction lighting shall be aimed to minimize glare and light trespass to adjacent properties and turned off at the end of construction hours, unless otherwise approved by the village manager or his/her designee through the site development permit process. Construction lighting must meet property line foot-candle requirements. 
d.  Temporary special event lighting is exempt when approved by the village manager or his/her designee on a temporary basis as part of the administrative review procedure. 
e.  Municipal lighting installed for the benefit of public health, safety and welfare. 
f.  Repair, maintenance, and/or replacement of original lighting elements with identical lighting elements, or lighting elements of alternate technologies which produce an equivalent level of illuminance. 
(3)  The following types of lighting are exempt from regulations of this article, but shall be subject to the review and approval by the Appearance Commission: 
a.  Any decorative or architectural accent lighting fixture with lighting elements which produce a combined illuminance of 1,000 lumens or fewer per fixture shall not be required to be 100 percent cutoff style, except 100 percent cutoff style decorative or architectural accent lighting fixture fixtures may be required on a case-by-case basis by the Appearance Commission in situations where lateral light illuminance may create impacts on adjacent land uses or where a direct line-of-sight would exist from adjacent or nearby residential property. 
b.  Recreational sports facility lighting, sports/leisure/entertainment, bridges, publicly zoned properties, public monuments, or other uses not otherwise addressed in this section will be reviewed as part of the site plan review and Appearance Commission review process with photometric plans that provide average and maximum lighting levels. All of the above uses must meet property line foot-candle requirements and use the other tables as recommendations. Full cutoff lighting for recreational sports facilities is strongly recommended. When full cutoff fixtures are not used, outdoor light fixtures shall include internal and/or external glare control. The fixtures shall be installed to minimize uplight and offsite light trespass. Lighting used to illuminate sports surfaces shall be turned off within one-hour after the last event of the evening. 
c.  Replacement of original lighting fixtures or standards with alternate lighting fixtures or standards of equal illuminance, cut-off style, and shielding. 
(d)  Appeals. Appeals of any decision of the Appearance Commission regarding the requirements of this section, or any other request for relief from the requirements of this section not within the purview of the Appearance Commission shall be subject to the review and approval procedures as set forth in section 98-47 and section 98-50(b). 
(e)  Design requirements. Lighting fixtures, standards, and elements not otherwise exempted per subsection (c) shall comply with the following design requirements. 
(1)  Cutoff style lighting fixtures shall be installed and maintained to be horizontal to the ground so that the cutoff characteristics of the fixture are maintained. 
(2)  Lighting installations shall be maintained in good repair in accordance with the most recent Property Maintenance Code in order to meet the provisions of this section on an on-going basis. 
(3)  Building mounted wall packs are required to be fully shielded. 
(4)  Pedestrian bollard lighting shall be subject to all the requirements of this section however pedestrian bollard lighting shall not be required to feature 100 percent cutoff style fixtures. 100 percent cutoff style bollard fixtures may be required on a case-by-case basis by the Appearance Commission in situations where pedestrian-level light illuminance may create impacts on adjacent land uses or where a direct line-of-sight would exist from adjacent or nearby residential property. 
(5)  The light source of landscaping lighting shall be recessed and/or shielded to avoid adversely affecting the vision of motorists and/or pedestrians in adjacent areas. Line of sight to a light source shall not be permitted five feet or more beyond the edge of the public right-of-way or property line in a residential district by an observer viewing from a position that is level with or higher than the ground below the fixture. 
(6)  All parking lot pole fixtures are required to be cutoff type with recessed lenses to limit glare and light trespass. Fixtures shall be directed below the horizontal rather than above the horizontal. 
(7)  Within one-hour after business hours conclude, parking lot lights shall be turned off, or the number of illuminated bulbs reduced by one-half or more, or the overall lighting intensity reduced by at least 50 percent, with the exception of automotive dealerships as specified in Table D-2. 
(8)  Parking lot floodlights for area illumination are prohibited. 
(9)  Light source locations shall be chosen to minimize the hazards of glare. 
(10)  Canopies. 
a.  The underside of canopies shall have a matte finish to minimize light reflection. 
b.  Canopy lights shall be fully recessed into the canopy. The bottom of each light fixture shall be flush with the ceiling of the canopy so the light source is not visible from or does not cause glare on public right-of-way or adjacent properties. 
c.  Lighting beyond the perimeter of a canopy shall be consistent with the lighting ordinance [this section] for commercial parking areas. Lighting standards for canopies are governed by Table D-1. 
(f)  Lighting guidelines. Lighting shall be governed by the lighting design guidelines, attached hereto and incorporated into this article, which may be amended from time to time. 
(g)  Lighting levels. 
(1)  Measurement. 
a.  All light fixtures including but not limited to those installed upon standards and poles, those mounted to buildings, and bollard fixtures shall be included upon any lighting and photometric plan. 
b.  Unless otherwise stated, all illuminance measurements for the purpose of this section shall be made at ground level with the meter oriented horizontally, on the subject property. Shared parking will be considered as one total subject property for the purpose of this section. 
c.  All light levels at ground level which meet or exceed 0.1 foot-candles shall be depicted upon any lighting and photometric plan. 
d.  The calculation of the uniformity ratio shall include all lighting levels as depicted upon a lighting and photometric plan at equal intervals at ground level which exceed 0.1 foot-candles and areas depicted on a lighting and photometric plan with light levels of less than 0.1-foot-candle shall be excluded from the calculation. 
e.  The minimum light level shall reference the lowest light level within the illuminated area of a site which provides a measurement of 0.1 foot-candles or greater. 
f.  The average light level shall reflect the mean of all light levels across a site which exceed 0.1 foot-candles. 
(2)  Limits. Any use utilizing outdoor illumination, including that which is reflected and illumination from inside a building that is visible from the outside, shall be conducted in accordance with Table D-1 as follows for all uses, with the exception of automotive dealerships as specified in Table D-2. 
(3)  Lighting zones. A subject property may be divided into zones to ensure that localized areas of a subject property which are intended to feature specialized lighting designs can be accommodated without influencing lighting levels elsewhere upon the subject property which would otherwise be permitted per ordinance. Establishment of lighting zones shall be subject to approval by the Appearance Commission and shall be used in application to site lighting designs which attempt to limit lighting levels in areas of a site adjacent to light-sensitive land uses or similar light-sensitive concerns without affecting the uniformity of lighting levels elsewhere upon a given site. 
(4)  Waivers. Waivers from the average foot-candle, maximum foot-candle, and uniformity ratio requirements contained in Table D-1 and the maximum foot-candle levels at lot lines contained in Table D-3 may be approved by the Appearance Commission without the need for a zoning variation when the Appearance Commission can identify circumstances and evidence which suggest that proposed conditions will comply with the criteria listed in section 98-47(c). 
Table D-1 
Levels of Activity 	Maximum Illuminance Standards (Foot-candles) 
	Average FC 	Maximum FC 	Highest uniformity ratio 
High 
Drive-up windows (within 20 feet) 	20.0 	30.0 	4:1 
Illuminated canopies 			
Private rights-of-way 			
High to medium (B-1, B-2, B-3, MURC, DD, S/L/E) 
Retail and restaurants 	5.0 	12.0 	4:1 
Medium 
Offices 	2.4 	15.0 	4:1 
Industrial 			
Hospital 			
Low 
Educational facilities 	2.0 	8.0 	4:1 
Institutional and churches 			
Multifamily residential 			
Uses that are not listed above, including but not limited to recreational sports facility lighting, sports/leisure/entertainment, bridges, publicly zoned properties or public monuments will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the Appearance Commission. 
 
Table D-2 
Lighting shall be provided as follows for automotive dealerships: 
Areas Of Activity 	Description 	Maximum FC 
Feature display area and merchandise area 	The first row of vehicles adjacent to a major/minor arterial, including the area in front of the vehicle up to the property line and behind the vehicle up to the merchandise area and/or the circulation area including drive aisles. All other rows of vehicles on a lot used for general auto sales, including all areas surrounding the vehicle up to the defined circulation area including related drive aisles are also included. Compliance with the provision related to security lighting, below, is required following the close of service hours. 	125 foot-candles (maximum) 
Circulation area 	Includes all portions of the lot dedicated to customer parking, employee parking, site entrance areas and inventory areas including related drive aisles. Compliance with the provision related to security lighting, below, is required following the close of service hours. 	15 foot-candles (maximum) 
Security lighting, Monday—Sunday 	The maximum average amount of light found on site within each of the areas of activity, including the feature display area, merchandise area, and circulation area following the close of service hours. 	10 foot-candles (maximum average) 
 
Table D-3 
The maximum limit of illuminance on the subject property at the lot line shall be as noted when adjacent to the following uses: 	Maximum foot-candles (fc) 	Maximum fixture height (height is measured from adjacent existing grade to the top of the pole or luminaire, whichever is higher) 	Maximum fixture height when 100' from residential 
Residential (including buildings primarily devoted to religious worship) 	0.1 fc 	14' for any fixture which is not fully shielded to prohibit line-of-sight views of any light element from adjacent property 	14' for any fixture which is not fully shielded to prohibit line-of-sight views of any light element from adjacent residential property 
18' for any fixture which is fully shielded to prohibit line-of-sight views of any light element from adjacent residential property 
Limited commercial 	0.2 fc 	20' 	14' for any fixture which is not fully shielded to prohibit line-of-sight views of any light element from adjacent residential property 
18' for any fixture which is fully shielded to prohibit line-of-sight views of any light element from adjacent residential property 
Business, Hospital and medical, Commercial, Light industrial, Service and Public Lands 	2.0 fc 	20' 	14' for any fixture which is not fully shielded to prohibit line-of-sight views of any light element from adjacent residential property 
18' for any fixture which is fully shielded to prohibit line-of-sight views of any light element from adjacent residential property 
Automotive dealerships 	5.0 fc 	24' 	14' for any fixture which is not fully shielded to prohibit line-of-sight views of any light element from adjacent residential property 
18' for any fixture which is fully shielded to prohibit line-of-sight views of any light element from adjacent residential property 
Public or Private Roadway Rights-of-way 	5.0 fc 	N/A 	N/A 
 
(h)  Prohibitions. High-intensity, special-purpose lighting is prohibited, including, but not limited to the below: 
(1)  Aerial lasers; 
(2)  Searchlight style lights; 
(3)  Flickering or flashing lighting; 
(4)  It is unlawful for any person to illuminate his or her property with floodlights or other lights which shine or glare into or toward any private dwelling house of another or into any street or avenue. All lights used for the illumination of property shall be directed toward the ground or toward the property to be illuminated, and should be equipped with reflectors and shields which shall prevent glare in the direction of any private dwelling house of another or into any street. 
(5)  Outdoor light projectors, except any light projector used for signage purposes otherwise expressly authorized by the Appearance Commission. 
(6)  Any lighting that creates a public nuisance or hazard can be ordered removed or altered by the village manager or his/her designee. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.12; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5394, § 2, 11-16-2010; Ord. No. 5747, § 4, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 5748, § 2, 12-10-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5748, § 2, adopted December 10, 2013, set out provisions noting this section of the Code shall not be applicable to automotive sales and leasing dealership uses; provided, however, that all other standards and regulations set forth in this Code relating to automotive sales and leasing uses shall remain in full force and effect.  
Sec. 98-383. - Electromagnetic interference. 
There shall be no electromagnetic interference that: 
(1)  Adversely affects, at any point, the operation of any equipment, other than that belonging to the creator of such interference; or 
(2)  Is not in conformance with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.13; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-384. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  When a new or altered commercial or industrial use of an occupancy is proposed that may, in the opinion of the building and zoning director, involve a possible violation of the regulations of this article, the building and zoning director shall, as a condition precedent to issuing a permit for such use or occupancy, require the deposit in escrow of $500.00 for a period of one year from the date of the new or altered use or occupancy. If, during such one-year period, the building and zoning director believes there is a reasonable probability that the regulations of this article are being violated, he may employ a qualified technician to perform investigations, measurements and analyses to determine whether or not the regulations of this article are being violated and may pay the technician's reasonable fees out of the escrow deposit, regardless of the outcome of the investigation. If the reasonable fees of such technician exceed the amount of any available escrow deposit, and if a violation of this article is discovered, the fees may be recovered as a penalty in the same manner as, and in addition to, the penalties specified in section 98-8. Escrow deposits or remainders thereof shall be returned to the depositors at the expiration of the escrow period. 
(b)  Whenever, in the opinion of the building and zoning director, there is a reasonable probability that any use or occupancy violates the regulations of this article, he is hereby empowered to employ a qualified technician to perform investigations, measurements and analyses to determine whether or not the regulations of this article are being violated. If a violation is found to exist, the violator shall be liable for the reasonable fees of the technician employed to perform such investigations, measurements and analyses. When no escrow deposit is available, such fees may be recovered as a penalty in the same manner as, and in addition to, the penalties specified in section 98-8. 
(c)  If a complaint is received regarding an alleged violation of any of the regulations of this article, and the building and zoning director does not believe that there is a reasonable probability that such a violation actually exists, the building and zoning director may, as a condition precedent to further investigation, require that the complainant post an escrow deposit with the village collector in the amount of $200.00 to defray the cost of employing a qualified technician to perform such investigations, measurements and analyses as may be necessary to determine whether or not such violation exists. If the complaint is substantiated, the escrow deposit shall be refunded to the depositor, and the reasonable fees incurred in retaining the qualified technician shall be recovered in the manner provided in subsection (a) or (b) of this section. If the complaint proves unfounded, such fees shall be paid from the complainant's escrow deposit, any remainder of such deposit shall be refunded to the complainant. 
(d)  In addition to the procedures specified in this section, the regulations of this article may also be enforced in the same ways as other provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12A.14; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Secs. 98-385—98-450. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ENVIRONMENTALLY SIGNIFICANT AREAS 
 
Sec. 98-451. - Purpose. 
(a)  The board of trustees, upon finding that certain areas within the Village possess or encompass a sensitive biological balance, particular habitat, historical importance or scenic value, shall, by ordinance, designate such areas as environmentally significant areas and promulgate regulations to provide for the protective management of such areas. 
(b)  This article recognizes that, because environmentally significant areas may contain certain important soil types, topography, hydrological characteristics and biological communities, there should be definite and specific limitations on building construction, development and land utilization within environmentally significant areas, designed to protect the values of such resources. 
(c)  The major objective of designating areas as environmentally significant is to prevent damage to specific environmental features, prevent depletion or destruction of natural or cultural resources, prevent alteration of scenic views, prevent loss of or adverse effect on historic character and prevent reduction of educational value. Within an environmentally significant area, the board of trustees may designate an area as a primary area if it possesses specific environmental characteristics, features or habitats that require the highest degree of protection from adverse effects of incompatible development. 
(d)  This article establishes an environmental review committee (ERC) whose purpose is to protect environmentally significant areas and primary areas from the problems of erosion, adverse impacts to cultural resources, flooding, sedimentation, water pollution, exhaustion of aquifers, stripping of forest cover and despoliation of wetlands. 
(e)  The goal of the ERC shall be to guide development so as to make maximum use of the capabilities of the land, including preservation of open space and wildlife cover of locally endangered species of flora and fauna, and avoid all possible damage to the natural environment contained within the environmentally significant and primary areas. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12D.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-452. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A-weighting means an electrical circuit inserted into noise measuring instruments to adjust the incoming signal in such a manner as to correspond to the way in which the human ear responds to noise. 
Buffer area means an area between different land areas that is usually transitional between the two and is integrally related to and protective of one or both of the different land uses. 
Contiguous means adjacent and parallel boundaries extending for a minimum of at least 100 feet. 
Dbh means diameter of breast height of a tree, measured four feet above the existing grade. 
Dripline means an imaginary vertical line that extends downward from the outermost tips of a tree's branches to the ground. 
Endangered species habitat means the habitat necessary to maintain the existence of specific flora or fauna that are listed on the State or federal lists of endangered or threatened species. 
Environmental plan (EP) means site development plans, graphic and narrative, that describe a proposed development, existing environmental features on a property, the potential adverse impacts of the development and the actions proposed to make the development environmentally compatible in accordance with sections 98-454—98-457. 
Environmental review committee (ERC) means a committee of five—seven individuals, appointed by the board of trustees, that is collectively knowledgeable in planning, biology, hydrology, water quality, soil science, engineering, economics and the applicable agency permit criteria. The ERC reviews all EPs for developments within the environmentally significant area, makes recommendations on feasible modifications to meet environmental criteria or regulations and reports its findings to the Village plan commission. 
Environmentally significant area (ESA) means a larger area encompassing an important natural or cultural resource (primary area) deemed significant by the Village. Such area is determined to be integrally related to the integrity and quality of a primary area through direct or indirect relationships (e.g., the Grove National Historic Site area, which is bounded by Milwaukee Avenue on the southwest, the Interstate 204 (tollway) on the west, Lake Avenue on the north, Glenbrook Estates and Glenview Woodland Subdivisions on the east, and the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad on the southeast). 
Hazardous material means any substance listed as a hazardous material by the State Environmental Protection Agency or State department of transportation, and includes "hazardous waste" as defined by 35 III. Admin. Code 721. 
Leq means the A-weighted energy mean of the noise level averaged over a 24-hour period. Such term can be considered as the continuous steady noise level that would have the same total A-weighted acoustic energy as the real fluctuating noise measured over the same period of time. 
Plant life means all photosynthetic plants, including fungi, such as mycorrhizal fungi algae, mosses, forbs and trees, that comprise a community of a particular ecosystem. 
Pond and lake mean a natural or artificial impoundment of water that retains water yearround. 
Primary area (PA) means an important natural or cultural resource that possesses and/or encompasses a sensitive biological balance, particular habitat, historical importance or scenic value (e.g., an area defined as a national historic landmark, an area containing rare and/or endangered plants or animals, or an area containing wetlands) that require careful protection from direct importance or scenic value or indirect impacts from contiguous areas (specifically for the Grove National Historic Site Area, such area includes the contiguous woodland that represents the remaining remnants of the historic Kennicotts' Grove). 
Wetland means lands characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a predominance of wetland vegetation or aquatic life that requires saturated or seasonally saturated soil conditions for growth and reproduction, that are commonly referred to as "ponds," "swamps," "marshes," "swales," "sloughs," and "wet meadows," and that should be construed in this definition to include drainageways. 
Wildlife means native nondomesticated mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and fish. 
Woodland means a forested area with a gross woody species basal area of 20 square feet or more per half acre and containing some trees greater than six inches in diameter at breast height (specifically for the Grove, the contiguous woodland that defines the primary area includes those areas of connected woodland or savanna remnants containing species associated with oak savanna and those areas imminently restorable to oak savanna). 
(Code 1959, § 24.12D.2; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-453. - Objectives of designating primary areas within environmentally significant areas. 
(a)  Principal objectives of designating primary areas within environmentally significant areas may include the following: 
(1)  Preservation of the habitat of any federal or State listed endangered or threatened species or preservation of relatively undisturbed wildlife habitats of native species. 
(2)  Maintenance or restoration of late succession vegetation or climax communities, especially deciduous forest and tall grass prairies that contain elements similar to the original vegetation of the region. 
(3)  Preservation of the extent, function and value of wetlands, marshes, ponds and related aquatic and semiaquatic communities and their associated soils. 
(4)  Preservation of historic resources, such as national historic sites, historic districts, historic homesteads, historic farm estates, historic architecture, archaeological sites or zones, or any property listed on or eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places. 
(b)  Other objectives that may be used in support of the principal objectives set forth in subsection (a) of this section include the following: 
(1)  Maintenance of a natural continuum of vegetation types. 
(2)  Maintenance of the localized hydrological cycle and existing natural drainage patterns. 
(3)  Preservation of localized topographic features and scenic views, including slopes, depressions, swales and bogs. 
(4)  Preservation of the sedimentary and/or gaseous nutrient cycle. 
(5)  Maintenance or restoration of a diversity and abundance of plant and animal species that is consistent with the overall community. 
(c)  Environmentally significant areas and primary areas shall be surveyed in conjunction with resource professionals and professional land surveyors. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12D.3; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-454. - ERC to be established. 
The board of trustees shall establish an ERC. The ERC shall have jurisdiction over requests to designate areas within the Village as ESAs and all activities concerning areas within such ESAs. The ERC shall prepare rules of procedure, which shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Board of trustees prior to adoption. All recommendations of the ERC shall be forwarded to the plan commission for hearing and recommendation to the board of trustees. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12D.4(1); Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-455. - Regulations governing structures in designated ESA or PA areas. 
No land clearing, alteration, addition, construction, demolition or other development shall take place on any land in the Village that is a designated ESA or PA, without compliance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Any land clearing, alteration, addition, construction demolition or other development must be identified as within or outside an ESA. 
(2)  If an action is determined to be partly or entirely within an ESA, it must then be determined whether the property on which the action is to occur is within or partly within the PA of the ESA. 
(3)  If a proposed development on a property entirely or partly within an ESA does not contain any portion of a PA or is not contiguous to a PA, an EP must be prepared pursuant to the environmental plan requirement set A as set forth in section 98-457(b). 
(4)  Any other action on a property that is wholly or partially within or contiguous to a PA must have an EP prepared pursuant to the environmental plan requirement sets A and B as set forth in section 98-457(a) and (b). 
(5)  Construction activity shall be limited to a structural envelope and accessway as defined in the development plans. Such envelope and accessway shall be located and staked out on the ground before any clearing or construction takes place. The structural envelope and accessway shall be the minimum area necessary for the construction and use of the proposed improvements. This subsection shall apply to all site improvements, including all structures and other impervious areas. 
(6)  All EPs shall be referred to the ERC and a hearing held thereon within a 45-day period to determine compliance of the proposed action with the appropriate criteria, requirements and other regulations stipulated in section 98-457. The ERC shall approve with modifications, or deny the plan within 105 days of the initial hearing. 
(7)  When initial plans or redesign plans are determined by the ERC to have no significant negative environmental impact pursuant to criteria for approval set forth in section 98-457 and are otherwise in compliance with federal, State and local regulations, development or other action may proceed pursuant to the appropriate article of this chapter or chapter 66. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12D.4(3)—(6), (8)—(10); Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-456. - Exceptions of the application of section 98-455. 
The provisions of section 98-455 shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  Nonresidential construction or alterations in an area which has been previously lawfully disturbed or covered by a surface other than the natural land cover native to the ESA. 
(2)  Nonresidential additions to existing structures which lie within the ESA as long as such additions do not extend beyond the existing outermost dimension of the buildings, and does not cover any previously undisturbed land. 
(3)  Single-family residences existing as of January 16, 1990, which are contiguous to, or located in an ESA or PA. Such residences shall be considered to be surrounded by a use envelope, the outer perimeter of which shall be defined as a line 25 feet from the outer walls of the principal structure, or the lot line, whichever is the lesser distance. Within such envelope, the following changes may be made without submission of any plans to the Village above and beyond what is normally required for issuance of a construction permit: 
a.  Room additions which do not increase the size of the principal structure to more than the bulk requirements of this section. 
b.  Demolition of existing structures, and reconstruction of a new structure, within the confines of the use envelope existing as of January 16, 1990. 
c.  Accessory uses as allowed in accordance with sections 98-213(a) and 98-213(b) only when within the specified building use envelope and additionally in compliance with the bulk regulations of section 98-214, or as provided in accordance with subsection (4). 
d.  No additions or expansions or cumulative additions or expansions may be constructed beyond the use envelope existing as of January 16, 1990. No construction, structure, or construction related to it may extend beyond the building use envelope as it was configured on January 16, 1990. 
(4)  Notwithstanding subsection (3), any permissible accessory building or structure, provided, such improvements are placed upon that portion of the lot which has been previously disturbed or covered by a surface other than the natural land cover native to the ESA or PA and the additional impervious area does not exceed five percent of the lot area, subject to section 98-101(b)(3). 
(Code 1959, § 24.12D.4(7); Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4888, § 2, 7-18-2006; Ord. No. 6159, § 6, 5-1-2018)  
Sec. 98-457. - Environmental plan criteria and requirements for approval. 
(a)  Approval criteria. 
(1)  All EPs shall address all vegetation elements, wetlands, drainage, visual and other such environmental effects of proposed developments as they relate to the criteria and requirements, and be consistent with the intent of this article as set forth in section 98-451. The EP shall be in compliance with federal, State and local regulations as such regulations may relate to environmental impact. 
(2)  The major focus of the EP shall be first to avoid, second to minimize and third to mitigate any detrimental impacts to resource characteristics of the ESA and PA consistent with the intent of this article as set forth in section 98-451. 
(3)  Construction plans must comply with section 7 of the Illinois Endangered Species Protection Act, 520 ILCS 10/7, and sections 401 and 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. No adverse effect shall occur to any critical federal or State endangered species habitat. 
(4)  Construction design plans shall preserve the hydrological characteristics essential to the integrity of the PA. 
(5)  The natural functions of ESA wetlands or watercourses shall not be impaired. Specifically, the natural grade and soils of any wetland or watercourse and the flow or quality of surface water to and from any ESA wetland or watercourse at any time during the year shall not be significantly altered in such a way as to degrade rare habitat elements or cultural resources. If negative alterations occur, mitigation in the form of restoration of the wetland or watercourse function and value must be provided in writing and approved by the ERC. 
(6)  Direct or indirect impairment to PA wetland shall be avoided. Impact shall be determined by the ERC. Examples of impact that could occur include, but are not limited to, wetland fill, drainage blockage or significant alteration to drainage patterns or subbasin watersheds. If a proposed development site contains areas of past wetland fill or drainage blockage, whether within the ESA or PA, such conditions shall be removed and wetlands restored by the property owner in conjunction with site development. Use of bypass flow-through piping shall be avoided or minimized in preference to preserving natural drainage. Stormwater control features (e.g., wet detention ponds) shall be designed to optimize protection of wetland areas. 
(7)  Construction plans shall be designed to minimize the creation of impermeable surfaces by limiting pavements, roadways and building footprints to essential square footages and using permeable asphalt and pervious pavers, where practical. 
(8)  Appropriate transport, detention and infiltration structures shall be incorporated in a coordinated stormwater management system to minimize both off-site outflow and surcharging (backwater) into the PA while maximizing groundwater recharge. 
(9)  The important cultural heritage, wildlife, recreational and educational values of the PA shall be preserved by maintaining reproductive and regenerative capabilities of wildlife and associated habitats, protecting historical contexts, maintaining aesthetic visual characteristics, designing compatible adjacent building structures and providing visual buffers made up of trees and shrubs consistent with existing vegetation. Preservation of such values must satisfy requirements of the State comprehensive outdoor recreation plan, the State historic preservation office and the National Park Service. 
(10)  Site design plans shall maintain or enhance the aesthetic, visual screening, windbreak, dust suppression, air quality improvements, noise barrier characteristics and other qualities of woodlands. All site improvements and structures shall be located and designed in such a way as to retain the maximum amount of natural vegetation on the site, especially existing mature wooded areas. Any structural design within the ESA should be designed so that building footprint roads avoid removal of trees with a dbh of four inches or more. Certain species of trees determined by the ERC to be incompatible invasive trees in the ESA shall be exempt from protection (e.g., in the Grove National Historic Area, eastern cottonwoods, box elders and European buckthorns are not protected). 
(11)  Landscaping designs shall maximize the use of compatible native species of trees, flowers and grasses to blend with or enhance the natural mosaic (complex) of ESA communities. Tree plantings shall be situated as buffers to protect the PA from adverse views, drainage and lighting effects. The objective is to soften impacts to the adjacent PA ecosystems. A variety of species shall be planted in natural arrangements to enhance the aesthetic and ecological value of such plantings. 
(12)  All native tree species with a dbh of more than four inches shall be protected with barrier fencing enclosing an area that includes the dripline area of the tree. Unprotected tree species with a dbh of four inches or more shall be retained if they are determined to be important to the historical context of a cultural resource element or to general aesthetic value. The barrier fencing must be located at least five feet from the trunk of a tree at all points. The fencing shall be mandatory only during construction. No disturbance or mowing shall occur within the dripline of any protected tree subsequent to construction. 
(13)  Soil erosion shall be minimized through compliance with the soil erosion and sediment control regulations set forth in article IX. 
(14)  No bulk storage or release into air, land or water of hazardous material is permissible within the ESA. 
(15)  Developments within the ESA or PA shall be designed to minimize reflected or generated light leaving the property from any direction, including skyward, by using nonreflective building shell construction and careful orientation and shielding of lighting fixtures. The frequency and intensity of generated light impacts on the ecological or cultural resources of the PA shall also be minimized by limiting operation of lights to actual use periods and using low wattage or yellow bulbs, whenever practicable. 
(16)  At no point along the boundaries of the PA or further within the PA shall the noise (sound pressure) level exceed an hourly A-weighted decibel level of a 24-hour 62 leq. Such standard shall be applied for all times during the day and night. If it is found that such standard is not met, operational or shielding remedies shall be sought. If the exceedance will be created by the development under consideration, noise reduction shall be provided in design plans. 
(b)  Environmental plan requirement set A. The following set of requirements for EP preparation applies to regulated activities within or partially within the ESA: 
(1)  The EP must provide information on proposed development plans in a combination of graphic and narrative formats that address the following points: 
a.  Describe the general need and nature of the proposed action. 
b.  Describe the existing environmental features on the property. 
c.  Describe the potential impact of the action. 
d.  Describe all feasible alternatives and other proposed actions to avoid, minimize and mitigate any potential shortterm or longterm adverse impacts. 
(2)  The EP must include an assessment of the direct or indirect impacts of proposed developments on natural or cultural features of ESA or PA ecosystems and cultural context. 
(3)  The EP must present information describing proposed actions in sufficient detail and accuracy to allow a reasonable assessment of the changes to the property. Such information includes the proposed land use, the building footprint, existing and proposed contouring, a cut and fill profile, access street and driveway locations and type (gravel, asphalt, etc.), and existing and proposed drainage systems, including flow-through calculations and retention/detention pond design. 
(4)  Specifically, the EP shall provide the following: 
a.  A description of the nature of the proposed action, including the following: 
1.  Existing landscape and activity on the site. 
2.  Conceptual site plans shall provide height, number of stories and placement of proposed structures, including setback lines and accessory structures. A scaled building evaluation drawing must show the existing and proposed exterior dimensions as viewed from all properties which are located within the ESA and located within 500 feet of the proposed development, and from all public streets. 
3.  Total approximate floor area of the proposed buildings. 
4.  Statement of interest in the land, including conditions for the sale or purchase of the parcel, such as deed restrictions, reservation of land for other uses or other conditions that may have bearing on the total land development. 
5.  Map of the applicant's entire holding and interest in land contiguous to the proposed development. 
6.  Vicinity map of all property within 500 feet of the development, that shows streets, easements, zonings, PAs, drainage, wetlands and land uses. 
7.  Time schedule, indicating anticipated starting and completion dates of development. 
8.  Location and identification of all public areas and municipal corporation lines within or adjacent to the site. 
9.  Legal description of the parcel, including total acreage of the parcel. 
10.  Preliminary engineering plans as required by the Village subdivision guide. 
11.  Existing one-foot interval contour topographic mapping for the site property and an overlay and concept drawing, at one-foot intervals, of proposed recontouring. 
12.  Cut and fill vertical profiles to accompany contour plan mapping. 
13.  Detailed drainage plan, including the existing and proposed drainage pattern of the site and adjoining area, at one-foot contour intervals. The drainage area and direction of flow of land upstream of the site and estimated runoff of the area served by any drains in compliance with article IX. Provision of adequate upstream flow-through design to avoid surcharging in PA lands must be demonstrated. The developer shall provide site drainage design plans that reduce the velocity and volume of post-development runoff by directing runoff from impermeable surfaces to uncompacted grassed swales, terraces and buffer strips. The design shall reduce high volume fluctuations in downstream storm sewers and retention/detention structures; improve runoff water quality by reducing nutrients and stabilizing sediments; provide potential for wetland creation and groundwater recharge within the ESA; and generally decrease erosion. 
b.  Existing environmental features, including the following: 
1.  Mapping of the general location, character and extent of on-site existing natural features, such as plantlife, wildlife, wetlands and woodlands, including the extension thereof to adjacent parcels within 250 feet of the proposed activity. 
2.  A descriptive inventory of site conditions, including the location and extent of all natural features as set forth in subsection (b)(4)b.1. of this section, including "wetlands" as defined by federal jurisdictional delineation methods, soil types, site vegetation and other habitat features as they relate to existing topography. 
3.  A description of existing and proposed water areas, showing depths, normal water levels, shore gradients, type of bank retention and shore vegetation. 
4.  A description of the distance and views to the entrance of any nearby park, monument or recreation area and any structures within a PA having cultural, historical or recreational significance. 
5.  A soil report listing the existing soil types and quantity of excavation and fill necessary to carry out the proposed development in compliance with article IX. 
6.  A soil boring survey so as to effectively assess the potential impacts of the proposed activity. Such survey shall include, but not be limited to, a description of the soil structure, performance of a percolation test and an analysis of engineering constraints. 
c.  A statement of the shortterm and longterm direct and indirect impacts of the proposed development on natural and cultural features of the ESA and PA as specified in any portions of this article, including soils, geology, surface water and groundwater, vegetation, wetlands, wildlife, air, reflected or generated light, noise, historical or cultural resources, historical areas eligible for or listed on the National Register of Historic Places and visual aesthetics. 
d.  Mitigation commitments, in accordance with the following: 
1.  Natural features and buffer areas shall be designated on the site plan in the following manner: 
i.  Natural features to remain undisturbed; 
ii.  Natural features proposed to be disturbed or removed; or 
iii.  Natural features to be relocated or reestablished as part of the side plan improvements in accordance with the additional guidelines set forth in subsections (b)(4)d.2.—8. of this section. 
2.  Specific plans shall be prepared for each site in the interest of minimizing adverse direct or indirect impacts to natural or cultural resources. 
3.  Disturbed areas to be reestablished shall be planted with compatible native species, characteristic of the existing or potential natural plant communities. The density/coverage of vegetation shall be such that it shall approximate the existing or potential natural condition (i.e., predisturbed condition) within ten years for wooded areas and within two years for herbaceous areas. Consideration shall also be given to additional vegetation screening to minimize visual impacts upon natural or cultural resources. 
4.  A replacement tree or a combination of trees shall be provided on-site to equal the original dbh for each tree that cannot be avoided and must be removed by construction. The minimum size of a replacement tree shall be three inches dbh. 
Wetland creation or restoration shall provide soil, vegetation and hydrology characteristics that effectively replace or enhance wetland functions and values on the development site, specifically as they improve or enhance wetland conditions within the PA. 
5.  A management plan for private stormwater retention must indicate measures to provide for the continued effective function of the system by establishing a schedule of ongoing monitoring and maintenance activities that may include cleaning of invert grates, sediment dredging, planting stabilizing vegetation or periodic burns of wet prairie basins. 
6.  Site specific lot configurations and setback buffers shall be designed to protect site hydrology, aesthetics and vegetation (maintenance or creation of vegetation/drainage corridors, minimization of fragmentation and minimization of habitat edge creation), for example, clustering development should be encouraged. 
7.  When development activity is proposed for any property within an ESA, consideration should be given to the correction of any past obstruction of drainage or wetland filling that may have occurred on the property. Such correction, including additional wetland creation and native species plantings, may serve as suitable mitigation of impacts caused by the development being proposed. 
(c)  Environmental plan requirement set B. The following set of conditions for EP preparation applies to regulated actions for parcels that are within, partially within or contiguous to a PA. The consideration of the avoidance, minimization and mitigation of any impacts to natural or cultural resources of the PA shall be given the highest level of assessment for developments within such areas: 
(1)  An identification of the boundaries of the PA and the acreage of the PA on the proposed site development is necessary. If the edges are delineated and there shall be no proposed activity in the PA, then the distance of the activity from the PA shall be noted on the development plans. The exact locations of the protective barriers between the activity and the PAs and around protected single trees shall be noted on plan drawings. 
(2)  Wires, signs or other items shall not be attached to any tree that is within the PA and any other protected species within the contiguous ESA. 
(3)  The type and scope of activities within the PA must be mapped and described. Efforts to minimize encroachment into the PA shall be described. 
(4)  Prior to any development, clearing, filling or other activity for which a permit is required, protective barriers, as approved by the Village, shall be erected around the perimeter of PAs designated for protection. Such protection shall remain until it is authorized to be removed by the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 24.12D.5; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Secs. 98-458—98-490. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 
 
Sec. 98-491. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the planned development district is to facilitate a more creative and efficient use of land than would otherwise be possible under traditional zoning regulations. The planned development also provides for preservation of natural site qualities, such as vegetation, topography and other unique physical site characteristics, the creation of urban amenities, the creation of additional open space and generally the design and development of unique high quality projects. 
(a)  The planned development is intended to provide for projects with either a single type of land use or a variety of land uses developed as a unified project. 
(Code 1959, § 24.13.1; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-492. - General provisions. 
In approving such planned developments, the board of trustees may impose additional restrictions and conditions particularly applicable to such development and may vary the general provisions, regulations and standards of this article, and may modify or vary any or all of the district regulations which would otherwise be applicable. 
(Code 1959, § 24.13.2; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-493. - Approval procedure. 
(a)  The procedure for securing approval of a planned development shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Step 1. Concept approval (optional). 
a.  The purpose of the concept or preliminary plan submission is to allow for review approval of an overall concept plan for planned development zoning which is of a preliminary nature by the plan commission and board of trustees. The concept plan approval process is optional. 
b.  Submission of a concept plan shall consist of the appropriate planned development zoning application and requisite submissions, subdivision application, appearance commission application, applicable fees for each of such applications, a proposed site plan, preliminary subdivision plat, preliminary engineering plans, preliminary landscape and open space plans, traffic impact study, tax impact study, market feasibility study, preliminary architectural plans, preliminary soil and sedimentation control plan and calculation for school and park dedication or fees. Each submission shall be submitted at the level of detail as specified on the applications themselves and in the engineering and subdivision guide, the applicant's checklist and the application guidelines. 
c.  The submissions as set forth in subsection (a)(1)b. of this section will be reviewed for their completeness by Village staff prior to referral of the application for public hearing. 
d.  The plan commission shall hold a public hearing on the application in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 98-49 and with the applicable sections of the plan commission rules and procedures. 
e.  Following the public hearing process and deliberative review of the concept plan, the plan commission shall prepare a report and recommendation, which shall indicate approval, modification or denial of the plan to the board of trustees. 
f.  The board of trustees, after receipt of the plan commission recommendation, shall either approve, modify or deny the concept plan. The granting of concept plan approval by the board of trustees shall indicate a general acceptance of the proposed plan and the appropriateness of the zoning and land uses proposed. Concept plan approval should also be viewed as an indication to proceed with the final plan process. The concept plan procedure is not mandatory and the petitioner may select to directly proceed to final plan approval. 
(2)  Step 2. Final plan approval. 
a.  The purpose of final plan approval is to obtain final plan development zoning approval. Submission for the final plan shall consist of final plans, drawings and any additional supporting data requested for all of the component parts listed in the concept plan submittal requirements, such as the final site plan, final engineering plans, final subdivision plat, final landscape and open space plan, as well as any necessary refinements to supporting documents submitted during the concept plan stage. 
b.  The submissions required in subsection (a)(2)a. of this section will be reviewed for their completeness by the Village staff prior to referral to the plan commission for public hearing. 
c.  A notice of public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with section 98-49(c). Once the plan commission hearings are held, the case reviewed and a report and recommendation transmitted to the board of trustees, the board shall approve, modify or deny the final plan. 
d.  The granting of final plan approval shall constitute a final zoning approval by passage of an ordinance and map amendment. 
e.  The final site plan, together with all other supporting plan documents, shall be binding on the owner, developer, their successors, grantees and assigns, and shall limit and control the use of the property, the location of structures, driveways, parking areas, open space and landscaping, and other accessory uses, except as may be modified in accordance with the changes in the planned development procedure as established in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  No alteration or amendment shall be made in the construction, development or use of a planned development without a new application under the provisions of this article; provided, however, that minor alterations may be made, subject to written approval of the director of development. 
(Code 1959, § 24.13.3; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-494. - Permitted uses. 
In addition to other uses permitted by this chapter as underlying uses in the planned development district, the following uses are permitted, which are unique to the planned development zoning district and are not permitted elsewhere in this article: 
(1)  All permitted uses in any zoning district, except P-1 public lands district regulations are permitted in a planned development district. 
(2)  Senior citizen housing facilities in accordance with section 98-496. 
(3)  Hotels and motels in accordance with section 98-496 and the following restrictions: 
a.  No building constructed under this subsection (3) may be converted to or used as apartments or condominiums. 
b.  No vehicle storage or permanent parking of equipment or vehicles shall be permitted, except motel/hotel owned vehicles. 
c.  No building may be placed within 300 feet of any residentially zoned property, inclusive of the required buffer. 
d.  If pets are allowed to remain with the occupant in the motel/hotel, the facility must provide a pet run that complies with this chapter. 
(4)  Headend facilities. 
(5)  Continuing care retirement communities (CCRCs) in accordance with section 98-214. 
(6)  Extended stay hotels in accordance with section 98-496 and the following restrictions: 
a.  No more than ten percent of the units shall be utilized at any time for more than an 180-day period. 
b.  No building constructed under this subsection (6) may be converted to or used as apartments or condominiums. 
c.  Density shall not exceed one room for each 1,000 square feet of lot area devoted to the use. 
d.  No vehicle storage or permanent parking of equipment or vehicles shall be permitted, except hotel owned vehicles. 
e.  No building may be placed within 300 feet of any residentially zoned property, inclusive of the required buffer. 
f.  Maximum unit occupancy shall be as set forth in section 404.4.1 of the 1998 International Property Maintenance Code, which the Village has adopted, which states: "Area for sleeping purposes: one person (min. 70 sq. ft.). More than one person per room (additional 50 sq. ft. per person)." 
g.  No permanent business license shall be issued for the conduct of any business from any guest room of the facility. 
h.  Each guest room having a stovetop unit or other type burner unit shall be required to also include a maximum 60-minute automatic power off timer for each such unit. 
i.  Either an indoor and/or fenced outdoor active recreation area shall be provided. The size of each recreation area shall be calculated at a ratio of five square feet per room, with a minimum provision of 750 square feet. If pets are allowed to remain with the occupant in the extended stay hotel, the facility must provide a pet run that complies with this chapter. 
(Code 1959, § 24.13.4; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4397, § 2, 5-21-2002; Ord. No. 5748, § 7, 12-10-2013)  
Sec. 98-495. - Mixed uses. 
(a)  The appropriateness of the land use mix within a planned development shall be determined by the board of trustees. Where a planned development is permitted by the board of trustees to contain a mixture of land uses, separate subdivided lots may be designated for each use, where possible. 
(b)  In a mixed use planned development, each individual use should be created primarily as a self-sustaining entity in terms of parking and open space allocations. 
(Code 1959, § 24.13.5; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003)  
Sec. 98-496. - Standards. 
(a)  Development. A planned development should be developed in accordance with the general purpose and intent of the Village comprehensive plan, this chapter and other adopted goals and policies of the Village. 
(b)  Ownership. 
(1)  The entire property to be occupied by a planned development shall be held in single ownership or unified control as defined by this article if there is a single use on a single lot. 
(2)  Separate structures, each on their own lot, may be separately subdivided and separately owned. 
(3)  Should a mixture of uses occur within a single structure, the ownership of such structure and the lot on which it is located shall remain with a single owner as defined by this article to ensure consistent and comprehensive property management. The entire planned development property, inclusive of all lots which may be separately owned, shall be managed by a single entity to ensure that common areas, such as landscaped open space, parking areas, driveways, retention detention areas, private streets, fire lanes and recreational facilities, are properly maintained. 
(4)  Any departure from the ownership and management provisions set forth in this subsection (b) shall require approval of the board of trustees. 
(5)  A statement of present and proposed ownership and management control shall be required. 
(c)  Compatibility. The planned development uses must be of a type and nature, and location so as not to create a detrimental impact or influence upon surrounding properties. Within a mixed use planned development, the uses, despite their differences, should be complementary to one another. 
(d)  Need. The planned development must be of a character, land use and type needed in the area. 
(e)  Density. 
(1)  The density of a planned development, either in terms of dwelling units and/or square footage, shall generally correspond to the requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
(2)  In the instance of a senior citizen housing facility, the number of dwelling units permitted is 55 units per acre. 
(3)  Where a planned development is permitted by the board of trustees to contain a hotel or motel, the density shall not exceed one room for each 500 square feet of the lot area devoted to the development. 
(f)  Changes in residency or tenancy for senior citizen housing facility. Where a planned development includes any structure designed and intended to be used as a senior citizen housing facility, adequate safeguards shall be provided to prevent any subsequent change in residency from the elderly to the nonelderly, or any change in tenancy from renter-occupied to owner-occupied, for a period of not less than 50 years. 
(g)  Height. There shall be a maximum height limit of 50 feet for structures other than single-family. For single-family residential structures, there shall be a maximum height limit of 35 feet. 
(h)  Yards. 
(1)  A yard at least 30 feet in depth shall be provided along the entire perimeter of the planned development for structures of 35 feet in height or less. 
(2)  A yard at least 50 feet in depth shall be provided along the entire perimeter of the planned development for structures over 35 feet in height. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  If a mixture of structural heights occurs within a planned development, the most restrictive yard requirement shall be applied. 
(5)  The setback requirements of the underlying I-1 and 1-2 zoning districts shall apply to developments of a limited commercial (I-1) or light industrial (1-2) nature. 
(6)  Accessory uses, to the extent provided in article IV, shall not be permitted in any part of the perimeter yard, except signs, fences, walls and hedges. 
(i)  Parking. Adequate parking shall be provided for each planned development use as set forth in article VI. Shared parking may be permitted on a limited basis for multiuse and/or multistructure planned developments. The amount of such shared parking shall be appropriate to the mix of uses proposed and the adequacy of parking resources in the general vicinity, and shall minimize overlapping peak parking demand peculiar to the uses proposed. The justification for such shared parking must be provided by the applicant. A single structure, single use, planned development must provide the parking required in article VI. 
(j)  Public improvements on-site and off-site. 
(1)  The planned development site shall be provided with adequate storm drainage facilities, public water supply and sanitary sewer facilities on-site as well as off-site, if deemed necessary. 
(2)  The proposed planned development site shall be accessible from public roads that are adequate to serve the traffic demand imposed upon them by the proposed development. Improvements to the public road system, such as lane additions, pavement widening, signalization and dedication of rights-of-way to achieve such improvements, may be necessary to provide for improved traffic flow to and around the proposed site. Adequate ingress and egress shall be designed so as to minimize traffic congestion in the vicinity of the proposed site. 
(3)  The on-site roadways, public or private, and the driveways shall be adequate to serve the uses of the planned development and shall meet the minimum standards of all applicable ordinances of the Village. 
(k)  Public services and facilities. The proposed planned development shall not impose any undue burden upon the public services and facilities of the Village, such as fire, police and public works. 
(l)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage of the proposed planned development shall not exceed that which is permitted by the underlying zoning district, and such maximum lot coverage shall be established by the plan commission in its review of the proposal. 
(m)  Open space. 
(1)  Each proposed planned development shall provide an appropriate amount of the net site acreage as open space. Open space shall consist of land specifically intended to be used by the public, or those areas reserved for use by all property owners within the planned development. Areas which shall not be considered as open space include parking lots, parking islands, landscaped areas immediately adjacent to buildings (architectural landscaping), landscaping for parking areas and detention areas which are wet the majority of the time or have their perimeter fenced. 
(2)  In evaluating the adequacy of the open space proposed, consideration shall be given to the following criteria: 
a.  The location of proposed buildings and land uses on the site; 
b.  The character and proximity of the surrounding development; 
c.  The amount of open space provided on other developed parcels in the general vicinity; and 
d.  The extent to which such open space is landscaped or otherwise improved to benefit intended users. 
Such open space shall be an integral component of the overall site design. 
(3)  All common open space shall be conveyed either to an entity established for the purpose of benefiting the owners or residents of the planned development, the Village park district or the developer/owner, provided that, in all cases, legally binding guarantees, as approved by the board of trustees, verify that the common open space will be permanently preserved as open space and properly maintained. Adequate safeguards, including covenants, shall be provided to prevent the subsequent development of such open space and to prevent the future construction of buildings and structures on such open space. Adequate provision shall be made for the care and maintenance of such open space. 
(n)  Landscape plan. A landscape plan shall be provided for all common open space areas and noncommon open space site amenities, indicating plant materials, grading, berming and recreational facilities and equipment. A schedule of landscape maintenance and material replacement shall also be provided and approved by the Village appearance commission and Village Board. 
(o)  Continuing care retirement communities (CCRCs). Where a planned development includes any structure designed and intended to be used as a CCRC, the following provisions shall be applicable, which provisions shall govern in the case of any inconsistency with other provisions of this Code: 
(1)  A minimum tract size of 15 acres shall be required. 
(2)  The maximum density shall not exceed 18 units per acre. The permitted number of dwelling units shall be based upon the sum of all residential units and assisted living units. Nursing care beds shall not be counted towards the total number of permitted dwelling units. 
(3)  No lot line of a CCRC may be closer than 2,640 feet to the lot line of another such facility. 
(4)  A yard setback shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Principal buildings and accessory buildings of two or more stories in height shall be set back no less than 100 feet from the lot line. 
b.  All other accessory structures shall be governed by the provisions of article IV. 
(5)  The minimum distance between any two separate buildings shall be 15 feet. 
(6)  The maximum percentage of the site which may be covered by buildings shall be 25 percent. 
(7)  The maximum percentage of the site which may be covered by a hard surface, including buildings, parking lot surfaces, walkways and other impervious surfaces, shall not exceed 50 percent. 
(8)  The height of any building, exclusive of roof-mounted building equipment, shall not exceed five stories or 50 feet, whichever is less. 
(9)  Principal and accessory uses shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  Principal uses. 
1.  Attached or detached single-family units. 
2.  Multiple-family dwelling units. 
3.  Nursing beds. 
4.  Assisted living units. 
b.  Accessory uses. The following accessory uses, if provided, must be for the exclusive use of the provider, residents and their guests: 
1.  Common dining facilities. 
2.  Therapy facilities. 
3.  Auditoriums/multipurpose rooms. 
4.  Recreation facilities. 
5.  Administrative offices. 
6.  Services and retail shops. 
7.  On-site laundry and dry cleaning services. 
8.  Laundry and dry cleaning facilities. 
9.  Other ancillary facilities deemed appropriate by the board of trustees. 
(10)  The CCRC must provide a means by which the facilities are made available on a continuing preference basis to Village residents and a means by which the facilities are made available on a continuing basis at less cost to Village residents, subject, however, to applicable federal, State and local law. All written proposals for fulfillment of such requirement approved by the Village Board of trustees shall constitute compliance with this subsection. 
(11)  Any proposed CCRC shall be considered by the board of trustees prior to its approval using the following criteria in addition to the standards applicable to all planned developments: 
a.  Long-range aims and goals pertaining to the physical and social development of the Village as provided in the comprehensive plan. 
b.  Integration of the proposed land use with the existing development and land use adjacent to the site. 
c.  Conditions and availability of adjacent streets to efficiently and safely afford a movement of traffic generated by the proposed development. 
d.  Additional public services made necessary by the proposed development. 
e.  Amount, location and proposed use of the permanent open space achieved by the development. 
f.  Accessibility of the site to public transportation. 
g.  Proximity of commercial and institutional facilities, including medical facilities, for the use of residents. 
(p)  Open space developments. 
(1)  Statement of purpose. 
a.  The intent of this subsection (p) is to permit one-family residential development in certain selected and restricted areas that, through design innovation, will encourage creative development alternatives that will benefit the total community by preserving desirable open space, wetlands, woodlands and other natural assets, in conjunction with the development of clustered one-family attached and detached residential dwellings, and provide improved design alternatives other than conventional subdivision development for difficult sites. The proposed open space development must meet the letter and spirit of this chapter, and the use will be compatible with already existing uses in the area, not interfere with the orderly development of the area and not be detrimental to the area. 
b.  The purpose of an open space development is to provide a method of development for land that permits variation in lot sizes without an increase in the overall density (numbers of dwelling units per acre) of population or development. This allows developments of varying lot sizes so as to provide home buyers a choice of lot sizes according to their needs and preserves open space, tree cover, scenic vistas, natural drainageways and outstanding natural topography. Such measures prevent soil erosion by permitting development according to the nature of the terrain; provides larger open areas with greater utility for rest and recreation; and encourages the development of more attractive and economic site design. 
c.  Open space developments are permitted only as planned developments. In order to be eligible for consideration as an open space development, the subject property shall exhibit one or more of the following conditions: 
1.  The property is of such a depth and/or width so as to make traditional single-family subdivision platting difficult. 
2.  The parcel is shaped in such a way that it contains acute angles which would make a traditional development difficult to achieve. 
3.  The parcel contains a floodplain or poor soil conditions which results in a substantial portion of the total area of the parcel being unbuildable. Soil test borings, floodplain maps or other documented evidence must be submitted to the plan commission in order to substantiate the parcel's qualification for open space development. 
4.  The parcel contains natural assets which could be preserved through the use of open space development. Such assets may include the natural stands of large trees, land which serves as a natural habitat for wildlife, unusual topographic features or other natural assets which should be preserved. 
5.  The parcel contains natural land forms which are arranged so that the change of elevation within the site includes slopes in excess of ten percent between the elevations. The elevation changes and slopes shall appear as the typical feature of the site, rather than the exceptional or infrequent features of the site. The topography is such that achieving road grades of less than that permitted by the Village would be impossible unless the site were mass graded. 
6.  The site plan creates the additional open space required under this subsection (p) as a site amenity. 
7.  In addition to one or more of the conditions set forth in subsections (p)(1)c.1.—6. of this section, the site shall contain at least one of the following characteristics: 
i.  The parcel has at least one lot line which abuts a nonsingle-family residential zoning district, a permanent nonresidential use or major thoroughfare; or 
ii.  The parcel is situated so that the open space development option will allow flexibility in design and placement of open space for increased insulation and protection for the residential units from an adjacent expressway or other major thoroughfare. 
Compliance with such standards shall not automatically guarantee approval of an open space development. 
(2)  Total project dwelling units per acre. The number of dwelling units per acre of the proposed open space development shall not exceed that permitted in the underlying zoning district. In calculating the dwelling units per acre of the proposed open space development, the total site area shall exclude public or private rights-of-way, paved parking lots and any school and/or park sites. In calculating the permissible numbers of dwelling units per acre in the underlying zoning district, the following shall be used: 
a.  R-E, one dwelling unit per two acres. 
b.  R-1, one dwelling unit per acre. 
c.  R-1.3, 1.33 dwelling units per acre. 
d.  R-2, two dwelling units per acre. 
e.  R-3, three dwelling units per acre. 
f.  R-4, four dwelling units per acre. 
g.  R-5, five dwelling units per acre. 
h.  RT-8, eight dwelling units per acre. 
i.  R-18, 18 dwelling units per acre. 
(3)  Minimum parcel size. No open space development shall be permitted unless the development contains a total site area of not less than five acres. 
(4)  Permitted uses. Single-family detached dwelling units, attached dwelling units (townhomes) and related accessory structures shall be permitted uses in open space developments. 
(5)  Bulk requirements. 
a.  The following bulk standards shall be applicable to open space developments, notwithstanding the bulk standards applicable to other types of planned developments: 
1.  Minimum lot area. No minimum lot area is required. 
2.  Minimum lot width. No minimum lot width is required. 
3.  Buildings per lot. No more than one building is permitted per lot. 
4.  Maximum building height. Maximum building height is 35 feet. 
5.  Minimum setbacks. 
i.  Front setbacks. Front setbacks shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the right-of-way. 
ii.  Interior side setbacks. 
Single-family detached dwellings shall be set back a minimum of ten feet between buildings. 
Single-family attached dwellings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet between buildings. 
iii.  Interior side to rear setbacks. 
Single-family detached dwellings shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet between buildings. 
Single-family attached dwellings shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet between buildings. 
iv.  Exterior side setbacks (adjoining a street). Exterior side setbacks (adjoining a street) shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet to the right-of-way. 
v.  Interior rear setbacks. Interior rear setbacks shall be 40 feet between buildings. 
6.  Maximum site coverage. Maximum site coverage shall be 40 percent of the net area of the site. For purposes of this subsection, the term "net site area" shall mean the total site area exclusive of any site area devoted to public or private rights-of-way. However, at the discretion of the plan commission and/or Village Board, such percentage may be adjusted as deemed appropriate or desirable with respect to the proposed development. 
7.  Minimum site perimeter yard. A yard shall be provided around the perimeter of the site of no less depth or width than that required by the underlying zoning or the corresponding minimum yard required on the property adjacent to the site, whichever is greater. If the property abuts a right-of-way, the perimeter yard shall be that established on the approved site plan. 
b.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (p)(5)a. of this section, the plan commission and/or Village Board shall have the right to impose such requirements or adjust and/or increase any such requirements as set forth in this section. 
(6)  Minimum total parking. A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided per unit, with additional parking spaces to be provided and located commensurate with anticipated need as established by Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) or other similar standards. 
(7)  Additional application requirements. In addition to the submission requirements applicable to other planned developments, any application for an open space development shall also include: 
a.  A statement setting forth the total area of the tract; 
b.  The available developable acreage; 
c.  The maximum number of lots allowable for the site by the underlying zoning under conventional zoning requirements; 
d.  The number and size of lots in the proposed open space development; and 
e.  The total area of the open space system. 
(8)  Additional approval standards. The following standards are applicable to open space developments and supplement the other planned development approval standards set forth in this section: 
a.  An open space development shall include substantially more open space than might be expected with more traditional development patterns. 
b.  Each dwelling unit shall be provided with an adequate private area adjacent to each such unit for the benefit of the resident. 
c.  Each dwelling unit within the development shall be provided with linkages and/or vistas or shall otherwise benefit from the open space areas proposed as part of the development. 
d.  Street and right-of-way widths within the development shall be designed and installed to the minimum width necessary to provide minimum emergency vehicle access, preserve the benefits of concentrating development on the site and foster a sense of immediacy and community. 
e.  Design techniques shall be incorporated into the design of the street system to reduce traffic volume and speed. 
f.  Through streets shall be minimized and the use of culs-de-sac and other design features shall be encouraged to reinforce the desired development pattern of small groupings of residences surrounded by open space. 
g.  Adequate alternative utility easements shall be provided elsewhere on the site in order to accommodate public utility needs appropriate to the minimal widths of public rights-of-way. 
h.  Sidewalks might not be required in an open space development if alternative pedestrian paths are provided that may include carriage walks to accommodate and encourage pedestrian circulation. In instances where no sidewalks are provided, linkages to circulation systems and public areas on adjacent properties shall be required. 
i.  The size of dwelling units within the open space development shall be consistent with needs of anticipated residents. 
j.  Common areas shall be protected from future development by conservancy or other easements that shall also assign ongoing maintenance obligations for such areas. 
k.  Common design guidelines shall be adopted to stipulate overall design themes that promote a diversity of building designs and a variety of building locations, while ensuring a harmonious and compatible development design. 
(q)  Form of ordinance. Any ordinance approving a planned development shall specify with particularity the special conditions and restrictions imposed by the board of trustees on the planned development, and shall specify the extent to which the district regulations which would otherwise have been applicable have been varied or modified, and shall provide for the land to be rezoned PD planned development, and shall be so shown on the zoning map of the Village. 
(Code 1959, § 24.13.6; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 5351, § 40, 6-15-2010)  
Secs. 98-497—98-530. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt historic preservation regulations, 65 ILCS 5/11-48.2-2. 
 
Sec. 98-531. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the same meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alteration means any act or process that changes the exterior architectural appearance of a building, structure or property including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, addition, repair, rehabilitation, restoration, relocation or demolition of such building, structure or property. 
Area means a specific geographic division of the Village. 
Addition means any act or process which changes one or more of the "exterior architectural features" of a structure designated for preservation by adding to, joining with or increasing the size or capacity of the structure. 
Building means any structure created for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a certificate issued by the Village Board of Trustees authorizing plans for alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a historic landmark or site, or a structure within a designated historic district. 
Commission means the Village Historic Preservation Commission. 
Commissioner means voting members of the Village Historic Preservation Commission. 
Community means the Village. 
Construction means the act of adding an addition to an existing structure, or the erection of a new, and/or principal accessory structure on a lot or property. 
Demolition means any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a landmark or site feature within a historic district including landscaping. 
Exterior architectural appearance means the architectural and general composition of the exterior of a structure, including but not limited to, kind, color and texture of building materials, and the type, design, and character of windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other pertinent elements. 
Historic districts means an area designated as a historic district by ordinance of the Village, which may contain within the definable geographic boundaries of one or more landmarks, and which may have within its boundaries other properties or structures that, while not of such historic and or architectural significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to overall visual characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within the historic districts. 
Landmark means a building, structure, object or site designated by ordinance of the Village Board of Trustees that meets any one of the criteria listed in section 98-536. 
Owner of record means the person, corporation or other legal entity listed as owner on the records of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. 
Rehabilitation means the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use, while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values. 
Removal means any relocation of the structure on its site or to another site. 
Repair means any change that does not require a building permit that is not construction, relocation or alteration. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, buildings, fences, gazebos, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, radio and television antennas, including supporting towers, swimming pools, satellite dishes, solar panels and wind generations. 
Structural change means any change or repair in the supporting members of a building, structure, roof or exterior walls which would expand the building in height, width, or bulk of the building. 
(Ord. No. 4382, § 5, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4649, § 2(2), 6-1-2004; Ord. No. 5762, § 5, 2-4-2014) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-532. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of buildings or sites of special character or historical significance or value for the people of the Village by: 
(1)  Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the distinctive, historic, architectural and/or landscaping characteristics of the Village which represent the Village's cultural social, economic, political and architectural history. 
(2)  Fostering a civic pride in the beauty and notable accomplishments of the past as represented in the Village's landmark and historic districts. 
(3)  Stabilizing and improving the property values of Village's landmarks and historic districts. 
(4)  Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the Village to its businesses, homeowners, residents and tourists, visitors and shoppers, thereby supporting and promoting business, commerce, industry and providing economic benefit to the Village. 
(5)  Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration and rehabilitation. 
(Ord. No. 4382, § 3, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4649, § 2(1), 6-1-2004)  
Sec. 98-533. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5636, § 2(e), adopted Feb. 19, 2013, repealed § 98-533, which pertained to creation of the [Historic Preservation] Commission; membership; meetings and derived from Ord. No. 4382, § 6, adopted Mar. 19, 2002; Ord. No. 4412, § 1, adopted June 18, 2002; Ord. No. 4512, adopted Apr. 15, 2003; Ord. No. 4649, § 2(3), adopted June 1, 2004; and Ord. No. 4894, § 1, adopted July 18, 2006.  
Sec. 98-534. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5636, § 2(e), adopted Feb. 19, 2013, repealed § 98-533, which pertained to powers and duties of the [Historic Preservation] Commission and derived from Ord. No. 4382, § 7, adopted Mar. 19, 2002; Ord. No. 4512, adopted Apr. 15, 2003; and Ord. No. 4649, § 2(4), adopted June 1, 2004.  
Sec. 98-535. - Landmark and historic district designation procedures. 
(a)  Applications. Any person, organization or association may submit an application to the commission requesting that a building, place or area be designated as a landmark or be removed as a designated landmark. The commission may also initiate its own request for designation or removal from designation, any building, place, or area as a landmark by filing an application with the secretary of the commission. In the case of a historic district, applications must be accompanied by a petition signed by 51 percent of the owners of record in an area proposed as a historic district, unless such an application is initiated by the commission. 
(b)  Exemptions. Property owned by any unit of local government, school district or other governmental agency, in which the governmental agency or unit of local government has adopted a valid ordinance regulating the historic preservation of properties owned by such agency, shall be exempt from landmark designation as prescribed by this ordinance. Such exemption shall not apply to property owned by the Village. 
(c)  Notification and public preliminary review. 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application for landmark or historic district designation, the secretary to the commission shall schedule a preliminary review to be held at the next regular meeting, or special meeting of the commission called for that purpose consistent with the time period specified in subsection (c)(2) of this section. The secretary shall arrange for written notification to the owner of record of the property, or the owners of record of an area nominated to be a historic district, of the time and place of the public preliminary review meeting and shall also cause the same notice to be delivered to the director of development advising the Director that an application for landmark or historic district designation has been received, requesting that the director report to the commission on any matters affecting the subject property or surrounding area. 
(2)  The public preliminary review meeting shall be scheduled to take place not later than five business days after notice is served by mail or delivery upon the applicant, and delivered to the director of development. 
(3)  At the public meeting noticed for the purpose of preliminary review, the commission shall consider the application and decide whether it merits a public hearing. The commission shall allow the applicant to provide reasons as to the merit or lack thereof regarding designation of the property as a landmark or a historic district. In determining whether there is merit in conducting a public hearing, the commission shall take into consideration the criteria established in section 98-536. In the event the commission finds that the application does not merit a public hearing, it shall enter a formal denial of the application. In the event the commission determines the application merits a public hearing, such hearing shall be scheduled in accordance with the procedures established in this article. 
(4)  No building permit shall be issued for alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a proposed landmark or of a property or structure within a proposed historic district from the date the secretary of the commission receives the application for landmark or historic district designation. After the public preliminary review meeting, in the event the commission denies the application for landmark or historic district designation, the freeze on issuance of building permits shall automatically be null and void. In the event a public hearing is scheduled, the freeze on the issuance of building permits shall remain in effect until the final disposition of the nomination by the Village Board of trustees, unless such alteration, removal or demolition of the proposed landmark or historic district properties, or structure, is authorized by the Village Board of trustees as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(d)  Fee. Each application submitted to the Commission by an applicant who is not an owner of the property for which the application is being filed, nor is a member of the Commission recommending consideration of a property being nominated by the Commission, shall be accompanied with a nonrefundable fee as set forth in section 30-1. 
(e)  Waiver of fees. Application fees may be waived if the applicant verifies that he or she is unable to pay the application fee because he or she has insufficient income to pay these fees without substantial financial hardship. 
(f)  Notice and hearing: A public hearing shall be scheduled within 75 days of a receipt of the application for landmark and or historic district designation or removal from designation, and written notice, setting forth the date, time anyplace of the hearing, shall be given to the owners of record and any other person having a legal or equitable interest in the property subject to the application for landmark or historic designation. Further, the secretary shall cause notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village, setting forth the nature of the hearing and the common address of the property or properties which are the subject of the hearing, and the date, time, and place scheduled for the public hearing. At the public hearing, the commission shall afford the opportunity to any person attending the hearing to give testimony regarding the proposed designation or removal from designation. If the hearing is continued, the commission shall provide oral notice at the hearing and any subsequent hearings of such continuance or continuances until the matter is concluded at the commission level. 
(g)  Commission review and recommendation: The commission shall review all information presented to it pertinent to the request for designation or removal from designation and within 30 days of the last public hearing date considering the request, submit a written report and recommendation containing its findings to the Village Board. 
(h)  Action by Village Board: The Village Board shall take final action approving or denying the application within 60 days of the submission of the report and recommendation of the commission. An ordinance passed by the majority vote of the Village Board is required to approve landmark or historic district designation. 
(i)  Protection by designation: Upon designation by ordinance of the Village Board, such building, place or area shall be a landmark or historic district, afforded the protections provided by this article. A copy of this article designating the building, place, or area as a landmark or historic district shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owners of record of the property or properties which have been landmarked or which comprise a historic district, and recorded with the County recorder of deeds. 
(j)  Denial of an application by Village Board of trustees. The denial of an application by the board of trustees shall be deemed to have occurred one of three ways: 
(1)  A majority vote of the board of trustees adopting a commission report recommending a denial of an application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed denied; 
(2)  If the board of trustees fails to act within 60 days of the submission of the commission's report; or 
(3)  If a majority vote of the board of trustees recommends denial of an application which has been recommended for approval by the commission. 
(k)  Reapplication. Upon denial or expiration as provided in subsection (j) of this section, a new application for designation or removal from designation shall not be considered for a period of one year from the date of denial or expiration. 
(l)  Administrative review: Any final action taken by the board of trustees under this article shall be subject to review in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 4382, § 8, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. 4649, § 2(5), 6-1-2004; Ord. No. 5742, § 3, 12-10-2013)  
Sec. 98-536. - Criteria for landmark or historic designation. 
The following criteria shall be utilized by the Village historic commission in determining whether a site, building or property should be declared a landmark or historic district: 
(1)  Its character, interest or value as part of the development heritage or cultural characteristics of the community, County, State or country. 
(2)  Its location as the site of a significant local, County, State or national event. 
(3)  Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the development of the community, County, State or country. 
(4)  Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural and or landscape style valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction or use of indigenous materials. 
(5)  Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer, architect or landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the development, County, State or country. 
(6)  Its overall embodiment of design, detailing, materials or craftsmanship which renders it architecturally significant. 
(7)  Its overall embodiment of design elements that make it structurally or architecturally innovative. 
(8)  Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that make it an established or familiar visual feature. 
(9)  It is located in an area that has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in history or prehistory. 
(10)  Whether the property owner opposes or supports the designation. 
(Ord. No. 4382, § 9, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4649, § 2(6), 6-1-2004)  
Sec. 98-537. - Certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Required. A certificate of appropriateness issued by the Village Board shall be required before a building permit, moving, or demolition permit is issued for any designated historic landmark or any building structure or site or part thereof in a historic district. A certificate of appropriateness is required if the building, structure or site will be altered, extended or repaired in such a manner as to produce a change, in the exterior appearance of such building or structure. Such changes include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Changes by addition, alteration, maintenance, reconstruction, rehabilitation, demolition, renovation or repair which requires a building permit or a demolition permit; 
(2)  Moving a building; and 
(3)  Any construction or alteration, demolition or removal affecting a significant exterior architectural feature as specified in the ordinance designating the landmark or historic district. 
(b)  Exception. An exception to this requirement of a certificate of appropriateness may be made if the applicant provides evidence sufficient to convince the Board of Trustees that a failure to grant the building permit will cause an imminent threat to life, health, or property. 
(c)  Application. Every application for a demolition permit or a building permit including plans and specifications shall be forwarded by the Development Department to the Commission within 15 days following receipt of the application by the Development Department. The application for issuance of certification of appropriateness must include the following: 
(1)  Street address of the property involved; 
(2)  Legal description of the property involved; 
(3)  Brief description of the present improvements located on the property; 
(4)  Detailed description of the construction, alteration, demolition or use proposed together with any architectural drawing or sketches, if those services have been utilized by the applicant, and if not, a sufficient description of the construction, alteration, demolition and use to enable anyone to determine what the final appearance and use will be; 
(5)  Owner's name; 
(6)  Developer's name, if different than the owner; 
(7)  Architect's name; 
(8)  A filing fee of $100.00; and 
(9)  Any other information required by the Development Department or the Commission. 
(d)  Standards. In making a recommendation as to whether the Commission should make a recommendation to the Village Board to approve or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission shall be guided by the following criteria: 
(1)  A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be utilized for a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building or property and its site environment. 
(2)  The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials and/or alterations of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided. 
(3)  Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings shall not be undertaken. 
(4)  Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved. 
(5)  Distinctive stylist features or examples of skilled craftsmanship that characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated with sensitivity. 
(6)  Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired or restored rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence. 
(7)  Chemical or physical treatment, such as sandblasting, that causes damage to historic material shall not be used. The surface cleaning of the structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. 
(8)  Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved if such resources must be disturbed mitigation measures shall be undertaken. 
(9)  New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment. 
(10)  New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
(11)  Contemporary design for alteration and addition to existing properties shall not be discouraged when such alteration or addition does not destroy significant, historical, architectural, or cultural material and such design is compatible with the size scale, color, material, and character of the property, neighborhood or environment. 
(e)  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be scheduled on the application for a certificate of appropriateness and written notice, setting forth the date, time and place of the hearing, shall be given to the owner of record and any other person having a legal equitable interest in the property subject to the request. Further, the secretary shall cause notice to be published in the newspaper of general circulation in the Village, setting forth the nature of the hearing of the property involved, and the date, time and place of the scheduled hearing. At the public hearing, the Commission shall afford the opportunity to any person in attendance to present their views pertinent to the certificate of appropriateness. If the Commission must schedule any meeting for subsequent public hearing on the request, it shall so announce at the first meeting but need not give further published notice. Public hearings shall be initiated within 60 days of receipt of the application. 
(f)  Commission review and recommendation. The Commission shall review all information presented to it pertinent to the applicant for a certificate of appropriateness and shall present and submit to the Board of Trustees, within 30 days of the last public hearing date considering the applicant, a written report and recommendation containing its findings and recommendations. 
(g)  Action by Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall take final action approving or denying the application of a certificate of appropriateness within 60 days of the submission of the report and recommendation by the Commission. An ordinance passed by the majority vote of the Board of Trustees is required to approve a certificate of appropriateness. 
(h)  Denial of an application by Board of Trustees. The denial of an application by the Board of Trustees will occur in one of three ways: 
(1)  A majority vote of the Board of Trustees adopting a Commission report recommending a denial of an application shall be deemed a denial; 
(2)  If the Board of Trustees fails to act within 60 days of the submission of the Commission's report the application shall be deemed denied; or 
(3)  A majority vote of the Board of Trustees recommends denial of an application which has been recommended for approval by the Commission. 
(i)  Appeals. Appeals from the decision of the Board of Trustees shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. 
(j)  Issuance and validity. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued by the Development Department following approval by the Board of Trustees. A certificate of appropriateness shall be invalid if the plans upon which the Board of Trustees issued the certificate of appropriateness are modified without prior notice and approval of the Board of Trustees, or if the building permit issued for the same work becomes invalid. The certificate of appropriateness remains valid for the same one-year period of validity as the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 4382, § 10, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4649, § 2(7), 6-1-2004; Ord. No. 5762, § 6, 2-4-2014)  
Sec. 98-538. - Certificate of economic hardship. 
(a)  Purpose. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article to the contrary, a certificate of economic hardship may be issued to allow the performance of work for which a certificate of appropriateness has been denied. A certificate of economic hardship shall be issued by the Board of Trustees upon a finding by it that all reasonable use of, or return from, a designated landmark or property within a historic district would be denied a property owner as a result of the disapproval of a certificate of appropriateness. The notice and hearing procedures required for the designation of a historic landmark shall be followed for the issuance of a certificate of economic hardship. 
(b)  Application. The following information must accompany an application for certificate of economic hardship: 
(1)  The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase, and the party from whom it was purchased including a description of the relationship if any, between the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased; 
(2)  The assessed value of the land and the improvements thereon according to the two most recent assessments; 
(3)  Real estate taxes for the previous two years; 
(4)  The remaining balance on the mortgage, if any, and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two years; 
(5)  All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner or applicant in connection with this purchase, financing or ownership of the property; 
(6)  Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked or offer received if any; 
(7)  Any consideration by the owner as profitable adaptive uses for the property; 
(8)  If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from the property for the previous two years, itemized operating, and maintenance expenses for the previous two years, and annual cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period; 
(9)  The form of ownership or operation of the property whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not for profit corporation, limited partnership, joint venture or other; 
(10)  Any other information including the income tax bracket of the owner, applicant or principal investors in the property reasonably necessary for determination as to whether the property can be reasonably used or yield a reasonable rate of return to the present or future owners. 
(c)  Public hearing. The Commission may solicit expert testimony or the applicant may submit evidence concerning any of the following items at the time of the public hearing, on the issuance of the certificate of economic hardship: 
(1)  Any substantial decrease in the fair market value of the property as a result of the denial of the certificate of appropriateness. 
(2)  Any substantial decrease in the pre-tax or after-tax return to owners of record or other investors in the property as a result of the denial of the certificate of appropriateness. 
(3)  Any additional cost of work necessary to comply with the standards and criteria for the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. 
(4)  In the case of a proposed demolition, the economic feasibility of rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure on the property. 
(d)  Commission review and recommendation. Upon a finding by the Commission that without approval of the proposed work, all reasonable use of or return from designated landmark or property within a historic district will be denied a property owner, then the application shall be delayed for a period not to exceed 60 days. During this period of time, the Commission shall investigate plans and make recommendations to the Board of Trustees to allow for reasonable use of or return from the property or to otherwise preserve the subject property. Such plans and recommendations may include, but are not limited to, a relaxation of the provisions of this article, a reduction in real property taxes, financial assistance, building code modifications, and/or changes in zoning regulations. If, by the end of the 60-day period, the Commission has found that without approval of the proposed work the property cannot be put to reasonable use or the owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic return therefrom, then the Commission shall recommend the issuance of a certificate of economic hardship approving the proposed work. A written report and recommendation containing its findings and recommendations shall be submitted to the Commission, which shall then make a recommendation to the Board of Trustees. 
(e)  Action by Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall take final action approving or denying the certificate of economic hardship within 60 days of the submission of the report and recommendation of the Commission. 
(f)  Denial of an application by the Board of Trustees. The denial of an application for a certificate of economic hardship will occur in one of three ways: 
(1)  A majority vote of the Board of Trustees adopting a Commission report recommending denial of an application for a certificate of economic hardship shall be deemed a denial; 
(2)  If the Board of Trustees fails to act within 60 days of the submission of the Commission report and recommendation, the application shall be deemed denied; or 
(3)  A majority vote of the Board of Trustees recommends denial of an application which has been recommended for approval by the Commission. 
(Ord. No. 4382, § 11, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4649, § 2(8), 6-1-2004; Ord. No. 5762, § 7, 2-4-2014)  
Sec. 98-539. - Unlawful alteration, demolition or removal. 
Any person who causes the alteration, demolition or removal of any designated landmark or improvement within a historic district without a certificate of appropriateness or certificate of economic hardship who shall be found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day that such violation shall continue to exist shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 4382, § 12, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 4512, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 4649, § 2(10), 6-1-2004)  
Secs. 98-540—98-570. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT CODE 
INTRODUCTION 
Code Components 
The Development Code contains the following sections or articles: 
•  Article 1: General Provisions: This section describes the purpose, intent, and applicability of the Downtown Development Code in the Village of Glenview. 
•  Article 2: Regulating Framework: This section defines the community's vision for Downtown as determined by the Village's extensive public planning process. It provides regulations on land uses, building heights, and parking based on the Downtown Revitalization Plan's recommendations. 
•  Article 3: Street Frontages: This section categorizes Downtown streets according to the desired physical character recommended by the Downtown Plan. It addresses optimal building setbacks, stepbacks, and types; site access; and parking placement. 
•  Article 4: Design Standards: This section contains standards that define building, streetscape, landscape, and site design. 
•  Article 5: Administration: This section presents the application and review process for Downtown development. 
•  Article 6: Definitions: This section is a glossary of technical terms. 
•  Article 7: Index 
 
How to Use the Code 
Development/Redevelopment 
To modify a building or develop a new building: 
1.  Review Article 2.1: Purpose to determine the community's preferred development direction for a particular block or parcel. Also review the full Downtown Revitalization Plan, which is available at www.glenview.il.us. 
2.  Review Article 2.2: Permitted Uses to determine allowed land uses for particular development sites. 
3.  Review Article 2.5: Building Heights to identify the range of heights allowed for the subject block. 
4.  Review Article 2.6: Parking for specific parking requirements for specific uses. 
5.  Review Article 3: Street Frontages to determine street cross-sections, building setbacks, allowed uses for each Frontage, and other requirements. 
6.  Review Article 4: Design Standards to determine the desired design approach for Downtown development. Consider each design standard as follows: 
• What is intended for the streetscape or "public realm" defined by the Building Line, which is a build-to line. 
• How a site should be designed regarding streetscape, landscape, and parking. 
• What architectural features should be incorporated into building design. 
Other Processes 
To change a permitted use to another permitted use in an existing building: 
Appearance Commission approval will be required for any change in signage, landscaping, or external appearance of the building. See chapter 54, article III. 
For a list of permitted uses, see Article 2.2 and the use tables in each street frontage. 
To change a zoning district: 
Rezoning of property is done by the passage of an ordinance by the Village Board of Trustees, after notice and a public hearing by the Plan Commission. See section 98-49 and check with the Development Department, Planning Division or the Village's web site at www.glenview.il.us. 
To subdivide a property: 
Subdivision of property is authorized by the Board of Trustees after a recommendation from the Plan Commission. See section 54-31 and check with the Development Department, Planning Division or the Village's web site at www.glenview.il.us. 
Non-conforming use or building: 
Existing uses, buildings and sites that met the rules when they were constructed, but do not comply with this code are considered nonconforming. See chapter 98, article V, nonconformities, or check the Village's web site at www.glenview.il.us. 
What codes or ordinances may apply to a project? 
The Development Department, Planning Division should be contacted regarding the approval procedures necessary for a project. The Village's web site, at www.glenview.il.us, is also a useful source of information. The following approvals may be required or this Code chapters may apply: 
• Appearance Commission Approval: Chapter 54, article III, required for any exterior building change or lighting, landscaping or signage change. Chapter 98, article XI, will be required if the property has been designated as a landmark or is within a historic district. 
• Awning Appearance Code and Design Guidelines. 
• Downtown Signs Design Guidelines. 
• Nonconformity: Chapter 98, article V. 
• Outdoor Dining Ordinance: Section 98-131. 
• Parking Lot Landscaping Ordinance and Design Guidelines. 
• Performance Standards, including Lighting: Chapter 98, article VIII. 
• Signs, Chapter 98, article VII. 
• Site Plan Approval: Chapter 54, article IV, will be required for all development projects within the Downtown District as defined herein. 
• Subdivision Code and/or Engineering approvals: Chapter 66. 
• Zoning Board of Appeals variances: Chapter 98. 
(Ord. No. 5762, § 8, 2-4-2014)  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 98-571. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "Downtown Development Code" for the Village of Glenview or the "Code." 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-572. - Applicability. 
The regulations of this code shall apply to all development, public or private, within the Downtown Development District, or "District," as designated on the attached Zoning Map, unless otherwise expressly exempted or provided in this Downtown Development Code (see areas shaded in gray in Figures 1.1, 2.5, and 3.2). 
The District generally encompasses Glenview Road from Washington Street to Waukegan Road, Waukegan Road from Lake Avenue to Henley Street, Railroad Avenue from Dewes Street to just north of Grove Street, Dewes Street from Washington to Waukegan, and portions of Pine, Grove, Church, Prairie, Harlem, McLean, and Maplewood that are side streets for the major roads in Downtown. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-573. - Effective date. 
This code was adopted and became effective on June 17, 2008, Ordinance Number 5112. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-574. - Purpose and authority. 
This code is adopted pursuant to the Home Rule powers of the Village of Glenview under the 1970 constitution of the State of Illinois. This code is adopted for the purpose of: 
1.4.1 Promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare; 
1.4.2 Improve the Village's quality of life for residents and visitors by enhancing Downtown's "sense of place." 
 
1.4.3 Implementing the policies and goals contained within the Village's Downtown Revitalization Plan; 
1.4.4 Maintaining orderly and compatible land-use and development patterns; 
1.4.5 Enhancing and expanding Downtown's retail environment by clustering shopping opportunities; 
1.4.6 Expanding residential opportunities, both to improve housing choice and increase foot traffic and vitality; 
1.4.7 Promoting rehabilitation and reuse of older buildings; 
1.4.8 Accommodating office uses in the right locations; 
1.4.9 Ensuring adequate light, air, privacy, and access to property; 
1.4.10 Providing for adequate storm water drainage; 
1.4.11 Enhancing pedestrian access and circulation; 
1.4.12 Providing efficient parking and transportation facilities; and 
1.4.13 Accommodating growth and development that complies with the preceding stated purposes. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-575. - Intent. 
1.5.1 The intent of this Downtown Development Code is to implement the Downtown Revitalization Plan adopted by the Village Board of Trustees on August 15, 2006. 
1.5.2 New development regulations are needed for the Downtown District, as herein defined, because the existing zoning, subdivision, site plan and appearance ordinances include provisions that are inconsistent with the principles of the Downtown Revitalization Plan. This code focuses on the creation of mixed-use, walkable neighborhoods, and emphasizes building "form," "public realm," and high-quality site and building design. It is intended to set the foundation for a vital, attractive Downtown by encouraging streets, blocks, and buildings that are pedestrian-oriented, have a mix of uses, contain architectural diversity, and offer additional opportunities to live, work, and shop in the Village. Downtown Plan implementation is intended to: 
1.5.2.1 Create a sense of place that has uses desired and needed by the community; 
1.5.2.2 Enhance the aesthetic appeal of the Downtown; 
1.5.2.3 Provide desirable amenities such as parking, open space and streetscape improvements; 
1.5.2.4 Address the needs of the Downtown merchants, while attracting additional high-quality establishments; 
1.5.2.5 Be financially prudent. 
1.5.3 More specific statements of intent are found within each major section of this Downtown Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-576. - Adopted plans. 
The following plans have been adopted by the Village Board of Trustees and shall be considered in any decisions under this Downtown Development Code in the Downtown Development District: 
1.6.1 Downtown Revitalization Plan (August 2006) 
1.6.2 Comprehensive Plan (2004) 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-577. - Minimum requirements. 
The provisions of this Downtown Development Code are the minimum requirements deemed necessary to carry out its stated purposes and intent. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-578. - Conflicting provisions. 
1.8.1 Conflicts with Local, State, or Federal Regulations: If the provisions of this Downtown Development Code are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government or inconsistent with other adopted ordinances or regulations of the Village, the more restrictive provision will control. However, in the event any of the provisions herein conflict with any of the provisions of the Municipal Code, the provisions of the Downtown Development Code shall apply. 
1.8.2 Conflict with Private Agreements and Covenants: This Downtown Development Code is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of this Code impose a greater restriction than imposed by a private agreement, the provisions of this Code will control. If the provisions of a valid, enforceable private agreement impose a greater restriction than this Code, the provisions of the private agreement will control. The Village does not enforce or maintain a record of private agreements. 
1.8.3 D-1 Repealed: Section 98-135 of the Glenview Municipal Code, "D-1 Downtown Business District regulations" is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-579. - Severability. 
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word in this Downtown Development Code be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the President and Board of Trustees without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
DIVISION 2. - REGULATING FRAMEWORK 
 
Sec. 98-580. - Purpose. 
The Regulating Framework defines the desired physical form for Downtown Glenview and sets development parameters such as land use, street type, building height, siting and setbacks, and parking placement. The Development Code incorporates the Plan and also applies to, and regulates, parcels not referenced in the Plan. 
Figure 2.1 shows the potential buildout of opportunity sites identified during the Downtown planning process. It reflects the goals and objectives of the Plan and serves as a guide for Village officials, property owners, and development professionals as they conceive and implement improvement and development projects within Downtown. 
 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-581. - Permitted uses. 
The following is a description of land uses allowed in the Downtown District (see Figure 2.5 for the location of each use by block.) Also refer to tables of permitted uses for each Street Frontage. 
 
2.2.1—2.2.5. Reserved. 
 
2.2.7 Below-Ground Uses: Ancillary commercial, ancillary residential, parking, storage, and mechanical uses are allowed in basement or below-grade floors. If commercial uses are permitted on the ground floor, such uses are also permitted in the basement level as long as access to commercial space is separate from access to upper-story residential units. 
2.2.8 Depths of Use: Depths of use requirements shown in Figure 2.5 are 50 feet minimum (see Figure 2.8). For example, at the southwest corner of Glenview and Church, at least 50 feet south along Church must be Full Ground Floor Retail before a transition to Ground Floor Retail/Office/Service/Residential is allowed. 
 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 5441, §§ 2, 3, 4-7-2011; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013)  
Sec. 98-582. - Minimum commercial depth. 
Commercial uses must have a minimum depth (from the front Building Line to the rear of the retail floor area) of 50 feet. For the three parcels (#003, 012, and 014) located on the southwest corner of Glenview and Waukegan Roads commercial uses must have a minimum retail depth of 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-583. - Uses on same floor. 
2.4.1 While uses can be "mixed" within buildings by floor as noted above, residential and commercial (retail, service, or office) uses cannot be mixed on the same floor in a building (i.e. a floor with housing units cannot contain retail, office or service uses.) 
2.4.2 A residential lobby/elevator is required on the ground floor in all buildings with residential uses on upper floors. Commercial uses on the first floor may have a secondary entrance from this lobby as long as their primary commercial entrance is from the sidewalk on the street. 
2.4.3 Parking is allowed on the ground floor behind commercial uses in buildings with retail, service, or office uses on the ground floor. 
2.4.4 In addition to the use information noted above by location, See Article 3: Street Frontages for more specific regulations on allowed uses. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-584. - Building heights. 
Figure 2.9 depicts the maximum number of stories allowed in specific areas of the Downtown District. 
Tables 2.1 and 2.2 provide the maximum allowable height in stories and feet. 
2.5.1 Floor heights by story for multi-story commercial or mixed-use buildings: The ground floor shall be at least 15 and no more than 17 feet tall, with the upper residential or office floors being at least 10 and no more than 12 feet tall. 
2.5.2 Floor heights by story for multi-family residential buildings: All floors shall be at least 10 and no more than 12 feet tall. 
2.5.3 Floor heights for Waukegan Road north of Grove Street and 155' south of Lake Avenue right-of-way (up to existing corner lot) on the west side of Waukegan: For mixed-use buildings, the ground floor shall be 15 feet, with upper residential floors being at least 10 and no more than 11 feet tall. 
Table 2.1: Maximum Height—Multi-story Commercial/Mixed Use 
Number 
of Stories 	Maximum 
Height 
5 	65 feet 
4 	53 feet 
3 	41 feet 
2 	29 feet 
1 	17 feet 
 
Table 2.2: Maximum Height—Multi-family Residential 
Number 
of Stories 	Maximum 
Height 
5 	60 feet 
4 	48 feet 
3 	36 feet 
2 	24 feet 
1 	12 feet 
 
2.5.4 Additional Height: 
2.5.4.1 Additional height: In addition to the maximum height for each building type, up to 5 feet can be added to the height of a building to allow for such features as pitched roofs, and parapet walls. 
This additional height is not allowed for buildings north of Grove Street and 155' south of Lake Avenue right-of-way (up to the existing corner lot) on the west side of Waukegan Road. 
2.5.4.2 Architectural features: For all buildings, an additional 10 feet (beyond the 5 feet allowed for pitched roofs and parapet walls) may be allowed by the Appearance Commission in specific circumstances to provide space for an interesting architectural feature such as a clock tower or a cupola. The floor area of these architectural features cannot be occupied for actual use (although they can remain open to provide additional ceiling height for the floor below). The floor area of the feature also shall not constitute more than 10% of the building's ground floor area. 
For buildings north of Grove Street and 155' south of Lake Avenue right-of-way (up to the existing corner lot) on the west side of Waukegan Road, this additional height for architectural features must be placed along the Waukegan Road frontage. 
2.5.5 One-story commercial buildings: For 1-story commercial buildings, the minimum height is 20 feet and the maximum height is 22 feet to provide an increased physical presence and shopping "streetwall." 
2.5.6 Decks/terraces: Active use is permitted on terraces created by building stepbacks. Decks or terraces are not permitted on rooftops or above enclosed ground floor parking. 
 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-585. - Parking. 
Parking shall be provided for each use according to the following ratios: 
2.6.1 Minimum Parking by Use: 
2.6.1.1 Townhomes/rowhomes: 2 spaces per unit. 
2.6.1.2 Condominiums: 1.5 spaces per unit, with at least 1 space per unit indoors. 
2.6.1.3 Retail/service: 1 space per 300 gross square feet (except in the Glenview Road Corridor Frontage). 
2.6.1.4 Office: 1 space per 300 gross square feet (except in the Glenview Road Corridor Frontage). 
2.6.1.5 Restaurant: 1 space per 160 gross square feet (outdoor dining square footage, which includes outdoor dining located on upper story terraces, balconies, and rooftops, whether covered or uncovered) shall be included when calculating parking requirements). 
2.6.2 Exemptions from Minimum Parking by Use: For any new development project, the first 2,000 square feet of retail, office, or service use shall be exempt from the calculation for required parking spaces. The exemption shall be applied to the least generating use on the ground floor. Only one exemption shall be allowed per building. 
2.6.3 Minimum Parking—Glenview Road Street Frontage: 
2.6.3.1 Retail, office, and service uses in this frontage are required to provide 1 spaces per 500 gross square feet of floor area due to the availability of street parking and commuter parking along the tracks. 
2.6.3.2 Restaurants and residential uses shall provide parking according to the ratios listed in 2.6.1. 
2.6.3.3 In the Glenview Road Corridor Frontage, when a new use occupies a building existing as of May 21, 1996, additional off-street spaces are not required, provided that parking serving the building was not eliminated or reduced after May 21, 1996. 
2.6.4 Shared Parking: 
2.6.4.1 Collective provisions: Shared parking shall be considered to minimize the visual impact of land devoted to parking and to provide more efficient parking. 
2.6.4.2 Location: All required parking spaces shall be on the same lot as the building or use being served or within 350 feet of the property line (see Figure 2.10)—provided that no off-street parking for a business use shall be in a residential district. 
2.6.4.3 Waiver: The Village Board may waive the number of spaces required in part or entirely if shared parking is deemed efficient based on the location of the proposed use, anticipated hours of peak parking demand, potential for shared parking, and availability of alternative parking. A written agreement covering such collective use shall be filed with the Development Department. 
 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 5441, § 4, 4-7-2011)  
DIVISION 3. - STREET FRONTAGES 
 
Sec. 98-586. - Purpose and intent. 
Each Downtown street has been assigned a Street Frontage designation to define an optimal "building envelope" and "public realm" using setbacks, sidewalk and street widths, and other design parameters. 
Along with Article 4: Design Standards , the required street, sidewalk and building relationships are intended to foster new development that enhances and expands the traditional "Main Street" scale of Downtown. 
Figure 3.2: Street Frontages assigns designations to all street frontages in Downtown and establishes a Building Line for each frontage. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008))  
Sec. 98-587. - Building line. 
3.2.1 The Building Line is a "build-to" line that will help establish consistent "streetwalls," sidewalk widths, and streetscape zones (see Figures 3.1 and 3.2). 
3.2.2 Relationship of Building Line to right-of-way or property line: The Building Line may differ from the current location of a right-of-way or property line. In these cases, because the Building Line must be "built to," the right-of-way/property lines will need to be adjusted through dedication of property between the property owner and Village. More specifically, the property owner may need to dedicate property to the public right-of-way to create the desirable street and streetscape width, or the Village may transfer right-of-way to the buildable development site. 
 
3.2.2.1 For Glenview Road, the Building Line is intended to eventually bring all buildings more in line with an 18-foot sidewalk width east of the river and a common 15-foot sidewalk width west of the river. 
3.2.2.2 For Waukegan Road, the Building Line is intended to eventually eliminate parking lots in front of buildings and bring buildings closer to the sidewalk to better frame the street, reduce its perceived width and scale, and establish this roadway as a physical part of the traditional Downtown starting at Lake Avenue. The code also incorporates foundation landscaping in front of all-residential buildings and a landscaped median in the center of Waukegan Road to provide a "green," attractive entrance to the Downtown. 
3.2.2.3 For residential buildings along Waukegan Road, the Building Line provides room for a consistent sidewalk/streetscape space that will accommodate foundation landscaping in front of buildings. 
3.2.3 Where the Building Line designated in this Chapter differs from the Subdivision Code, Chapter 66, Sec 66-165, the provisions of the Downtown Development Code shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008))  
Sec. 98-588. - Street standards. 
3.3.1 Purpose and intent: The Street Standards defined for each Street Frontage delineate street and sidewalk conditions that will establish a more attractive, pedestrian-oriented shopping environment. 
3.3.1.1 Over time, desired or common sidewalk widths will be established to create a more regular walking experience from block to block that incorporates a minimum 5-foot "free zone" walking area and additional space for street trees, plantings in raised planters, or parkways. 
3.3.1.2 Developers are required to install Village-approved streetscape elements for new developments. 
3.3.2 Required: All developments within the Downtown District must comply with the Code's Street Standards. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-589. - Street frontages. 
The five designations are (See Figure 3.2 ): 
 
3.4.1 Where Street Frontage designations change along a street, either designation can be applied for a maximum of 75 feet in either direction along that frontage. Developments on corner lots should use standards for the building's primary street and standards for the "side street" frontage. 
 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-590. - Glenview road corridor. 
3.5.1 Purpose and Intent. The Glenview Road Corridor is applied to Downtown Glenview's traditional shopping street. This stretch of Glenview Road has a pedestrian-oriented, "Main Street" character, and the Downtown Revitalization Plan and Development Code seek to enhance this character by providing a consistent building "streetwall," and a streetscape/sidewalk zone that allows ample room for walking, shopping, outdoor dining, and landscaping. 
3.5.2 Street/Sidewalk Standards. The Building Line for the Glenview Road Corridor Frontage, shown in Figures 3.3 and 3.4 , provides two distinct streetscape/sidewalk zones. 
3.5.2.1 West of the river, the Building Line creates an optimal 80-foot right-of-way to provide a uniform streetwall from the river to Washington, although some variation may occur to accommodate sight lines at the railroad tracks and at intersections. (See Figure 3.3 and 3.5 through 3.7. ) 
3.5.2.2 East of the river, the Building Line creates an optimal 110-foot right-of-way. This provides a larger streetscape/sidewalk zone because of the large street cross-section and acts as a transition between the Waukegan/Glenview intersection and the narrower cross-section west of the river. (See Figures 3.4 and 3.8 through 3.10. ) 
 
 
3.5.2.3 Glenview Road—West of River. On Glenview Road west of the river, the desired sidewalk/streetscape zone is 15 feet. Within this space, required street trees can be placed in decorative tree grates to match the Village's standard grate or in 18-inch tall planters that help separate pedestrians and vehicular traffic, creating a sense of safety. (See Figures 3.6 and 3.7.) 
 
 
3.5.2.4 Glenview Road—East of River. The desired sidewalk/streetscape zone on Glenview Road east of the river is 18 feet from curb to building, which would accommodate streetscaping such as street trees in tree grates or 18-inch raised planters while maintaining a sufficient clear zone for walking and shopping. A wider streetscape is desired because of Glenview Road's larger street width in this location. The 18-foot sidewalk will also act as a transition from the 18-foot streetscape/sidewalk zone desired on Waukegan Road. (See Figures 3.9 and 3.10.) 
 
3.5.3 Building Setbacks. 
A.  Front yard: Zero, build-to. At least 60% of the ground-floor front facade must be built to the Building Line, and it must be built to the Building Line at each interior side property line. 
B.  Side yard, interior: Zero, build-to at ground level. A 10-foot pedestrian pass-through is allowed if necessary to access a rear parking lot. 
C.  Side yard, interior adjacent to residential district (including Transitional Street Frontage): 20 feet minimum. 
D.  Side yard, corner lot on side street: Zero, build-to at ground level. 
E.  Rear yard: 5 feet minimum. 
3.5.4 Building Stepbacks. 
3.5.4.1 Front: Starting with the 4th floor, 10 feet from the Building Line, except for corner elements within 50 feet of the corner of the building. 
3.5.4.2 Side, interior: Starting with the 2nd floor, 10 feet from property line to allow air and light to windows. (See Figure 3.12.) 
3.5.4.3 Side, corner lot: Starting with the 4th floor, 10 feet. 
 
3.5.5 Parking Placement. 
The following standards are for off-street, surface parking lots. In addition, parking may be contained within buildings or underground. 
A.  Off-street, surface parking lots and parking decks must be placed behind a building. 
B.  5 feet from the side yard. If a side alley or access drive is present, parking is permitted within the 5-foot setback as long as the spaces are perpendicular to the alley. (Adjacent commercial parking lots must be connected.) 
C.  10 feet minimum from the rear of the lot if not adjacent to an alley. 
D.  5 feet minimum from the rear of the lot if adjacent to an alley. 
E.  5 feet from the Building Line on the side yard of a corner lot. 
3.5.5.1 Standards for Underground Parking. Underground parking must meet the building setbacks for the front and side yards at ground level specified in 3.5.3 and the parking placement standards for the rear yard specified in 3.5.5. 
3.5.6 Access. 
3.5.6.1 Mid-block curb cuts and access drives are not allowed in the Glenview Road Corridor. Loading, if provided, and parking access must be from the alley or side street. 
 
3.5.6.2 If no alley exists at the time of development, the developer is required to dedicate an alley right-of-way, construct the alley pursuant to Village requirements, maintain it by keeping it clear of stored materials and vehicles, and provide landscaping adjacent to the alley. Alley right-of-way width must be 20 feet with 5 feet remaining in the setback for foundation landscaping. 
3.5.7 Reserved. 
3.5.8 Conditional Uses. Any retail, office, or service use greater than 5,000 square feet shall require a conditional use permit. 
3.5.9 Building Types. Building types allowed in the Glenview Road Corridor shall be Retail/Office and Mixed-Use as defined in Article 4: Design Standards. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013) 
  
Sec. 98-591. - Waukegan road corridor. 
3.6.1 Purpose and Intent. The Waukegan Road Corridor is currently an auto-oriented roadway that provides an entrance into Downtown Glenview's main shopping area. South of Grove Street, this corridor is envisioned as an extension of the pedestrian-oriented shopping environment found on Glenview Road. North of Grove Street, this corridor should provide an attractive, mixed-use gateway into the Downtown retail core. 
The Development Code seeks to both accommodate auto traffic and enhance the pedestrian environment along Waukegan Road. Establishing a consistent "streetwall" with an ample sidewalk/streetscape is the main priority for this frontage. Following a common Building Line and prohibiting off-street parking in front of buildings will allow Waukegan Road to be "framed" over time with building "streetwalls": (See Figure 3.14 and 3.15. ) 
 
3.6.2 Street/Sidewalk Standards. The Building Line in the Waukegan Road Corridor Frontage provides a larger streetscape/sidewalk zone to compensate for the large street cross-section along Waukegan Road (see Figure 3.16). The optimal right-of-way is 110 feet, which will include a center landscaped median. (See Figures 3.16 through 3.19.) 
 
3.6.2.1 Waukegan Road. 
The desired sidewalk/streetscape zone for Waukegan Road is 18 feet from curb to building, which provides a larger pedestrian area to compensate for the larger street cross-section along Waukegan Road. 
In front of commercial or mixed-use buildings, the 18-foot width is intended to have a shopping streetscape character with trees in a landscaped parkway or planters, and a pedestrian clear zone of at least 5 feet. (See Figures 3.17 and 3.18.) 
In front of all-residential buildings, the 18-foot sidewalk/streetscape zone should include a parkway or raised planter, a minimum 5-foot sidewalk, and a 4-foot landscape edge at the foot of the building. (See Figure 3.19.) 
 
 
 
3.6.3 Building Setbacks. 
A.  Front yard: Zero, build-to. At least 60% of the ground-floor front facade must be built to the Building Line, and it must be built to the Building Line at each interior side property line (unless an access drive is to be built adjacent to the interior side property line). 
B.  Side yard, interior: Zero, build-to at ground level. A 10-foot pedestrian pass-through is allowed if necessary to access a rear parking lot. 
C.  Side yard, adjacent to an access drive within property: 10 feet minimum where there is no alley requirement, zero in all other locations. 
D.  Side yard, corner lot on the side street: Zero, build-to at ground level. 
E.  Rear yard, adjacent to an alley: 5 feet minimum. 
F.  Rear yard, not adjacent to an alley: 25 feet minimum. 
3.6.4 Building Stepbacks. 
3.6.4.1 Side, interior: Starting with the 2nd floor, 10 feet from property line to allow air and light to windows. (See Figure 3.21.) 
3.6.4.2 Side, corner lot: Starting with the 4th floor, 10 feet. 
3.6.4.3 Rear: Starting with the 4th floor, 10 feet (See Figure 3.25). 
 
3.6.5 Parking Placement. The following standards are for off-street, surface parking lots. In addition, parking may be contained within buildings or underground. 
3.6.5.1 All-residential buildings. 
A.  Off-street, surface parking must be placed in the rear 50% of the lot depth (from the front Building Line to the rear property line) except on the west side of Waukegan between the river and Dewes. 
B.  5 feet from the interior side yard (adjacent parking lots must be connected when sharing access drive). 
C.  10 feet minimum from the rear of the lot if not adjacent to an alley. 
D.  5 feet minimum from the rear of the lot if adjacent to an alley. 
E.  5 feet from the Building Line on the side yard of a corner lot. 
3.6.5.2 Retail/mixed-use buildings less than 30,000 sq. ft. on ground floor. 
A.  Off-street, surface parking is encouraged to be placed in the rear of the building, and at least 75% of the spaces must be placed in the rear 75% of the lot depth (from the front Building Line to the rear property line). 
B.  5 feet from the Building Line for the remaining 25% of spaces. The parking area may not occupy more than 50% of the frontage. 
C.  5 feet from the interior side yard (adjacent commercial parking lots must be connected). 
D.  5 feet minimum from the rear if adjacent to an alley. 
E.  10 feet minimum from rear if not adjacent to an alley, or if adjacent to properties along a Transition Street or other residential zone. 
F.  5 feet from the Building Line on side streets. 
3.6.5.3 Retail/mixed-use buildings greater than 30,000 sq. ft. on ground floor. 
A.  5 feet minimum from the front Building Line, although a portion of the off-street parking is encouraged to be placed to the side or rear of the building. 
B.  5 feet from an adjacent rear alley. 
C.  15 feet from the rear setback if no rear alley exists, or if adjacent to a residential zone. 
 
3.6.5.4 Standards for Parking Enclosures Sites without alleys are permitted to have a enclosed parking within the rear yard building setback. The parking enclosure must be setback 10' from the rear lot line and the structure cannot be more than 10' in height. Covered commercial parking is encouraged to be open and not enclosed with walls. 
3.6.5.5 Standards for Underground Parking Underground parking must meet the building setbacks for the front and side yards at ground level specified in 3.6.3 and the parking placement standards for the rear yard specified in 3.6.5. 
3.6.6 Access. 
3.6.6.1 Mid-block curb cuts and access drives are not allowed in the Waukegan Road Corridor north of Grove Street and south of Lake Street on the west side of Waukegan Road. Loading, if provided, and parking access must be from the alley or side street. 
If no alley exists at the time of development, the developer is required to dedicate an alley right-of-way, construct the alley pursuant to Village requirements, maintain it by keeping it clear of stored materials and vehicles, and provide landscaping adjacent to the alley. Alley right-of-way width must be 20 feet with 5 feet remaining in the setback for foundation landscaping. (See Figures 3.25 and 3.26 ) Access to alley from single-family lots on west side is prohibited. 
Any mid-block developer is required to build the alley up-front in anticipation of future links. The site plan must show how parking could be connected to the alley in the future and how a temporary Waukegan Road driveway would be disconnected and greened when the alley becomes active. 
Because the mid-block access drive is a temporary condition until a continuous rear alley is established, upper stories are permitted to be built to the side lot line over the access drive. 
3.6.6.2 Curb cuts and access drives are allowed on all other Waukegan Road blocks and shall be shared where feasible. Adjacent surface parking lots utilized by commercial uses must be connected. 
3.6.6.3 Curb cuts along Waukegan Road must be at least 100 feet from any intersection with a side street, such as Stevens, Maplewood, MacLean, Grove, and Glenview. 
3.6.6.4 Direct access to indoor parking, such as a parking deck or indoor parking within a residential or mixed-use development, is not allowed directly off of Waukegan Road. Access must be from a side street or access drive, alley, or parking area. 
3.6.6.5 Access drives must be shared with other mid-block developments on the same block. 
3.6.6.6 If a driveway is to be used to access commercial or residential rear parking lots on Waukegan Road, it must be shared with future developments on adjacent properties via easements if the future development cannot be accessed from an alley or side street. 
 
3.6.6.7 Access driveways to indoor parking as well as surface parking lots from side streets must be at least 25 feet from Waukegan Road. 
3.6.7 Reserved. 
3.6.8 Conditional Uses. 
Any retail, office, or service use greater than 5,000 square feet shall require a conditional use permit. 
3.6.9 Building Types. 
Building types allowed in the Waukegan Road Corridor shall be Retail/Office, Mixed-Use and Apartment/Condominium as defined in Article 4: Design Standards. 
 
3.6.10 Development Scenarios. 
The following 3-D massing diagrams show potential development scenarios on a sample block along the Waukegan Road Corridor. 
Figure 3.27 shows two infill developments that comply with the Downtown Development Code and fit in among existing buildings. 
Figure 3.28 shows how the block could develop over time with four buildings. 
In all cases, developments should feature high-quality architecture with appropriate articulation and fenestration as discussed in Article 4: Design Standards. 
 
(Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013)  
Sec. 98-592. - Secondary street. 
3.7.1 Purpose and Intent. 
Dewes Street, Railroad Avenue, and Harlem Avenue as well as side streets that intersect with Glenview and Waukegan Roads are considered Secondary Streets within Downtown. These streets are intended to have a mixed-use character that is supportive of the pedestrian-oriented shopping environment along the Glenview Road and Waukegan Road Corridors. The Secondary Street Frontage also seeks to provide appropriate transitions from the shopping blocks to adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
The Downtown Revitalization Plan and Development Code encourage a consistent "streetwall" of buildings and ample sidewalk/streetscape space. Limited curb cuts are allowed to provide shared access drives to new developments within a block. (See Figures 3.29 and 3.30, as well as figures throughout Article 3.7.) 
 
3.7.2 Street/Sidewalk Standards. The desired rights-of-way for the Secondary Street Frontage are shown in Figures 3.31 to 3.41 and described on the following pages: 
 
 
 
3.7.2.1 Secondary Street—Dewes. Because properties on the north side of Dewes Street face residential uses on the opposite side of the street, additional landscaped setbacks are incorporated. A 10-foot landscape zone adjacent to buildings will add green space on the street opposite these existing residential uses. A sidewalk should be placed between this 10-foot landscape zone and a parkway or raised planter along the curb. (See Figures 3.31 through 3.33.) 
 
  
3.7.2.2 Secondary Street—Harlem. The intended streetscape along Harlem Avenue, with its retail and mixed-use blocks, is similar to Glenview Road but has an additional 2 feet in its streetscape/sidewalk zone. The streetscape should include trees in tree grates or raised planters. (See Figures 3.34 through 3.36.) 
3.7.2.3 Secondary Street—Railroad. Because of the head-in, 90-degree commuter parking and the potential need for outdoor seating/cafe space, an 18-foot streetscape/sidewalk zone is intended for the east side of Railroad Avenue. (See Figures 3.37 and 3.38. ) 
 
 
  
3.7.2.4 Secondary Street—"Side Street." In addition to Dewes, Harlem, and Railroad, several other side streets act as a transition from the retail/mixed-use character of Glenview and Waukegan Roads to nearly residential blocks. A 20-foot streetscape/sidewalk zone has been established for these streets, with a 5-foot landscape space placed adjacent to the building. (See Figures 3.39 through 3.41.) 
3.7.3 Building Setbacks. 
A.  Front yard: Zero, build-to. At least 60% of the ground-floor front facade must be built to the Building Line, and it must be built to the Building Line at each interior side property line. 
B.  Side yard, interior: Zero, build-to at ground level. A 10-foot pedestrian pass-through is allowed if necessary to access a rear parking lot. 
C.  Side yard, adjacent to an access drive: 10 feet, build-to. 
D.  Side yard, interior adjacent to residential district (including Transitional Street Frontage): 20 feet minimum. 
E.  Side yard, corner lot on side street: Zero, build-to. 
F.  Rear yard, adjacent to an alley: 5 feet minimum. 
G.  Rear yard, not adjacent to an alley: 10 feet minimum. If a 10-foot rear stepback is included above the third floor, only a 10-foot minimum rear setback is required. 
3.7.4 Building Stepbacks. 
3.7.4.1 Front: Starting with the 4th floor, 10 feet from the Building Line. 
3.7.4.2 Side, interior: Starting with the 2nd floor, 10 feet from property line must be included to allow air and light to windows. (See Figure 3.43. ) 
3.7.4.3 Side, corner lot: Starting with the 4th floor, 10 feet. 
 
 
3.7.5 Parking Placement. The following standards are for off-street, surface parking lots. In addition, parking may be contained within buildings or underground. 
A.  Off-street, surface parking not contained within the building or underground must be placed in the rear 75% of the lot depth (from the front Building Line to the rear property line). 
B.  5 feet from the interior side yard (adjacent commercial parking lots must be connected). 
C.  5 feet from the rear if adjacent to a rear alley. 
D.  10 feet from the rear if not adjacent to an alley or if adjacent to properties along a Transition Street Frontage or adjacent to other residential districts. 
E.  5 feet from Building Line on the side yard of a corner lot. 
3.7.5.1 Standards for Underground Parking. Underground parking must meet the building setbacks for the front and side yards at ground level specified in 3.7.3 and the parking placement standards for the rear yard specified in 3.7.5. 
3.7.6 Access. 
3.7.6.1 Curb cuts are allowed on Secondary Street Frontages but must be spaced at least 85 feet apart. 
3.7.6.2 Curb cuts and access drives shall be shared where feasible, and adjacent commercial surface parking lots must be connected. 
3.7.6.3 Curb cuts must be at least 25 feet from any intersecting street. 
3.7.7 Reserved. 
3.7.8 Conditional Uses. 
Any retail, office, or service use greater than 5,000 square feet shall require a conditional use permit. 
3.7.9 Building Types. Building types allowed on the Secondary Street shall be Retail/Office, Mixed-Use, Condominium/Apartment as defined in Article 4: Design Standards. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013) 
  
Sec. 98-593. - Transition street. 
3.8.1 Purpose + Intent. The Transition Street Frontage provides a residential zone that fits the Downtown character of its location and provides a transition to residential neighborhoods to the south and west. 
3.8.2 Street/Sidewalk Standards. The Building Line in the Transition Street Corridor Frontage provides a larger sidewalk to allow for increased landscape and buffering across from established residential uses. The optimal right-of-way is 86 feet. 
 
 
3.8.3 Building Setbacks. 
A.  Front yard: Zero, build-to. At least 75% of the front facade shall be built to the Building Line. 
B.  Side yard, interior: 10 feet minimum from a lot line or access driveway. 
C.  Side yard, corner lot on side street: Zero, build-to. 
D.  Rear yard: 10 feet minimum. 
3.8.4 Parking Placement. Townhomes and rowhomes must have 2 indoor parking spaces per unit (within unit or in a garage). Minimum setbacks for any additional surface parking are: 
A.  25 feet from the front Building Line. 
B.  5 feet from the side street Building Line. 
C.  15 feet from an interior side yard lot line or access drive. 
D.  5 feet from the alley or rear lot line. 
3.8.4.1 Standards for Underground Parking. 
Underground parking must meet the building setbacks for the front and side yards at ground level specified in 3.8.3 and the parking placement standards for the rear yard specified in 3.8.4. 
3.8.5 Access. 
3.8.5.1 Curb cuts are allowed on Transition Street Frontages but must be spaced at least 85 feet apart. 
3.8.5.2 Curb cuts and access drives shall be shared where feasible. 
3.8.5.3 Curb cuts must be at least 25 feet from any intersecting street. 
3.8.5.4 Parking and services shall be accessed from an alley or garage. Rowhomes and townhomes are not allowed on a lot without an alley. 
3.8.5.5 Garages on corner lots shall face the alleys. 
3.8.6 Reserved. 
Table 3.4 lists the land-use categories allowed along the Transition Street Frontages. These categories are further defined in Article 6: Definitions. 
3.8.7 Building Types. 
Building types allowed on Transition Street shall be Townhomes and Rowhomes as defined in Article 4: Design Standards. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 5651, § 3, 3-19-2013) 
  
Sec. 98-594. - River corridor. 
3.9.1 Purpose and Intent. 
In addition to a green edge along the West Fork of the North Branch of the Chicago River, the Downtown Revitalization Plan envisions a central open space framed by mixed-use buildings south of Glenview Road. The River Corridor Frontage requirements provide appropriate setbacks from the River to create an attractive, landscaped open space along its edge (see Figures 3.49 and 3.50). 
3.9.2 Requirements. 
3.9.2.1 Buildings and parking must be at least 35 feet from the edge of the river, which is measured from the established high water elevations—in most cases the channel bank. 
3.9.2.2 Property owners shall accommodate public access to the River through paths, plazas, gardens, or other forms of open space. 
3.9.2.3 Natural landscaping should be provided within the 35-foot setback. 
3.9.2.4 Developments at this location should comply with the standards for the street onto which they front and should also review the standards for the adjacent street frontage. 
3.9.2.5 If River Drive, south of Glenview Road, is vacated by the Village, buildings can be built to the River Corridor buffer, shown in Figure 3.49. However, developments should incorporate the central open space along the river envisioned in the Plan (see Figure 3.50). 
3.9.2.6 If River Drive remains, which is not the preferred scenario, buildings should be built to the existing property lines along the drive. 
 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 98-595. - Purpose. 
The following Design Standards were created to complement the development regulations in the Downtown Development Code. The Standards should be used by landowners, businesses, developers, planners, architects, landscape architects, and engineers as guiding principles for developments proposed in Downtown Glenview. 
The Design Standards are intended to maintain and enhance the physical character of Downtown by encouraging development proposals that strive for high-quality design. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-596. - Village character. 
Although these standards do not mandate or endorse one particular style of architecture, they do recognize the value of Downtown Glenview's traditional historic revival architecture and its identity as an upscale, North Shore commuter railway village. 
The standards encourage development that respects the Village's history, "fits in" with high-quality adjacent structures and enhances Downtown's overall architectural character. 
 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008) 
  
Sec. 98-597. - Objectives. 
Site and building design should enhance Downtown's electric character by: 
• Fostering a "built over time" appearance with variations in facades, building height, and rooflines. 
• Articulating buildings with detailed fenestration, high-quality materials, signage, and lighting. 
• Incorporating attractive, year-round streetscape/landscape elements. 
• Incorporating environmentally sensitive, sustainable design where feasible. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-598. - Context. 
The design of each development, whether it consists of one or multiple buildings, will be reviewed by Village boards and commissions for its suitability for a given site, compatibility with adjacent development, and consistency with the goal of improving the design quality of Glenview's built environment. In addition, other plans and development regulations affect development in Downtown Glenview. 
The Comprehensive Plan provides goals and objectives and a land-use direction for the entire Village. 
The Downtown Revitalization Plan sets a new direction for the improvement and development of the area. The Downtown Development Code and its Design Standards seek to implement the Revitalization Plan by providing development regulations and design direction. 
Developments are not required to use one architectural style but should enhance Downtown's existing character, which includes English Tudor Revival, English Cotswold, Georgian Revival, Federal Revival, Colonial Revival, Classical Revival and other traditional styles. 
 
The Glenview Municipal Code provides a variety of other related development regulations, as noted in the Introduction and Administration sections. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-599. - Organization. 
Standards within this section are numbered. Photograph captions also contain the number of the standard or standards that most closely relate to the photograph. 
Article 4.6 lists the standards specific to certain building types in the Downtown and includes "wireframe" diagrams that provide guidance regarding appropriate scale and massing. This section also provides photographs of buildings that feature high-quality design. 
Article 4.7 provides design standards applicable to all Downtown buildings on properties covered by the code. 
Article 4.8 through 4.10 provide standards for building materials, lighting, and outdoor cafes. 
Article 4.11 provides parking standards. 
Article 4.12 includes standards for Downtown streetscape and landscape. 
  
Sec. 98-600. - Building types. 
The following building types are allowed in Downtown: 
• Mixed Use 
• Retail/Office 
• Condominium/Apartment 
• Rowhome/Townhome 
Each building type must comply with the Regulating Framework and Street Frontages sections and follow the Design Standards in this section. 
The photos and graphics that follow show images for each building type. They provide additional direction for building siting, massing, and design. The 3-D "wireframe" diagrams are intended to show massing, scale, and fenestration but are not intended to show detailed architecture and articulation or indicate a preference for one architectural style for Downtown. 
Photographs included in these Design Standards are intended to show high-quality design and architecture but may not comply with every provision of the Downtown Development Code or Article 4. 
4.6.1 Mixed Use. 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
4.6.4 Rowhome/Townhome. 
 
 
4.6.4.1 The main entrance to each dwelling must face the street. 
4.6.4.2 Buildings on corner lots shall be designed with two front facades. 
4.6.4.3 Service, equipment, and trash areas must be located in and accessed from the alley where feasible. 
4.6.4.4 The design of garages, including materials, should be compatible with the design of the rowhomes/townhomes. 
 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-601. - Building design. 
4.7.1 General. 
4.7.1.1 To maintain an active pedestrian environment, buildings shall be oriented toward streets, sidewalks, and/or public plazas. 
4.7.1.2 Facades shall be proportioned to respect the human scale. 
4.7.1.3 Facade elements shall provide a change in plane, creating interest in light and shadow. 
4.7.1.4 Standardized, formulaic, non-regional architecture and architectural features used primarily for advertising purposes are not allowed. 
4.7.1.5 Developers should consider creative, adaptive reuse of high-quality existing buildings. 
4.7.2 Articulation. 
Plane/Material Changes: 
4.7.2.1 A building base, middle, and top shall be strongly articulated through materials, details, and changes in the plane of the wall, including stepbacks and patios on upper floors (see Figure 4.8). 
4.7.2.2 Pitched roofs may project into space where upper story floors have been step-backed. 
4.7.2.3 Mixed-use buildings must have a distinct ground-floor base with easily identifiable, traditional storefronts with clear glass and kneewalls. 
 
4.7.2.4 Facades shall be articulated to express vertical rhythm related to structural columns and bays. 
4.7.2.5 Building design should feature a balance of vertical and horizontal elements. 
4.7.2.6 Unarticulated, flat-front, all-glass, or all-metal buildings are prohibited. 
4.7.2.7 To prevent a "dead wall" on buildings with first-floor parking, articulate the ground floor with faux windows, banding, or other architectural features. 
 
Visual Interest 
4.7.2.8 Building orientation and design elements shall encourage overall visual continuity between developments. 
4.7.2.9 To avoid a look of monotony of materials or design, buildings should be articulated, such as with projections, recesses, material changes, parapets, cornices, and varying roof heights. 
4.7.2.10 Commercial and mixed-use buildings should have new facades at least every 75 feet. Long buildings should be "broken up" with articulation and contribute to a "built over time" appearance. 
4.7.2.11 Because of the prominence and visibility of corner buildings, features such as a cupola, rotunda, atrium, clock tower, pilasters, roofline balustrades, and/or varying rooflines should be considered to add visual interest to Downtown. 
 
 
4.7.3 Entries. 
4.7.3.1 Building entries should be clearly defined and articulated. 
4.7.3.2 Primary store entrances shall be located along the primary Street Frontage, with secondary entrances located behind the building or along a side street. 
4.7.3.3 Primary access to individual commercial storefronts, including restaurants, must be from the street/sidewalk and not from inside lobbies and hallways. 
4.7.3.4 On mixed-use commercial buildings, residential or office entrances/lobbies should be distinguished from storefronts and located on side streets and away from intersections wherever possible. 
4.7.3.5 Recessed entries for retail and service uses are encouraged to provide cover from the elements and to allow easier opening of doors. Non-recessed doors should not encroach into the 5-foot pedestrian clear zone when opened. 
 
4.7.4 Fenestration. 
Location 
4.7.4.1 Ground-level retail or office space shall include large, clear-glass windows that allow views into building interiors to reinforce an active shopping and business environment. 
4.7.4.2 Blank walls exceeding 20 feet in length are not allowed facing Glenview or Waukegan Roads. 
Amount 
4.7.4.3 At least 50% of ground-floor retail, service, and office facades facing Street Frontages or public plazas shall be fenestrated with clear, non-tinted windows. 
4.7.4.4 At least 25% of every upper-floor facade shall be fenestrated. 
4.7.4.5 At least 25% of ground-floor facades facing rear parking areas or alleys shall be fenestrated (see Figure 4.9). 
4.7.4.6 A kneewall of at least 10 inches and not more than 18 inches is required on commercial storefronts. 
Materials 
4.7.4.7 Fenestration must be either windows or doors that allow views into the shops, working areas, lobbies, or pedestrian entrances or window displays. 
4.7.4.8 Dark-tinted, spandrel, frosted, or smoked glass shall be used sparingly and for decorative or accent purposes or on solid walls necessary to the function of the building only (such as storage areas, kitches, and bathrooms). Reflective glass is prohibited. 
 
4.7.4.9 Solid walls necessary to the function of a building shall incorporate features such as awnings, display windows, material and color variations, arches, piers, columns, high-quality graphics, spandrel glass, landscaping, and other elements to reduce perceived building scale and add visual interest. 
 
4.7.5 Service Areas. 
Design & Materials 
4.7.5.1 Service areas, pipes, utility boxes, and utility doors should be placed out of view where feasible (see Figures 4.10 and 4.11). 
4.7.5.2 Accessory service areas behind buildings that are visible from streets and sidewalks shall be designed in a manner consistent with the building front or side. 
4.7.5.3 Loading, trash, and utility areas shall be designed to accommodate snow removal by eliminating unnecessary obstacles and providing storage locations where feasible. 
4.7.5.4 When parking is located behind buildings, rear building entrances and facades shall be designed in a manner consistent with the front and side facades. 
4.7.5.5 Access to rear parking lots should be clearly defined and visible from the street. 
4.7.5.6 Screening materials should complement the building and adjacent buildings in materials and color and be effective in every season, such as fencing, shrubs, or evergreens. Screening must be at least 7 feet in height. 
4.7.5.7 For all development that abuts a residential property at the rear, an 8 foot high solid screen fence is required along the property line. If alley condition is present, fence to be installed within alley right-of-way adjacent to residential property. Fence to be maintained by property owner. 
 
Location & Maintenance 
4.7.5.8 Separate areas for loading, trash, and utilities for individual businesses are discouraged. Shared service areas between businesses should be considered for ease of maintenance and improved aesthetics. 
4.7.5.9 Rear facades visible from streets and sidewalks should be treated with similar articulated architecture and fenestration as the front and sides of the building. Architecture and fenestration on the rear facade should extend at least 40 feet from the curb on a side street (see Figures 4.10 and 4.11). 
4.7.5.10 Loading, trash, and utility areas (including pipes, conduit, utility boxes, and utility doors) shall be located out of view wherever possible and in all cases screened from street and sidewalk views. Roof top mechanicals shall be located in the middle of the roof and shielded by a screening wall similar in design and materials to the building. These areas should be incorporated into site plans and building designs. 
 
4.7.6 Building Projections. 
Retail/Mixed Use/Multi-family 
Eaves and bay or box windows may encroach past the Building Line, with the following limits (see Figure 4.12). For regulations on blade signs and awnings, consult the Village's Zoning Ordinance. 
4.7.6.1 Eaves: 3 feet maximum 
4.7.6.2 Bay/Box windows: 5 feet maximum (allowed only on upper stories). 
Rowhomes/Townhomes 
Eaves, bay windows, and porches or stoops may encroach past the Building Line, with the following limits (see Figure 4.13): 
4.7.6.3 Eaves: 3 feet maximum 
4.7.6.4 Bay/Box windows: 5 feet maximum. 
4.7.6.5 Porches: 5 feet maximum 
Balconies 
4.7.6.6 Balconies, decks, or terraces must not cross the Building Line. 
4.7.6.7 Inset or recessed balconies, decks, or terraces are allowed on the front of buildings. 
4.7.6.8 Balconies, decks, or terraces are allowed to encroach into areas where the building has been stepped back from the building or property line. 
4.7.7 Building Colors 
4.7.7.1 Building color shall be compatible with the area's character and enhance the building's visual appeal. 
 
4.7.7.2 Primary, bright, or excessively brilliant colors are discouraged unless used sparingly for subtle trim accents.  
Sec. 98-602. - Building materials. 
Overall 
4.8.1 Wood, brick, stone, and glass are the preferred primary building materials for all structures in the Downtown. New building construction and rehabilitations should be primarily constructed of these high-quality materials (see Table 4.1). 
4.8.2 Concrete block (smooth or decorative splitface), stucco (smooth or textured synthetic), plywood, sheet pressboard, unfinished pre-cast concrete, poured-in-place concrete, synthetic stone, smooth/textured synthetic stucco or plaster, and metal/decorative metal shall not be used as primary materials on facades or walls that are visible from streets, driveways, sidewalks, and/or parking areas. They shall be used only for decorative accent purposes and limited in their use on building facades and visible walls (see Table 4.1). 
4.8.3 The primary building material used on front facade shall be continued as the primary material on the side and rear facades, except where the side of a building directly abuts the side of an existing building. 
4.8.4 The number of materials on an exterior building face should be limited (no more than 5) to prevent clutter and visual overload. 
Fencing 
4.8.5 Brick, stone, or decorative metal shall be used for fencing. Decorative or non-screening fence height shall be 30 to 42 inches. Railings along terraces can be solid walls or open fencing but may not be clear glass or plastic. 
 
Table 4.1: Preferred/Prohibited Materials 
Primary Building Materials 
PREFERRED 	PROHIBITED* 
• Brick 	• Concrete, including poured-in-place and unfinished pre-cast 
• Stone 	• Plywood 
• Glass 	• Sheet pressboard 
• Wood 	• Synthetic stone 
	• Smooth/tex-tured synthetic stucco or plaster 
	• Metal/decorative metal 
 
* Limited use allowed for decorative accent purposes. 
 
4.8.6 Chain link fencing is not allowed. 
4.8.7 Fences shall be considered an extension of building architecture and shall make an attractive transition between the building mass, the natural forms of a site, and the "public realm" or streetscape. 
Awnings 
Refer to the Village's Awning Appearance Code and Design Guidelines. 
4.8.8 Building awning design and colors should be consistent and complementary in color, style, and size with the overall building facade and adjacent buildings. 
4.8.9 Awnings shall be constructed of high-quality fabric or metal. Plastic or vinyl awnings are not allowed Internally lighted awnings are not allowed. 
4.8.10 The bottom of awnings shall be placed a minimum of 8 feet above the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-603. - Lighting. 
Refer to the Glenview Municipal Code's performance standards on lighting. 
4.9.1 Site lighting shall incorporate principles to limit "light pollution" and preserve the nighttime environment, such as incorporating down-lighting and shields. 
4.9.2 Lighting shall provide a sense of safety without having a negative affect on neighboring properties and shall be located, aimed, or shielded to minimize glare, sky glow, and stray light trespassing across property lines, especially along alleys. 
4.9.3 Exterior lighting for signage shall be down-directed. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-604. - Outdoor cafes. 
4.10.1 Outdoor cafes/seating areas are encouraged to make Downtown more active and enhance its overall pedestrian character, especially in blocks identified as key commercial/retail/restaurant locations. 
4.10.2 Outdoor cafes shall maintain at least 5 feet of clear space for movement of pedestrians along the sidewalk. 
4.10.3 Tables, chairs, and other equipment should be kept out of the pedestrian zone. The pedestrian zone also should be clear of street trees, tree grates, and other landscaping. 
4.10.4 Second-story terraces for outdoor dining are encouraged where sidewalk space is limited. Second-story terraces shall be integrated into the design of restaurants and the overall building. 
4.10.5 A temporary or seasonal barrier or edge is encouraged to define outdoor cafe spaces and ensure the pedestrian clear zone. The barrier should be a simple decorative railing, fence, planters, or similar element. The design of the barrier should reflect the style of the building and coordinate with the Downtown streetscape, and shall be reviewed and approved by the Village's Appearance Commission. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008) 
 
  
Sec. 98-605. - Parking. 
Refer to Article 2: Regulating Framework, and the Village's Municipal Code and Parking Lot Landscaping and Design Guidelines for additional information on parking standards. 
Design 
4.11.1 Off-street parking spaces may be open or enclosed in a building. 
4.11.2 Parking areas shall be screened with fencing and landscaping at street and sidewalk edges and adjacent to residential buildings. Fencing, walls, and landscaping shall be a maximum of 30 to 42 inches in height and shall preserve sight lines at entrances/exits to reduce conflicts between pedestrians and motorists. 
4.11.3 All exposed/visible walls on freestanding parking structures, as well as on parking structures in buildings, should be screened and articulated with architectural treatment. 
4.11.4 Designated parking spaces, except those within townhomes/rowhomes, shall be marked with permanent marking materials and maintained in a clearly visible condition. 
4.11.5 Parking area lighting shall be designed to Village standards and minimize impact on surrounding properties. 
4.11.6 Parking areas shall be designed to accommodate snow removal, such as by eliminating unnecessary obstacles and providing for temporary snow storage where feasible. 
4.11.7 Off-street parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least 7 feet if provided within a building. 
Location 
4.11.8 Parking areas in front of buildings are prohibited unless otherwise specified in the Code. 
4.11.9 Mid-block parking lots should be limited to avoid breaking up the shopping streetwall. 
4.11.10 Business owners, employees, and residents should park in the rear of parking lots or on the upper floors of parking structures rather than occupy spaces on streets or prime parking locations for shoppers, visitors, and restaurant patrons. 
4.11.11 Bicycle parking shall be considered and placed in locations that are safe and convenient to high-traffic destinations in such a manner as to not impede pedestrian circulation. 
Sharing: 
4.11.12 Adjacent commercial parking lots must be connected, where feasible, if access to the two lots is not available via an alley, to facilitate trips between commercial uses. 
4.11.13 If a driveway is needed to access rear parking lots, it must be shared with future development on adjacent properties via easements if the future development cannot be accessed from the alley or side street. 
 
 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008) 
  
Sec. 98-606. - Streetscape/landscape. 
An attractive and effective streetscape will provide visual continuity from block to block and continue to define Downtown as a special place. Developers should incorporate the Village's streetscape design into development, including standards for street trees, street furniture, pavers, and other streetscape elements. This will help visually unify the district. 
4.12.1 The current streetscape design installed along Glenview Road should be enhanced and continued throughout Downtown, with modifications to match different road and sidewalk widths. 
4.12.2 Landscape and hardscape for large corner bump-outs should be treated on an individual basis because of particular needs and situations in each area. Individual elements should follow the overall Downtown streetscape design theme. 
4.12.3 The developer is responsible for installing Village-approved streetscape elements within all new developments. 
4.12.4 Developments are encouraged, where feasible, to include "greening" elements such as planter boxes, gardens on terraces or patios, landscaping, and other environmentally attractive and beneficial features. 
Plazas and Open Spaces 
4.12.5 Plazas and open spaces shall be considered within new developments where feasible. 
4.12.6 Decorative paving such as brick, clay pavers, stone, decorative pre-cast concrete pavers, or stamped concrete shall be considered when designing the hardscape for new plazas, open spaces, and bumpouts. 
4.12.7 Existing and future open spaces should incorporate special features such as fountains, artwork, plantings, and other elements. 
4.12.8 Where pedestrian paths or pass-throughs are used to access parking, they shall incorporate decorative fencing, arches, lighting, paving or signage. 
Street Furniture 
4.12.9 Decorative metal benches, trash receptacles, and bike racks shall be provided at high-activity pedestrian areas. 
4.12.10 Decorative stands or corrals for newspaper vending machines shall be considered to consolidate clutter and screen views. 
4.12.11 Decorative planters shall be placed in plazas and along pedestrian paths and sidewalks where they will not impede safe flow of pedestrians. 
 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
DIVISION 5. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 98-607. - Project review. 
All redevelopment projects within the District are subject to the regulatory review process as described below. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-608. - Site plan review. 
All redevelopment projects within the District shall be subject to Site Plan Review approval as set forth in Chapter 54, Article IV, of the Glenview Municipal Code. 
5.2.1 Approval Criteria: The Plan Commission shall recommend approval of a redevelopment if it meets the following criteria: 
5.2.1.1 Conformity with all the provisions and requirements of this Downtown Development Code 
5.2.1.2 Conformity with all the provisions and requirements of other applicable codes and ordinances relating to land development including, but not limited to, the tree preservation code and subdivision code. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-609. - Appearance review. 
All redevelopment projects within the District shall be subject to Appearance Code as set forth in Chapter 54, Article III, of the Glenview Municipal Code. 
5.3.1 Approval Criteria: The Appearance Commission shall recommend approval of a redevelopment if it meets the following criteria: 
5.3.1.1 Conformity with all the provisions and requirements of this Downtown Development Code. 
5.3.1.2 Conformity with the Signs in Chapter 98, Article VI of the Glenview Municipal Code. 
5.3.1.3 Conformity with all the provisions and requirements of other applicable codes and ordinances relating to land development including, but not limited to the Awning Appearance Code and Design Guidelines and Downtown Sign Design Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-610. - Conditional uses. 
Land Use categories authorized by this Downtown Development Code as conditional uses in Article 2 herein shall be heard by the Plan Commission and the Board of Trustees pursuant to Chapter 98, Section 98-43 (c)(2), and subject to the standards set forth in Section 98-50 of the Glenview Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-611. - Variations. 
Variations from the regulations of this Downtown Development Code, except for Article 4, Design Standards, shall be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals as set forth in Chapter 98, section 98-47, of the Glenview Municipal Code. Exceptions from the regulations of Article 4 shall be considered by the Appearance Commission as set forth in Chapter 66 of the Glenview Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008) 
5.5.1 Authorized Variations: Variations from the regulations of this Downtown Development Code shall be recommended by the Board only in accordance with the standards set forth in Chapter 98, Section 47 (c), and may be granted only to vary any of the regulations relating to: 
5.5.1.1 Regulating Framework, Article 2 of this Code 
5.5.1.1.1 Use 
5.5.1.1.2 Height 
5.5.1.1.3 Building location 
5.5.1.1.4 Parking 
5.5.1.2 Street Frontages, Article 3 of this Code 
5.5.1.2.1 Street and sidewalk standards 
5.5.1.2.2 Building setbacks 
5.5.1.2.3 Building stepbacks 
5.5.1.2.4 Parking placement 
5.5.1.2.5 Access 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
Sec. 98-612. - Non-conformities. 
The provisions of Chapter 98, Article IV, Section 98-251 et seq., Non-conformities, shall be followed unless inconsistent with the provisions of this Downtown Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008)  
DIVISION 6. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 98-613. - Terms. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Downtown Development Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Chapter 98, Section 98-4, or this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Alley: dedicated public right-of-way, other than a street, that affords a secondary means of access to abutting property, generally at the rear of the lots. 
Access drive: dedicated public right-of-way, other than a street, that affords access from a street from the front of a lot. 
Apartment: multi-family residential development with for-rent units. 
Awning: a metal tubular structure over a storefront or entrance that provides a framework for a canvas covering and that provides protection from sun and inclement weather for patrons walking below. 
Balcony: platform that is cantilevered from a building wall and is enclosed by a parapet or railing. 
Bay/Box Windows: generally, a U-shaped enclosure that extends the building's interior space beyond the plane of the exterior wall and/or the Building Line. 
Building Line: a line/plane indicated on the regulating plan defining the street frontage which extends vertically and at which the building facade shall be placed. The required building line for each site is shown in the Street Frontage section. 
Commercial: Retail, service, restaurant, and office uses. 
Conditional Use: a use which is limited to public and quasi-public uses affected with the public interest, or uses which may have unique, special or unusual impact upon the use or enjoyment of neighboring property, meeting reasonable conditions and standards, and permitted only after a public hearing. 
Condominium: multi-family residential development with for-sale units. 
Development Code: The Downtown Development Code. 
Development project: any use in the Downtown Development District that results in the construction of a new building or structure, major modifications to the interior dimensions of an existing building or structure (including building additions), alteration in area to a paved parking lot or the addition of or change to a curb cut. 
Drive-through facilities: any business engaged in the sale or service of any item where the delivery of such item is to patrons remaining in a vehicle. 
District: The Downtown Development District. 
Downtown Development District: includes 
• Glenview Road from Washington Street to one block east of Waukegan Road; 
• Waukegan Road from Lake Avenue to Henley Street; 
• Railroad Avenue from Dewes Street to just north of Grove Street; 
• Dewes Street from Washington Street to Waukegan Road; 
• portions of Pine, Grove, Church, Prairie, Harlem, McLean, and Maplewood that are side streets for the major roads listed above; 
• all as designated on the Zoning Map, unless otherwise expressly exempted or provided in this Downtown Development Code. 
Downtown Revitalization Plan: the plan approved by the Village Board of Trustees in November 2006, which serves as the guiding framework for this Downtown Development Code. 
Eave: edge of a roof that projects beyond the vertical building facade. 
Front Yard: a yard extending along the full length of a front lot line and back to a line drawn parallel to the front lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard. When a lot fronts onto two nonintersecting streets (through lot), the front yard shall be determined to be on the street to which all of the houses along that block are oriented, and the opposite yard shall be treated as a rear yard. 
Ground Floor: the first level of a building at or above grade. The floor height of the ground floor is measured from the grade to the midpoint of the floorplate of the floor above (or, if there is no floor above, the ceiling or roof above.) 
Floor: the space within a building and above grade that is between the midpoint of the floorplate and the midpoint of the floorplate for the floor above. Of, if there is no floor above, the ceiling or roof above. See also Ground Floor. 
Floor area: the area, measured at floor level, contained between the exterior wall surfaces of a building or other structure or, in the case of rooms, between the exterior wall surface of the building and the center of the enclosing partitions, or between the centerlines of partitions where no exterior wall is affected. 
For the purpose of determining off-street parking and loading requirements, the term "floor area" shall be defined to be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, or portion thereof, devoted to a use requiring off-street parking or loading as provided in this article. Such area shall include accessory storage areas located within selling or working space devoted to retailing activities, the production or processing of goods, or business or professional offices. However, the term "floor area" shall not include floor space devoted primarily to the housing of mechanical or electrical equipment, or storage purposes, except as otherwise noted in the Municipal Code, nor floor space and ramps, aisles and maneuvering space devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities, nor basement floor space, other than the area devoted to merchandising activities, the production or processing of goods, business or professional offices, or dwelling uses. 
Interior Side Yard: a yard extending along a side lot line that is not adjacent to a street and back to a line drawn parallel to the side lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the width of the required minimum side yard, but excluding any area encompassed within a front yard or rear yard. Dimensions of side yards specified in the district regulations of this chapter refer to the required width of each side yard, rather than to the total width of both side yards, unless otherwise specified. 
Manufacturing: the assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods and materials. 
Mixed Use: a building that includes two or more complementary uses, such as residential, retail, office, and service. 
Multi-family building: residential development with dwelling units that share common walls with units that are laterally and vertically adjacent. 
Municipal: a building that provides municipal services and is owned by the Village. (Examples include the Village Hall, fire stations, and police departments.) 
Office Use: establishments engaged in the provision of goods and services in an office setting, usually by professionals. This includes business, government, professional, medical, or financial services and includes such occupations as accountants, economic consultants, doctors, dentists, architects, software developers, researches and designers. 
Parapet: a low protective wall or barrier at the edge of a balcony or roof. 
Porch: a covered but otherwise open platform that provides a transition between the interior of a building and the public space of the street. 
Primary Street: The street that abuts the property and includes the building's primary entrance and front facade. See also side street. 
Rear Yard: a yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line, except as qualified in the definition in this section of the term Yard, side, and back to a line drawn parallel to the rear lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required rear yard. 
Regulating Framework: establishes the desired physical form for the downtown development district and sets development parameters such as permitted land uses, street types, building height, siting, and setbacks. 
Residential: a building or part of a building containing dwelling units. 
Retail Use: Businesses that provide goods/merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and render services incidental to the sale of those goods. Also, restaurants. 
Service Use: Businesses that provide services (as opposed to goods) to the general public. (Examples include hotels, finance, real estate, insurance, travel agencies, health and educational services, and galleries.) 
Setback: the distance between a reference line, which shall be a public or private right-of-way or easement, whichever shall be applicable, and a building, or portion thereof, on the lot in question. In the case of a lot adjoining a public or private street right-of-way, the setback shall be the difference between such right-of-way line and the building closest to the right-of-way on the lot. In the case of an unrecorded easement, the building and zoning director shall determine the setback in a manner whichwill provide a reasonably consistent setback. 
Side Yard, Corner Lot of Side Street: a yard extending along a side lot line that is adjacent to a street and back to a line drawn parallel to the side lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the width of the required minimum side yard, but excluding any area encompassed within a front yard or rear yard. Dimensions of side yards specified in the district regulations of this chapter refer to the required width of each side yard, rather than to the total width of both side yards, unless otherwise specified. 
Side Street: For buildings on corner lots, the street that abuts the property but does not include the building's primary entrance (except those with corner entrances) and front facade. See also primary street. 
Single-family Attached: a residential building containing one dwelling unit only that is physically separated from units immediately adjacent. 
Stepback: the minimum distance a building's upper-floor facade must be placed from the facade of the floor or floors below. 
Stoop: a staircase on the facade of a building that leads either to a small, unwalled entrance platform or directly to the main door (Sarasota County). 
Telecommunications call centers: a place of business primarily devoted to handling inbound and outbound communications, such as telephone or Internet orders. This term includes, but is not limited to, mail order catalog houses and telephone survey firms. 
Townhouse/Rowhouse: single-family attached homes that share walls with units laterally adjacent to them. 
Warehouse: A building (or portion of the building) used for the storage of goods and/or materials. This term shall include, but not be limited to, commercial storage facilities, miniwarehouses, and other uses similar in nature and impact. 
(Ord. No. 5112, Exh. A, 6-17-2008) 
