6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 1/426
PREFACE
This Village Code of the Village of Hawthorn Woods, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 1847-18, passed
April 23, 2018. Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this Village Code to the extent that they
are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ORDINANCE NO. 730-95
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE VILLAGE CODE OF THE
VILLAGE OF HAWTHORN WOODS, ILLINOIS
BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Hawthorn Woods, Illinois, an Illinois municipal corporation:
SECTION ONE: That the Village Code of the Village of Hawthorn Woods, Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., a copy of which is
attached hereto as Exhibit "A", be and the same is hereby adopted as the official Village Code of the Village of Hawthorn Woods, Illinois
(the "VILLAGE CODE").
SECTION TWO: That from and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the VILLAGE CODE, containing the compilation of all
ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of the Village,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code and Law of the Village as enacted by the President and Board of
Trustees.
SECTION THREE: That there is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the
continuous supplemental service, provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent
nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions of the VILLAGE CODE is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the
proper place in each of the official copies, three (3) copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the Village Clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly open.
SECTION FOUR: That all ordinances of a general nature included in this VILLAGE CODE shall be considered as a continuation of said
ordinance provision and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any
interruption in the continuous effectiveness of ordinances included in said VILLAGE CODE. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax
levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect unless
specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the VILLAGE CODE. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the VILLAGE
CODE.
SECTION FIVE: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of
such VILLAGE CODE, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such VILLAGE CODE in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village to be misrepresented thereby.
SECTION SIX: That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
SECTION SEVEN: That this Ordinance and the VILLAGE CODE adopted by the same shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and approval in accordance with law, as printed and published in book form by order of the President and Board of Trustees.
The foregoing Ordinance was passed by a roll call vote as follows:
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 2/426
Upon adoption by the board of trustees, this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code of
Hawthorn Woods. This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the HAWTHORN WOODS VILLAGE CODE, and is hereby
published by authority of the board of trustees and shall be kept up to date as provided in section 1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of
the village attorney, acting for said village board of trustees. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating
thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any legal document. (1995 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in
section 1-2-1 of this title. (1995 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
A. Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this
shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part
of this code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said ordinance
material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be properly
identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code. (1995 Code)
B. The village clerk shall keep a separate book containing every amendment or addition passed to this code, with a reference on each copy
of such amendment or addition as to the place in the record of ordinances where the original reference may be found. These records
shall be kept in addition to the record of ordinances which the clerk is required to keep by statute. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this code in such a
manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official
instructions when so authorized by the village board. The clerk shall also see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official
copies maintained in the office of the clerk. Any person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall make every effort to maintain
this code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the village clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the village and shall be returned to the office of the clerk when directed so to
do by order of the village board. (1995 Code)
1-1-5: COPIES OF CODE:
All of the printed copies of this code belonging to the village shall be deposited with the clerk, and he shall deliver one copy thereof to the
mayor and each member of the board of trustees, and to such other persons as the board may direct. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. Ord.
1125-05, 5-16-2005)
1-1-6: DESIGNATION OF VILLAGE PRESIDENT AS MAYOR:
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1-2.1, the village president shall for all purposes be designated as the mayor. (Ord. 1125-05,
5-16-2005)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this Village Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in
this Village Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following
sections), and excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances
relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations;
contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the Village; and all special ordinances. (1995 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 3/426
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates
of public utilities shall be replaced by virtue of the proceeding section, excepting as this Village Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this Village Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(1995 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or
any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or
so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect
save only that proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
B. This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new
provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of
the Village herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing
provisions and not a new enactment of the same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or
altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Village Code. (1995 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Village Code or any part thereof is for any reason held
to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of Trustees hereby declares that it would have
passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1995
Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
A. Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or
persons, any single matter, party or persons shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine
gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be applied to any section of this
code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be repugnant
thereto. (1995 Code)
B. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this code shall be literally construed in order that the true intent of
the mayor and board of trustees may be fully carried out. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
C. The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the village has been changed in the content of this code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the village's
ordinances is not meant to amend the passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1995 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context
makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 4/426
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.
BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the board of trustees of the village.
CODE: The municipal code of Hawthorn Woods, Illinois, and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The county of Lake, state of Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by
the words, "of the village of Hawthorn Woods".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
FISCAL YEAR: The fiscal year of the village shall commence on May 1 of each year; provided, however, that beginning on January 1,
2009, the fiscal year shall commence on January 1 of each year and end on December 31 of such year.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be
imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health
and welfare of inhabitants of the village, or any activity which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the
property of a person or persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or
land, whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the
words "of the village of Hawthorn Woods".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the
whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as
well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by
which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or
diminished and every right of interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, this term shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or
things in small quantities direct to the consumer.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: This term shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, this term shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land,
whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The village of Hawthorn Woods, county of Lake, state of Illinois.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, such terms shall be understood to relate to the sale of
goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: These terms may include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written
signature of any person is required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. 1995 Code; Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005; Ord. 1237-07, 11-26-2007)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent
of the provisions of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1995 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 5/426
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this code, where no other penalty is set forth, shall be punished by a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any offense1. (Ord. 1134-05, 7-25-
2005)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or
where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this code.
B. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer
may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense;
provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being
enforced.
C. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall
be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (1995 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable
for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty
on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1995 Code)
1-4-4: CITATION PROCEDURE:
A. Definitions: Whenever the following words or terms are used in this section, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
COURT: The nineteenth judicial circuit court, Lake County, Illinois.
HE, HIS OR HIM: A male or female person and/or a company, corporation or other entity.
MINOR OFFENSES: Refers to any or all violations of the following provisions of this code:
1. Section 4-3A-2 (removal of infected trees).
2. Subsection 5-3-1A (curfew; age and hour restrictions; adult responsible).
3. Section 5-4-2 (except subsection 5-4-2E4) (animal control; dogs).
4. Title 6, chapter 1 (motor vehicle licenses).
5. Section 6-2-1 (vehicle code; except moving violations and other violations reportable to the Illinois secretary of state pursuant to
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-204).
6. Title 6, chapter 3, except as provided in subsection 6-3-10C (parking regulations).
VIOLATOR: Any person, irrespective of gender, and/or any company, corporation or other entity who is alleged to have violated any of
the code provisions described in this section. (Ord. 1134-05, 7-25-2005; amd. Ord. 1277-09, 2-23-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 6/426
B. Reserved. (Ord. 1134-05, 7-25-2005)
C. Issuance Of Citation Or Ticket And Procedures:
1. Issuance: Upon the commission of a minor offense specified in subsection A of this section, a police officer, building inspector or code
enforcement officer of the village shall issue to the violator a citation which informs said violator that he has violated one or more
provisions of this code described in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1345-10, 9-29-2010)
2. Violator's Process By Payment Or Scheduling For Hearing: The said violator, upon receiving such a citation, may settle the violation
claim by paying the settlement amount for such minor offense as set forth in subsection E of this section. Payment may be mailed to
either the police station of Hawthorn Woods or the office of the village clerk, or payment may be delivered in person at either of the
same locations during scheduled business hours. Payment of the settlement amount hereunder shall be made within ten (10) days
following the date of the violation. If said violator does not wish to settle the claim as aforesaid, said violator shall bring the citation to
the police department of the Hawthorn Woods police station or to the office of the village clerk during scheduled business hours within
ten (10) days following the date of violation to request a hearing, and the village shall arrange for a time and place for hearing of the
alleged violation before the court.
3. Failure To Make Payment: If the violator fails either to make payment of the settlement amount, or fails to request a court hearing,
within the ten (10) days following the date of the violation in accordance with the above, a final notice shall be issued. In such case,
the settlement amount shall be equal to two (2) times the original settlement amount and the violator may pay the applicable amount
pursuant to the procedures outlined above within ten (10) days of the final notice. If the violator fails to make payment of the
settlement amount, the village is authorized to file and prosecute a complaint against him in court. (Ord. 1134-05, 7-25-2005)
4. Form Of Citation: The form of citation issued by a village police officer, building inspector or code enforcement officer of the village in
cases of minor offenses described in subsection A of this section shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: a) the specific
ordinance violated, including the date, time and location of the offense or violation, b) the amount of payment applicable to the alleged
violation required for settlement of the claim, and c) that failure to settle the claim or request a court hearing may result in a complaint
being filed against him in court. (Ord. 1345-10, 9-29-2010)
D. Reserved.
E. Settlement Amounts Enumerated: This subsection shall set the original settlement amounts for any or all the minor offenses described in
subsection A of this section. Said amounts shall be as follows: (Ord. 1134-05, 7-25-2005)
Code Provisions Violated Amount
4-3A-2 infected, dead or diseased trees, abatement by owner $ 50.00
5-3-1A curfew hours and age restrictions 50.00
5-4-2 dogs (except subsection 5-4-2E4 of this code) 50.00
Title 6, chapter 1, vehicle licenses (In addition to the penalty hereinafter set forth, a license shall be purchased in
accordance with the provisions of subsection 6-1-4C of this code.)
50.00
6-2-1 vehicle code (except moving violations and other violations reportable to the Illinois secretary of state pursuant
to 625 ILCS 5/6-204 and seat belt violations)
75.00
6-2-1 vehicle code (seat belt violations) 60.00
Title 6, chapter 3 parking regulations (except sections 6-3-4 and 6-3-8 of this code and except as provided in
subsection 6-3-10C of this code)
25.00
6-3-4 vehicles for sale prohibited 50.00
6-3-8 parking on private property prohibited 50.00
(Ord. 1134-05, 7-25-2005; amd. Ord. 1277-09, 2-23-2009; Ord. 1343-10, 9-29-2010; Ord. 1397-12, 4-16-2012; Ord. 1489-14, 3-31-2014)
1-4-5: ENFORCEMENT OF CODE:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the village, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the
chief operating officer, the building inspector, the code enforcement officer, or the chief of police or other police officer may issue to the
individual or entity a ticket, citation, or other charge for violation or noncompliance with the code or ordinance of the village. (Ord. 1345-10,
9-29-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 7/426
Chapter 5
VILLAGE MAYOR AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES
1-5-1: VILLAGE MAYOR1:
A. Powers: The village mayor shall be the chief executive of the village and shall be responsible for the enforcement of all laws and
ordinances. He, or the mayor pro tem, shall preside at all meetings of the board of trustees. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. Ord. 1125-
05, 5-16-2005)
B. Bond: Before entering upon the duties of office, the village mayor shall execute a bond, with security, to be approved by the mayor and
board of trustees. The bond shall be payable to the village in whatever penal sum may be directed by resolution, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the duties of the office and the payment of all monies received by such officer, according to the law and also the
ordinances of the village. Such bond may provide that the obligation of the sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by the
insolvency, failure or closing of any bank organized and operating either under the laws of the state or the United States wherein such
officer has placed funds in his custody, if the bank has been approved by the mayor and board of trustees as a depository for these
funds. All bonds shall be filed with the village clerk. To the extent that the village participates in any self-insurance risk pool which
provides public officials fidelity, crime and honesty (dishonesty) coverages equivalent to or in excess of the bonding requirements set
forth in this section, and for so long as such coverages are provided, the bonding requirements of this section shall be deemed satisfied.
(1995 Code; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
C. Mayor Pro Tem: One of the board of trustees shall be chosen by the board of trustees to act as mayor pro tem in the absence of the
mayor. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
1-5-2: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
A. Regular Meetings: The village board shall hold its regular meetings on the fourth Monday of each month at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and
at other times as the board may determine in accordance with the open meetings act, being 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq.,
as from time to time amended. (Ord. 1684-16, 7-18-2016)
B. Special Meetings: The mayor or any three (3) trustees may call special meetings of the village board. (Ord. 423-89, 5-8-1989; amd. Ord.
1125-05, 5-16-2005)
C. Notice Of Meetings:
1. The village clerk is hereby authorized and directed to publish the following notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the
corporate limits of the village:
NOTICE
The regular Village Board meetings of the Village of Hawthorn Woods, Lake County, Illinois, will be held on the fourth Monday of
each month, at 7:00 P.M., Village Hall, 2 Lagoon Drive, Hawthorn Woods, Illinois.
Dated:
Village Clerk, Village of Hawthorn Woods
(Ord. 1684-16, 7-18-2016)
2. A copy of said notice shall also be posted at the principal office of the village and shall be supplied to those news media which have
filed an annual request for notice as provided in section 120/2.02 of the open meetings act, being 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et
seq. (Ord. 322-82, 3-9-1982; amd. Ord. 423-89, 5-8-1989; 1995 Code; Ord. 927-01, 1-15-2001)
1-5-3: COMMITTEES:
A. Appointment: There shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the trustees, the following standing committee consisting of
five (5) members each, or such other number as the trustees shall designate, of which the mayor shall be an ex officio member:
Environmental committee.
The mayor, with the approval of the trustees, may appoint such other committees as may be deemed necessary. (Ord. 1609-15, 11-23-
2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 8/426
B. Reports: Committees to which matters are referred shall report in writing on the request of any two (2) members of the board of trustees.
(Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. 1995 Code)
1-5-4: PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES:
The procedure for the passage of an ordinance shall be as follows:
An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the board of trustees. When first introduced, said ordinance shall be read to the board
of trustees and a motion shall be made to have the same engrossed by the clerk upon the records of the proceedings of the meeting at
which said proposed ordinance is introduced. The ordinance may then be referred to the proper committee for consideration and report, or
may be called up for passage at the meeting at which it was introduced, or any subsequent meeting, when it shall again be read. The
voting upon the passage of an ordinance shall be by ayes and nays, and the village clerk shall call upon each trustee in alphabetical order
and record his or her vote. If the vote is sufficient to enact the ordinance presented in accordance with applicable law, the ordinance shall
be deemed to be enacted. The mayor shall cast a vote on said ordinance: a) where the vote of the trustees has resulted in a tie; or b)
where one-half (1/2) of the trustees elected have voted in favor of the ordinance; or c) where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate
authorities is required by law. After the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, said ordinance shall become effective immediately, or
at such time as the appropriate action has been taken to validate said ordinance, in accordance with applicable law. (Ord. 322-82, 3-9-
1982; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
1-5-5: RULES OF ORDER:
A. Order Of Business: The order of business to be observed at all meetings of the board of trustees shall be as follows:
1. Roll call of members.
2. Reading of minutes of the previous meeting, and approval thereof.
3. Reports of committees.
4. Reports of officers.
5. Unfinished business.
6. New business.
7. Adjournment.
The above order of business may be suspended upon a majority vote of trustees present. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. 1995 Code)
B. Quorum: A majority of the members of the board of trustees, inclusive of the mayor, shall constitute a quorum to do business, but no
ordinance shall be passed except upon a favorable vote of a majority of the elected members as is provided by statute. (Ord. 105-58, 7-
15-1958; amd. 1995 Code; Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
C. Voting: Every trustee who shall be present when a question is stated from the chair shall vote thereon unless excused by a majority of
the trustees present. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. 1995 Code)
D. Robert's Rules Of Order: The village mayor shall decide all questions of order, and in all cases not specifically provided for by law or
ordinance, shall be governed in his decisions by parliamentary law as prescribed by "Robert's Rules Of Order" as revised from time to
time. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. 1995 Code; Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
1-5-6: STANDING RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR SPECIFIED PUBLIC HEARINGS:
A. Rules Created: The procedural order of business to be observed for all public hearings conducted by the village board pertaining to
annexation, zoning, and/or architectural review matters shall be as follows:
1. The mayor shall chair the public hearing;
2. The mayor may regulate the conduct of the proceeding, and may disallow any testimony or evidence in accordance with the rules;
3. All persons addressing the village board shall be given an opportunity to testify and present evidence, and an opportunity to ask
questions;
4. All persons wishing to testify shall raise their hands, identify themselves by name, address and be sworn by the court reporter or
notary public. All those testifying shall stand at the podium to address the village board;
5. Any member of the village board may ask questions of any person giving testimony at the public hearing;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 9/426
6. The village board will first hear statements from the applicants or their attorneys and/or witnesses;
7. The village board will then hear statements or testimony from members of the public;
8. The chair will allow cross examination of the applicants, their witnesses, and members of the public and any witnesses who
presented testimony on behalf of the public (includes questions);
9. The applicant will be allowed to present rebuttal testimony to matters raised by the village or members of the public. Any witness
presenting rebuttal testimony shall be subject to cross examination and/or questions by the public and the village board;
10. Testimony and evidence which is cumulative, repetitious, harassing, argumentative or irrelevant to the case being heard will be
disallowed;
11. Cross examination of persons giving testimony must be relevant to the matters heard and be confined to the points raised during
that person's testimony;
12. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the mayor will close the public hearing and no further testimony or evidence shall be taken,
unless the mayor continues the hearing to a date specific for the purpose of taking further testimony and evidence or unless the
village board reopens the public hearing pursuant to law;
13. Any member of the village board absent from all or a portion of a public hearing who certifies that he or she has read the transcript
on any given matter may vote upon any question before the village board with respect to such matter.
B. Rules Of Procedure Applicable To Planning, Building And Zoning Commission, And Zoning Board Of Appeals: The rules of procedure for
public hearings as set forth in subsection A of this section shall also apply to any public hearing pertaining to annexation, zoning, and/or
architectural review matters conducted by the planning, building and zoning commissioner and zoning board of appeals. As applied in
these instances, the term "mayor" shall be interchanged with "chairperson" and the term "village board" with the name of the board or
commission conducting said hearing. (Ord. 1483-14, 1-21-2014)
C. Modifications To Rules During Public Hearings: The rules of procedure for public hearings as set forth in subsection A of this section
may be modified by the president of the village board or the chairperson of the plan commission, zoning board of appeals, or the
architectural review commission as necessary or appropriate to accommodate specific circumstances during a public hearing. (Ord.
1108-05, 2-28-2005)
1-5-7: ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
A. Permitted: Any member of the mayor and board of trustees of the village may attend any open or closed meeting of the mayor and board
of trustees via electronic means (such as by telephone, video or internet connection) provided that such attendance is in compliance
with the rules set forth in this section and any applicable laws.
B. Prerequisites: A member of the mayor and board of trustees may attend a meeting electronically if the member meets the following
conditions:
1. A quorum is physically present throughout the meeting;
2. A majority of the members physically present vote to approve the electronic attendance at the meeting;
3. The member notifies the village clerk at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary
communications equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result in denial of a request
for electronic attendance;
4. The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
a. The member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability; or
b. The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the business of the village; or
c. The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency;
5. The village clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request, shall inform the mayor and corporate authorities of the request for
electronic attendance.
C. Voting Procedures: After a roll call establishing that a quorum is physically present, the mayor or presiding officer shall call for a motion
that a member may be permitted to attend the meeting electronically after specifying the reason entitling the absent member to attend
electronically. The motion must be approved by a roll call vote of a majority of the members physically present.
D. Adequate Equipment Required: The member participating electronically and other members of the mayor and board of trustees must be
able to communicate effectively, and members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the meeting site. Before
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 10/426
allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the village shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the meeting
site.
E. Minutes: Any member attending electronically shall be considered an off site attendee and counted as present electronically for that
meeting. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state specifically whether each member is physically present or present by
electronic means.
F. Rights Of Remote Member: A member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting
and participate in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and procedures
previously adopted and adhered to. The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken.
Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and
recorded by the village clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member attending electronically may leave a
meeting and return as in the case of any member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his or her leaving and
returning.
If the mayor is attending the meeting electronically, a member who is physically present shall be chosen by a majority of the corporate
authorities attending the meeting to preside over the meeting. Such member shall have only the rights and duties of a presiding officer,
not mayor pro tem, and shall be entitled to vote only as a member. The mayor shall retain his right to vote as provided by applicable law.
G. Committees, Boards And Commissions: These rules shall apply to all committees, boards and commissions established by authority of
the mayor and board of trustees. (Ord. 1285-09, 7-20-2009)
Chapter 6
CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER
1-6-1: CREATION OF OFFICE; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
There is hereby created the office of chief operating officer, which officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of
the board of trustees. He shall be chosen on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to actual
experience in, or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of office hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 406-88, 5-10-1988; amd. 1995
Code; Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005; Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
1-6-2: BOND AND OATH:
The chief operating officer shall furnish a surety bond in such amount and form as is approved by the corporate authorities, the bond to be
conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the village. Before entering upon the duties
of the office, the chief operating officer shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the statutes of the state of Illinois1. (Ord. 406-88, 5-
10-1988; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
1-6-3: FUNCTIONS, DUTIES, AUTHORITY:
The chief operating officer is responsible to the mayor and board of trustees. He/she may head one or more departments and shall be
responsible to the corporate authorities for the proper administration of all affairs of the village, excepting such affairs or matters as the
mayor and board of trustees may from time to time determine to be under their direct control and supervision. All provisions herein
contained shall be subject to the exceptions set forth in the immediately preceding sentence. To the ends hereinbefore contemplated, but
subject to the exceptions and qualifications hereinbefore set forth, the chief operating officer shall have power and shall be required with
diligence to: (Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
A. Make, in the ordinary course of business, all purchases of services, equipment, material and supplies necessary for the village as
provided for in the annual budget ordinance, provided that on any such purchase in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), the
approval of the corporate authorities shall first be obtained, and in all cases the chief operating officer shall submit expenditures for
payment to the corporate authorities. (Ord. 1679-16, 7-18-2016)
B. Recommend to the corporate authorities the adoption of such measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the health,
safety or welfare of the community, or for the improvement of the services rendered by the village when such measures require action
by the corporate authorities.
C. Furnish the corporate authorities with such background support information as may be requested on any subject to enable them to make
a decision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 11/426
D. Attend all meetings of the corporate authorities and to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before them, but with no right to
vote.
E. Be responsible for investigating all complaints received in relation to matters concerning the operation of the village and the services
maintained and provided by the village, and to direct communications activities to keep the public informed of village plans and
operations.
F. Develop and implement such procedures, with the approval of the corporate authorities, as may be necessary to ensure that the affairs of
the village are handled on a professional and businesslike basis.
G. Perform related work to all of the above and such other duties as directed by the corporate authorities. (Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
1-6-4: ABSENCE OF CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER:
In the event the chief operating officer is or will be absent from the village or incapacitated from performing the duties of his/her position, the
chief administrative officer shall perform all of the duties of the chief operating officer. (Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
1-6-5: REMOVAL OF CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER:
The corporate authorities may remove the chief operating officer at any time by a majority vote of all of its members. (Ord. 406-88, 5-10-
1988; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
1-6-6: CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER:
A. Office Established, Appointment, Term: There is hereby established the office of chief administrative officer who shall be appointed by
the mayor, with the advice and consent of the corporate authorities.
B. Duties: The chief administrative officer is second in command to the chief operating officer. Additionally, the chief administrative officer
assists and provides backup support to the director of community development and director of public works/village engineer, researches
policy options, manages special projects, reports regularly to the chief operating officer, makes recommendations as deemed necessary
for the health, safety, welfare or economic development of the village and other such duties as the mayor and board of trustees may
assign from time to time.
C. Salary: The chief administrative officer shall receive such compensation as may be from time to time established by the mayor and
board of trustees. (Ord. 1720-16, 11-28-2016)
Chapter 6A
BUDGET OFFICER1
1-6A-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of budget officer. The budget officer shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the
corporate authorities. The budget officer may hold another village office, either elected or appointed. (Ord. 1450-13, 5-20-2013)
1-6A-2: OATH OF OFFICE; BOND:
Before taking office, the budget officer shall take an oath of office and furnish a fidelity bond in the same manner and in such amounts as
are otherwise applicable to the office of chief operating officer. (Ord. 936-01, 3-19-2001; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
1-6A-3: COMPENSATION:
The budget officer shall receive such compensation as may be provided from time to time by ordinance. (Ord. 936-01, 3-19-2001)
1-6A-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 12/426
The budget officer shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal
management procedures in all village departments, commissions, and boards.
B. Compile an annual budget in accordance with section 1-6A-5 of this chapter.
C. Examine all books and records of all village departments, commissions, and boards which relate to monies received by the village,
village departments, commissions, and boards, and paid out by the village, village departments, commissions, and boards, debts and
accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the village, village departments, commissions, and boards.
D. Obtain such additional information from the village, village departments, commissions, and boards as may be useful to the budget officer
for purposes of compiling a village budget, such information to be furnished by the village, village departments, commissions, and
boards in the form required by the budget officer. Any department, commission or board which refuses to make such information as is
requested of it available to the budget officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget for the village
until such village department, commission or board shall comply in full with the request of the budget officer.
E. Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no expenditures are made by the village, village departments,
commissions, or boards except as authorized by the budget. (Ord. 936-01, 3-19-2001)
1-6A-5: COMPILATION AND CONTENTS OF BUDGET:
The budget officer shall compile a budget, such budget to contain estimates of revenues available to the village for the fiscal year for which
the budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the village and all of the village's departments, commissions, and
boards. Revenue estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal
management practices. Substantial conformity to a chart of accounts, now or in the future, recommended by the national committee on
governmental accounting, or the auditor of public accounts of the state of Illinois, or the division of local governmental affairs and property
taxes of the department of revenue of the state of Illinois, or successor agencies shall be deemed proof of such conformity. The budget
shall contain actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for the two (2) years immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the
budget is prepared. So far as is possible, the fiscal data for such two (2) preceding fiscal years shall be itemized in a manner which is in
conformity with the chart of accounts approved above. Each budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure
shall be made. (Ord. 936-01, 3-19-2001)
1-6A-6: PASSAGE OF ANNUAL BUDGET:
Passage of the annual budget by the corporate authorities shall be in lieu of passage of the appropriation ordinance as required by section
8-2-9 of the Illinois municipal code. The annual budget need not be published except in a manner provided for in section 1-6A-10 of this
chapter. The annual budget shall be adopted by the corporate authorities before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies. (Ord.
936-01, 3-19-2001)
1-6A-7: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT FUND:
In the preparation by the budget officer of the annual budget, an amount not to exceed three percent (3%) of the equalized assessed value
of property subject to taxation by the village may be accumulated in a separate fund for the purpose or purposes of specific capital
improvements, repairs, and/or replacements of specific types of village equipment or other tangible property, both real and personal, to be
designated as the "capital improvement, repair or replacement fund". Expenditures from the capital improvement repair or replacement fund
shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which the capital improvement, repair or replacement will occur. Upon the completion or
abandonment of any object for which the capital improvement, repair or replacement fund, or should any surplus monies remain after the
completion or abandonment of any object for which the capital improvement, repair or replacement fund was inaugurated, then such funds
no longer necessary for capital improvement, repair or replacement shall be transferred into the general corporate fund of the village on the
first day of the fiscal year following such abandonment, completion, or discovery of surplus funds. (Ord. 936-01, 3-19-2001)
1-6A-8: REVISION OF ANNUAL BUDGET:
The corporate authorities hereby delegate authority to heads of village departments, commissions, or boards to delete, add to, change or
create subclasses within object classes budgeted previously to the department, commission, or board, subject to the prior approval of the
budget officer. By a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the corporate authorities then holding office, the annual budget for the village
may be revised by deleting, adding to, changing or creating subclasses within object classes and object classes themselves. No revision of
the budget shall be made increasing the budget in the event funds are not available to effectuate the purpose of the revision. (Ord. 936-01,
3-19-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 13/426
1-6A-9: FUNDS FOR CONTINGENCY PURPOSES:
The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the total budget, less the
amount set aside for contingency purposes, which monies may be expended for contingencies upon a majority vote of the corporate
authorities then holding office. (Ord. 936-01, 3-19-2001)
1-6A-10: PUBLIC INSPECTION, NOTICE AND HEARING ON BUDGET:
The corporate authorities shall make the tentative annual budget conveniently available to public inspection for at least ten (10) days prior
to the passage of the annual budget, by publication in the journal of the proceedings of the corporate authorities or in such other form as
the corporate authorities may prescribe. Not less than one week after the publication of the tentative annual budget, and prior to final action
on the budget, the corporate authorities shall hold at least one public hearing on the tentative annual budget, after which hearing or
hearings the tentative budget may be further revised and passed without any further inspection, notice or hearing. Notice of this hearing
shall be given by publication in a newspaper having a general circulation in the municipality at least one week prior to the time of the
hearing. (Ord. 936-01, 3-19-2001)
Chapter 7
VILLAGE CLERK
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT:
The village clerk shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 1451-13, 5-20-2013)
1-7-2: DUTIES:
The village clerk shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by law and as may be assigned to him by the corporate authorities. In
particular, the village clerk shall: (Ord. 422-89, 5-8-1989)
A. Keep his office at the place appointed by the mayor and board of trustees.
B. Attend all meetings of the mayor and board of trustees and take minutes of all its proceedings. (Ord. 422-89, 5-8-1989; amd. Ord. 1125-
05, 5-16-2005)
C. Record such minutes, together with all ordinances and resolutions passed by the board of trustees, in books to be kept for that purpose.
D. Publish all proceedings of the board of trustees, and all ordinances required by law to be published. (Ord. 422-89, 5-8-1989)
E. Serve all notices, either by personal service, by publication or by posting, required by law, by the board of trustees or the mayor to be
served, unless such notices are expressly ordered to be served by some other person. (Ord. 422-89, 5-8-1989; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-
16-2005)
F. Keep all original documents relating to all warrants drawn on the treasurer, stating the date, number and amount thereof, to whom
payable, and against what fund drawn.
G. File all ordinances, communications, receipts and other documents required to be filed and arrange the same in systematic order for
ready reference.
H. Keep the corporate seal of the village1 and affix the same to all papers as required.
I. Be the custodian and keeper of all the official books, records, ordinances, resolutions and papers of the village, except as otherwise may
be provided by law or ordinance.
J. Make copies of all papers in his office and transcripts from journals and other records and files of his office certified under the corporate
seal for use as evidence when required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 14/426
K. File or cause to be filed a certified copy of each tax levy ordinance with the proper authorities of Lake County, Illinois, within the time
required by law. (Ord. 422-89, 5-8-1989)
L. Do such further acts and deeds and perform such duties and responsibilities as shall be required by law, by ordinance, or as otherwise
directed by the mayor and board of trustees. (Ord. 422-89, 5-8-1989; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
1-7-3: COMPENSATION AND BOND:
A. Compensation: The village clerk shall receive such compensation as may from time to time be established by the mayor and board of
trustees. (Ord. 779-97, 1-13-1997; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
B. Bond: The village clerk's bond shall be set at one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 779-97, 1-13-1997)
1-7-4: DEPUTY CLERK:
A. Appointment, Powers And Duties: The village clerk is hereby authorized to appoint a deputy clerk with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees, who, without limitation, shall have the power and duty to execute all documents, papers, receipts, orders, checks and
other instruments required by law to be executed by the village clerk, to affix the corporate seal thereto whenever required, and to make
such records and perform any and all duties and functions performable by the village clerk. Any such appointment may be revoked at
any time and a new appointment may thereafter be made if desired. Any such appointment, however, shall run concurrently with the
village clerk's term of office unless sooner terminated. An original of the instrument making an appointment of a deputy by the village
clerk shall be filed and shall remain on file in the office of the village clerk. Any person accepting an appointment as deputy of the village
clerk shall take and subscribe the same oath or affirmation as is required of village officers, and such oath or affirmation shall be filed
and shall remain on file in the office of the village clerk.
B. Form And Effect Of Signature: In signing any documents, the deputy clerk shall sign the name of the clerk with the word "By" and the
deputy clerk's own name and the words "Deputy Clerk". When duly authorized as herein provided for, the signature affixed by such
deputy in the manner herein prescribed on any document, including, but not limited to, contracts, bonds or other obligations of the
municipality, such document shall have the same effect as if the documents so executed had been signed by the clerk in person.
C. Limitations On Powers And Duties: The powers and duties of the deputy clerk shall be exercised only in the absence of the clerk from
the place where the clerk's office is maintained, and only when either written direction has been given by the clerk to such deputy clerk
to exercise such power, or the corporate authorities have determined by resolution that the clerk is temporarily or permanently
incapacitated to perform such function. (Ord. 237-77, 3-15-1977; amd. 1995 Code)
1-7-5: VILLAGE COLLECTOR:
A. Appointment; Term: The office of the village collector is hereby established for the village. Said officer shall be appointed by the mayor,
with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, for a period of one year.
B. Village Clerk Act As Collector: As provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-30-15, the mayor and board of trustees hereby
determine and provide the village clerk may hold the office of village collector. (Ord. 495-91, 7-8-1891; amd. 1995 Code; Ord. 1125-05,
5-16-2005)
Chapter 8
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-8-1: CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER:
A. Office Established, Appointment: There is hereby established the office of chief financial officer who shall be appointed by the mayor,
with the advice and consent of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 1452-13, 5-20-2013)
B. Duties: The chief financial officer shall have the rights, powers, privileges, authority and shall perform such duties as are authorized and
prescribed by the statutes of the state of Illinois for the office of treasurer. In addition the chief financial officer shall perform such duties
and functions as may be provided for in this code or as the corporate authorities may direct. In particular, the chief financial officer shall:
(Ord. 1224-07, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord. 1308-10, 1-19-2010)
1. Prepare and keep all financial records of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 15/426
2. Keep a current account of the amount budgeted each year and the sums spent out of each object class showing the unexpended
balance for each item. (Ord. 1224-07, 6-26-2007)
3. Assist the chief operating officer in the preparation of the annual budget ordinance and tax levy ordinance in time for their enactment
and filings as required by law. (Ord. 1224-07, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
4. Keep accounts showing at all times the fiscal condition of the village, including the current and anticipated revenues and expenses of
all municipal object classes.
5. Prepare and keep all bond registers and other records required by law to be kept by the treasurer, and shall prepare for signature and
publication the annual treasurer's report and any other report required by law.
6. Prepare each month a warrant for the payment of all sums due from the village, listing each item and the account out of which it is
payable; which warrant, when properly authorized by the mayor and board of trustees, shall authorize the issuance of a voucher or
check as provided by law for the payment of each item. No item shall be included in such warrant unless it has been authorized by
the board of trustees. A list of all items to be paid shall be submitted to the board of trustees.
7. Such additional duties as the mayor and board of trustees may determine and assign from time to time. (Ord. 1224-07, 6-26-2007)
C. Compensation: The chief financial officer shall receive such compensation as may from time to time be established by the mayor and
board of trustees.
D. Bond: Before entering upon the duties of office, the chief financial officer shall execute a bond, with security, to be approved by the
mayor and board of trustees. The bond shall be payable to the village in whatever penal sum may be directed by resolution, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office and the payment of all monies received by such officer, according to the law and
also the ordinances of the village. Such bond may provide that the obligation of the sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by
the insolvency, failure or closing of any bank organized and operating either under the laws of the state or the United States wherein
such officer has placed funds in his custody, if the bank has been approved by the mayor and board of trustees as a depository for
these funds. All bonds shall be filed with the village clerk. To the extent that the village participates in any self-insurance risk pool which
provides public officials fidelity, crime and honesty (dishonesty) coverages equivalent to or in excess of the bonding requirements set
forth in this section, and for so long as such coverages are provided, the bonding requirements of this section shall be deemed satisfied.
(Ord. 1224-07, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord. 1308-10, 1-19-2010)
1-8-2: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
A. Office Established, Appointment: There is hereby established the office of village attorney who shall be appointed by the mayor, with the
advice and consent of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 1453-13, 5-20-2013)
B. Duties:
1. Legal Advice: The attorney for the village shall be the legal advisor to the village, and shall render advice on all legal questions
affecting the village whenever requested to do so by the village officials. Upon request by the mayor or board of trustees, he shall
reduce any such opinion to writing; and upon request by the mayor, he shall render an opinion to any officer of the village with regard
to his duties or powers. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2. Attend Board Meetings, Report: The village attorney shall attend the meetings of the board of trustees on request, and on or before
the first meeting in May of each year, make a report in writing to said board of all suits, prosecutions or actions prosecuted or
defended by him during the preceding year, of the names of the parties thereto, of the title of the courts in which they were
commenced, of their progress or final disposition, and other information concerning the legal interests of the village which may be
deemed necessary or proper by the village. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. Ord. 1237-07, 11-26-2007)
3. Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein expressly set forth or pertaining by implication to his office, the village attorney shall
prepare and draft any proposed ordinance requested of him by any member of the board; he shall give the necessary attention to all
suits and proceedings in every court of record in which the village is a party or directly interested; and he shall be the attorney of the
plan commission and the board of appeals. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. Ord. 226-76, 7-13-1976)
C. Salary: The compensation of the village attorney shall be fixed by the board of trustees. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958)
D. Additional Counsel: With the advice and consent of the board of trustees, the mayor may appoint additional counsel to assist the
attorney for the village on special matters. Such special counsel shall receive such compensation as may be directed by the board of
trustees. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. 1995 Code; Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
1-8-3: VILLAGE ENGINEER:
There is hereby established the independent contractor position of village engineer. Said position shall be appointed by the mayor, with the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 16/426
advice and consent of the board of trustees. The village engineer shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and board of trustees. The
compensation of the village engineer shall be fixed by the board of trustees. (Ord. 1210-07, 4-16-2007)
1-8-4: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
A. Position Created, Appointment: There is hereby established the independent contractor position of building inspector for the village. Said
position shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The building inspector shall serve at the
pleasure of the mayor and board of trustees. The compensation of the building inspector shall be fixed by the board of trustees. (Ord.
1210-07, 4-16-2007)
B. Powers And Duties:
1. Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the building inspector to see to the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to buildings or
zoning and to inspect all buildings or structures being erected or altered as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance
with the village ordinances.
2. Stop Work Order: The building inspector shall have the power to order all work stopped on construction, alteration or repair of
buildings in the village when such work is being done in violation of any provision of any ordinance relating thereto, or in violation of
the zoning title. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such an order except on the written permission of the building
inspector; provided, that if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within an hour. Such written stop
order may be served by the building inspector or by any policeman of the village.
3. Inspections, Right Of Entry: The building inspector shall have the power to make or cause to be made an entry into any building or
premises where the work of altering, repairing or constructing any building or structure is going on, for the purpose of making
inspections, at any reasonable hour.
C. Penalty: Any person who shall refuse entry under subsection B3 of this section or who shall continue to work in violation of a stop order
of the building inspector, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this title for each day during or on which any work in
violation of such stop order is done. (Ord. 151-63, 1963; amd. 1995 Code)
1-8-5: VILLAGE PLANNER:
A. Position Established, Appointment: There is hereby established the independent contractor position of village planner. Said position shall
be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The village planner shall serve at the pleasure of the
mayor and board of trustees. (Ord. 1210-07, 4-16-2007)
B. Duties: The village planner shall render advice on questions relating to municipal planning whenever requested to do so by the village
officials, and shall perform such other duties as the mayor and board of trustees may determine and assign from time to time. (1995
Code; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
C. Compensation: The compensation of the village planner shall be fixed by the board of trustees. (Ord. 1210-07, 4-16-2007)
1-8-6: INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; LIABILITY INSURANCE:
A. It is hereby found and determined that in order to provide for the indemnification of officers, employees and agents of the village, to the
end that all persons elected, appointed or employed by the village may be secure in their person and property while engaging in any
activity on behalf of the village, it is in the best interests of the village to provide the indemnities to all officers, employees and agents of
the village as hereinafter set forth.
B. The village shall indemnify any person who was or is a party to or is threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or
completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative (other than an action by or in the right of the
village by reason of the fact that such person is or was an officer, employee or agent of the village) against expenses (including attorney
fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably incurred by such person in connection with such action,
suit or proceeding if such person, while performing any duty or function on behalf of the village, and in a manner reasonably believed to
be in or not opposed to the best interests of the village, and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause
to believe such conduct was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit or proceeding by judgment or settlement, conviction or upon a
plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent, shall not, of itself, create a presumption that the person did not act in good faith and in a
manner which such person reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interest of the village, and with respect to any
criminal action or proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe such conduct was unlawful. (Ord. 336-84, 4-10-1984)
C. Any indemnification under subsection B of this section shall be made by the village only upon a determination that indemnification of the
officer, employee or agent is proper in the circumstances because he has met the applicable standard of conduct set forth in subsection
B of this section. Such determination shall be made: 1) by the village by a majority vote of a quorum consisting of the mayor and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 17/426
trustees who were not parties to such action, suit or proceedings, or 2) if such a quorum is not obtainable, or, even if obtainable, a
quorum of disinterested persons as aforesaid so directs, by independent legal counsel in a written opinion. (Ord. 336-84, 4-10-1984;
amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
D. The indemnification provided by this section shall not be deemed exclusive of any other rights to which those indemnified may be
entitled under any contract or agreement, both as to action in his official capacity and as to action in another capacity while holding such
office, and shall continue to as a person who has ceased to be an officer, employee or agent and shall inure to the benefit of the heirs,
executors and administrators of such a person.
E. The village shall have the power to purchase and maintain insurance on behalf of any person who is or was an officer, employee or
agent of the village, against any liability asserted against such person and incurred in any such capacity, or arising out of their status as
such, whether or not the village would have the power to indemnify such person against such liability under the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 336-84, 4-10-1984)
1-8-7: ADOPTION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF THE STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
A. The provisions of section 5-151 and article 102 of the state officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq., (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and
employees of the village to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5. Three (3) copies of the act are, and have been
for not less than thirty (30) days prior to the enactment of this section, on file in the office of the village clerk.
B. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the village is
hereby prohibited.
C. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the village under the act is hereby prohibited.
D. The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by any officer or employee of the village is hereby prohibited.
E. For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
F. The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for
similar violations of the act.
G. This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village
officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this section, however, the
provisions of this section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a). (Ord. 1066-04, 4-26-
2004)
H. There is hereby created the office of ethics officer. The ethics officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the
corporate authorities. The ethics officer may hold another village office, either elected or appointed. The ethics officer shall provide
guidance to the officers and employees of the village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of this section
and state ethics laws. The ethics officer shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the village. (Ord. 1066-04, 4-26-2004;
amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
I. Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by
reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this section by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village of Hawthorn Woods.
J. If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the
Illinois supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the village of Hawthorn Woods if the act is found unconstitutional by the
Illinois supreme court.
K. If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does
not address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect;
however, that part of this section relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village of Hawthorn Woods. (Ord. 1066-04, 4-26-2004)
1-8-8: VILLAGE LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 18/426
A. Position Established, Appointment: There is hereby established the independent contractor position of village landscape architect. Said
position shall be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. The village landscape architect shall
serve at the pleasure of the mayor and board of trustees. (Ord. 1210-07, 4-16-2007)
B. Duties: The village landscape architect shall render advice on questions relating to landscaping in the village whenever requested to do
so by the village officials, shall review all landscape plans, tree preservation plans and other plans related to tree removal permits as
regulated by the village, and shall perform such other duties as the mayor and board of trustees may determine and assign from time to
time. (Ord. 1141-05, 8-15-2005)
C. Compensation: The compensation of the village landscape architect shall be fixed by the board of trustees. (Ord. 1210-07, 4-16-2007)
1-8-9: DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:
A. Office Established, Appointment, Term: There is hereby established the office of director of community development who shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the corporate authorities.
B. Duties: The director of community development plans, directs, manages and oversees the activities and operation of the community
development department, including land use, short and long range planning, building codes, permit issuance, inspections,
environmental review and economic development and other such duties as the mayor and board of trustees may assign from time to
time.
C. Salary: The director of community development shall receive such compensation as may be from time to time established by the mayor
and board of trustees. (Ord. 1720-16, 11-28-2016)
1-8-10: PROHIBITED INTERESTS IN VILLAGE CONTRACTS, WORK OR BUSINESS:
No employee of the village shall be financially interested directly in his own name or indirectly in the name of any other person, association,
trust, or corporation, in any contract, work, or business of the municipality or in the sale of any article whenever the expense, price, or
consideration of the contract, work, business, or sale is paid either from the treasury or by an assessment levied by statute or ordinance.
Such persons shall not be interested, directly or indirectly, in the purchase of any property that: a) belongs to the village, b) is sold for taxes
or assessments, or c) is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the village.
No independent contractor or consultant of the village shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in the purchase of any property that: a)
belongs to the village, b) is sold for taxes or assessments, or c) is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the village. (Ord. 1192-06, 12-
18-2006)
1-8-11: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS/VILLAGE ENGINEER:
A. Office Established, Appointment, Term: There is hereby established the office of director of public works/village engineer who shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the corporate authorities.
B. Duties: The director of public works/village engineer plans, directs, manages and oversees the activities and operation of the public
works department, including streets, drainage, municipal facilities, sanitary and storm sewer, fleet services and other such duties as the
mayor and board of trustees may assign from time to time.
C. Salary: The director of public works/village engineer shall receive such compensation as may be from time to time established by the
mayor and board of trustees. (Ord. 1720-16, 11-28-2016)
1-8-12: DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION:
A. Office Established, Appointment, Term: There is hereby established the office of director of parks and recreation who shall be appointed
by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the corporate authorities.
B. Duties: The director of parks and recreation plans, directs, manages and oversees the activities and operation of the parks and
recreation department, including recreation programs, special events and parks maintenance and other such duties as the mayor and
board of trustees may assign from time to time.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 19/426
C. Salary: The director of parks and recreation shall receive such compensation as may be from time to time established by the mayor and
board of trustees. (Ord. 1720-16, 11-28-2016)
Chapter 9
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
1-9-1: ANNUAL BUDGET:
The board of trustees shall pass a budget ordinance each year as set forth in chapter 6A of this title. (Ord. 1237-07, 11-26-2007)
1-9-2: ANNUAL TAX LEVY:
The board of trustees shall, on or before the last Tuesday in December of each year, ascertain the total amount of appropriations legally
made for all corporate purposes to be provided for by the tax levy of that year, and shall pass a tax levy ordinance which shall incorporate
the appropriation ordinance as originally passed, or may be lawfully amended, which ordinance shall specify in detail the purposes for
which such appropriations are made, or have been made, and the amount appropriated for each purpose, respectively, and which shall levy
the amount so ascertained upon all the property subject to taxation within this village as that property is assessed and equalized for state
and county purposes for the current year. The village clerk shall thereupon file a certified copy of said tax levy ordinance with the county
clerk of Lake County, as required by statute. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. 1995 Code)
1-9-3: CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES:
A. Conflict Of Interest: Except as authorized by law, no officer or employee of the village shall be directly or indirectly financially interested
in any contract work or business of the village, or the sale of any article, the expense, price or consideration of which is paid from the
treasury, or by any assessment levied by any act or ordinance, or in the purchase of any real estate or other property. (Ord. 105-58, 7-
15-1958; amd. 1995 Code)
B. Bids: Any work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation when
the expense thereof shall exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder, after no less than
ten (10) nor more than fifteen (15) days' notice of a call for such bids is published in such newspaper of general circulation as the
trustees may, by resolution, direct and as is otherwise provided by statute; provided, however, that such bidding may be waived by a
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees then holding office. Such notice need give only a general description of the work, detailed
drawings, plans and specifications of which shall be on file with the village clerk. Such contract shall be approved by the trustees and
execution thereof shall be by the mayor of the village. (Ord. 1228-07, 7-23-2007)
1-9-4: MUNICIPAL TAXES:
A. Police Protection Tax: A tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of police protection in the village at the rate of 0.075 percent of the value,
as equalized or assessed by the department of revenue, for all taxable property therein, all in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1-3. (Ord. 182-69, 1969; amd. 1995 Code)
B. Street And Bridge Tax: A tax is hereby imposed for street and bridge purposes in this village at a rate of 0.10 percent of the value, as
equalized or assessed by the department of revenue, of all taxable property lying within the limits of the village. Said street and bridge
tax, as authorized by this subsection, shall be in addition to: 1) any tax that the village is now authorized to levy for street and bridge
purposes; 2) the tax that such municipality is now authorized to levy on all property within the municipality; and 3) the amount authorized
to be levied for the purpose as provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-1. (Ord. 308-80, 1980)
ARTICLE A. WORKING CASH FUND
1-9A-1: FUND CREATED:
Pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-7-1 et seq., and all acts amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto, a fund to be known as the "working cash fund" of the village is hereby created and set apart in the amount of thirty
nine thousand dollars ($39,000.00); such fund to be maintained and administered in the manner prescribed by the provisions of said statute
above referred to, for the purpose of enabling the village to have in its treasury at all times sufficient money to meet demands thereon for
ordinary and necessary expenditures for all general and special corporate purposes. (Ord. 269-78, 6-13-1978)
1-9A-2: BONDS AUTHORIZED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 20/426
In order to raise the sum of thirty nine thousand dollars ($39,000.00) needed for the purpose of creating the working cash fund of the village
as hereinabove referred to, there shall be borrowed by, for and on behalf of the village, the sum of thirty nine thousand dollars ($39,000.00),
and to evidence said loan, negotiable coupon bonds of the village shall be issued. Said bonds shall be designated working cash fund
bonds, shall be dated June 1, 1978, and shall be eight (8) in number, numbered consecutively from 1 to 8, inclusive. Bonds numbered 1
through 7 shall be of the denomination of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) each, and bond no. 8 shall be of the denomination of four
thousand dollars ($4,000.00). Each such bond shall become due on December 1, 1980, and shall bear interest from date at the rate of four
percent (4%), payable on December 1, 1980, which interest payment to the date of maturity of principal shall be evidenced by proper
interest coupon attached to each bond and maturing on the date herein provided. Both principal and interest shall be payable in lawful
money of the United States of America at the State Bank of Lake Zurich, Lake Zurich, Illinois. Said bonds shall be signed by the mayor and
clerk of the village, shall be countersigned by the treasurer thereof, with the seal of the village affixed thereto, and said interest coupons
shall be signed by the mayor and clerk by their facsimile signatures, and said officers, by the execution of said bonds, shall adopt as and for
their respective proper signatures their respective facsimile signatures appearing on said coupons. (Ord. 269-78, 6-13-1978; amd. Ord.
1125-05, 5-16-2005)
After this article has become effective as provided by law, the bonds herein authorized shall be executed and delivered to the treasurer of
the village and be by her countersigned and delivered to the State Bank of Lake Zurich, Lake Zurich, Illinois, the purchaser thereof, upon
receipt of the purchase price therefor, same to be the par value of said bonds, plus accrued interest to date of delivery, in accordance with
the terms of the contract for the sale thereof. (Ord. 269-78, 6-13-1978)
1-9A-3: PAYMENT, REGISTRATION OF BONDS:
The bonds hereby authorized shall be payable to the bearer; provided, however, that such bonds may be subject to registration as to
principal in the name of the holder on the books of the village treasurer, such registration to be evidenced by notation of said treasurer upon
the back of such bonds so registered. No bond so registered shall be subject to transfer except upon such books and similarly noted on the
back thereof unless the last registration shall have been to bearer. Such registration of any of said bonds shall not, however, affect the
negotiability of the coupons attached to said bonds, but such coupons shall continue transferable by delivery merely. (Ord. 269-78, 6-13-
1978)
1-9A-4: FORM OF BOND AND COUPON:
Each of said bonds and the interest coupons to be thereto attached shall be in substantially the following form: (Ord. 269-78, 6-13-1978)
(Form Of Bond)
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
STATE OF ILLINOIS COUNTY OF LAKE
VILLAGE OF HAWTHORN WOODS
WORKING CASH FUND BOND
Number 1 $5,000
(4,000)
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that the Village of Hawthorn Woods, Lake County, Illinois, hereby acknowledges itself to owe,
and for value received promises to pay to bearer, or if this bond is registered, then to the registered holder hereof, the sum of Five
Thousand Dollars ($5,000) (Four Thousand Dollars - $4,000) on the first day of December, 1980, together with interest on said sum from
the date hereof until paid at the rate of four percent (4%) per annum, payable on December 1, 1980, upon presentation and surrender of
the interest coupon hereto attached as it becomes due and payable. Both principal and interest hereon are payable at the State Bank of
Lake Zurich, Lake Zurich, Illinois. For the prompt payment of this bond, both principal and interest, as aforesaid, at maturity, and the levy of
taxes sufficient for that purpose, the full faith, credit and resources of said Village are hereby irrevocably pledged.
This bond is one of a series of bonds issued by said Village for the purpose of creating a working cash fund in and for said Village, pursuant
to and in all respects in compliance with the provisions of Division 7 of Article 8 of the Illinois Municipal Code, effective July 1, 1961, and all
acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, and in compliance with an ordinance duly passed by the Mayor and Board of Trustees
of said Village, and published, in all respects as by law required.
It is hereby certified and recited that all acts, conditions and things required by the Constitution and laws of the State of Illinois, to exist or to
be done, precedent to and in the issuance of this bond, have existed and have been properly done, happened and been performed in
regular and due form and time as required by law; that the indebtedness of said Village of Hawthorn Woods, represented by this bond and
the issue of which it forms a part, and including all other indebtedness of said Village, howsoever evidenced and incurred, does not exceed
any constitutional or statutory limitations, and that provision has been made for the collection of a direct annual tax, in addition to all other
taxes, on all of the taxable property in said Village sufficient to pay the interest hereon as the same falls due and also to pay and discharge
the principal hereof at maturity.
This bond is subject to registration as to principal in the name of the holder on the books of the Village Treasurer, such registration to be
evidenced by notation of such Treasurer on the back hereof, and after such registration, no transfer hereof, except upon such books and
similarly noted hereon, shall be valid unless the last registration shall have been to bearer. Registration of this bond shall not affect the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 21/426
negotiability of the coupon hereto attached, which shall continue negotiable by delivery merely, notwithstanding registration hereof.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Village of Hawthorn Woods, Lake County, Illinois, by its Mayor and Board of Trustees, has caused this bond
to be signed by the Mayor of said Village and attested by its Village Clerk and countersigned by the Village Treasurer, and has caused the
corporate seal of said Village to be affixed hereto, and the coupon hereto attached to be signed and attested by the Mayor and Clerk,
respectively, by their respective facsimile signatures, and said officers do, by the execution hereof, adopt as and for their respective proper
signatures their respective facsimile signatures appearing on said coupon, all as of the first day of June, 1978.
Mayor
ATTEST:
Village Clerk
COUNTERSIGNED:
Village Treasurer
(Form Of Coupon)
Number 1 $500.00
On the first day of December, 1980, the Village of Hawthorn Woods, Lake County, Illinois, will pay to bearer Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00)
in lawful money of the United States of America at the First State Bank of Lake Zurich, Lake Zurich, Illinois, for interest due that day on its
Working Cash Fund Bond, dated June 1, 1978, numbered 1.
(Facsimile Signature)
Mayor
ATTEST:
(Facsimile Signature)
Village Clerk
(Form Of Registration Of Ownership)
Date of
Registration
Name of Registered Owner
Signature of Treasurer
Village of
Hawthorn Woods
(Ord. 269-78, 6-13-1978; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
1-9A-5: TAX LEVIED:
A. Amount Of Tax: For the purpose of providing the funds required to pay the interest on said bonds promptly when and as the same falls
due, and to pay and discharge the principal thereof at maturity, there be and there is hereby levied upon all of the taxable property within
the village in each year while any of said bonds are outstanding, a direct annual tax sufficient for that purpose, and that there be and
there is hereby levied on all of the taxable property in the village, in addition to all other taxes, the following direct annual tax:
For The Year
A Tax Sufficient To
Produce The Sum Of:
1979 $42,900.00 for principal and interest through December 1, 1980
Principal or interest falling due at any time when there are insufficient funds on hand to pay the same shall be paid promptly when due from
current funds on hand in advancement of the collection of the taxes herein levied, and when said taxes shall have been collected,
reimbursement shall be made to the said funds in the amount thus advanced.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 22/426
B. Collection Of Tax: As soon as this article becomes effective, a copy hereof, certified by the clerk of the village, which certificate shall
recite that this article has been passed by the village board of trustees and duly published according to law, shall be filed with the county
clerk of Lake County, Illinois, who shall, in and for the year 1979, ascertain the rate percent required to produce the aggregate tax
hereinbefore provided to be levied upon the property in the village for said year, and extend the same for collection on the tax books in
connection with other taxes levied in said year in and by the village for general corporate purposes of the village, and in said year, such
annual tax shall be collected by the village in like manner as taxes for general corporate purposes for said year are levied and collected,
and when collected, such taxes shall be used for the purpose of paying principal and interest upon the bonds herein authorized when
same mature. (Ord. 269-78, 6-13-1978)
1-9A-6: PROCEEDS FROM TAX LEVY AND BOND SALE:
The funds derived from such levy be and the same are hereby appropriated and set aside for the sole and only purpose of paying principal
of and interest on said bonds when and as the same become due. The funds derived from the sale of said bonds shall be set apart in the
working cash fund of the village created by this article and shall be used only for the purposes and in the manner provided by law. The said
fund and the money therein shall not be regarded as current assets available for appropriation and shall not be appropriated by the
corporate authorities in the annual appropriation ordinance. All investment of funds shall be in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-7-4. All monies realized by the village from the sale or redemption of the securities authorized for investment under said
paragraph 5/8-7-4 shall be placed in the working cash fund. Interest on the investments shall be transferred to the general corporate fund of
the village as authorized by said paragraph 5/8-7-4. (Ord. 269-78, 6-13-1978; amd. Ord. 432-89, 10-9-1989)
Chapter 10
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1-10-1: VILLAGE SEAL:
A. Seal Established: The village seal shall bear the inscription: "Village of Hawthorn Woods, Ill. Corporate Seal" and date of incorporation
and is hereby established and declared now to be the seal of the village.
B. Custody Of Seal: The village seal, as established herein, shall remain in the custody of the village clerk1 to be used by said clerk and the
president of the village whenever required by law. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958)
Chapter 11
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
1-11-1: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VILLAGE CODE VIOLATIONS:
The village hereby provides for a system of administrative adjudication of village code violations to the extent expressly authorized by the
Illinois municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., as amended, which is expressly adopted herein by reference ("act").
As used herein, a "system of administrative adjudication" shall include the adjudication of any violation of this code, except for:
A. Building code violations that must be adjudicated pursuant to division 31.1 of article 11 of the Illinois municipal code; and
B. Any offense under the Illinois vehicle code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles; and
C. Any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 1289-09, 8-17-2009)
1-11-2: PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The adoption by the village of a system of administrative adjudication does not preclude the village from using other methods to enforce
municipal ordinances, including, but not limited to, relief in the circuit court for the nineteenth judicial circuit, Lake County, Illinois, or any
other court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1289-09, 8-17-2009)
1-11-3: CODE HEARING UNITS; POWERS OF HEARING OFFICERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 23/426
A. There is hereby established a code hearing unit in the village of Hawthorn Woods municipal government. The code hearing unit shall
have jurisdiction to adjudicate any violation of this code (hereinafter referred to from time to time as "code violations") as provided for in
section 1-11-1 of this chapter.
B. Hearing officers shall preside over all administrative adjudication hearings. The powers and duties of hearing officers shall include the
following:
1. Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the existence of the code violation; and
2. Issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their
representatives; and
3. Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
4. Issuing and serving a determination, based on the evidence presented at the hearing, of whether a code violation exists. The
determination shall be in writing and shall include findings of fact, decision, and order including the fine, penalty, or action with which
the respondent must comply, or dismissing the case if a violation is not proved; and
5. Imposing penalties consistent with applicable code provisions and assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged
violation, except, however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have authority to: a) impose a penalty of incarceration, or b)
impose a fine in excess of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). The maximum monetary fine imposed pursuant to this provision shall
be exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs imposed to secure compliance with this code and shall not be applicable to cases to
enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the village.
C. Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings, hearing officers shall have successfully completed a formal training program
which includes the following:
1. Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings which they will conduct; and
2. Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will adjudicate; and
3. Observation of administrative hearings; and
4. Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing final orders.
In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years.
D. A proceeding before the code hearing unit shall be instituted by the filing of a written pleading by an authorized official of the village, as
provided in the act. (Ord. 1289-09, 8-17-2009)
1-11-4: HEARING PROCEEDINGS:
When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code violation finds a code violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation
on a multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates: a) the name and address of the defendant, b) the type and nature of the
violation, c) the date and time the violation was observed, and d) the names of witnesses to the violation.
The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing unit where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report
and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty
(30) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is reported. However, if the code violation involves a municipal ordinance regulating
truants, the hearing date shall not be less than seven (7) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is reported.
One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the code hearing unit and shall be part of the record hearing, one
copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual representing the village in the case so that he or she may prepare evidence of the
code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first class mail to the
defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the hearing. In municipalities with a population under three
million (3,000,000), if the violation report form requires the respondent to answer within a certain amount of time, the village must reply to
the answer within the same amount of time afforded to the respondent.
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this chapter except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
authorized by a hearing officer under this chapter shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. The case for the village may be presented by an
attorney designated by the village or by any other village employee, except that the case for the village shall not be presented by an
employee of the code hearing unit. The case for the defendant may be presented by the defendant, his or her attorney, or any other agent
or representative of the defendant. (Ord. 1289-09, 8-17-2009)
1-11-5: RULES OF EVIDENCE:
The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in an adjudicatory hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 24/426
it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. (Ord. 1289-09, 8-17-2009)
1-11-6: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by the code hearing unit shall constitute a final determination for the purposes of judicial review, and shall be subject to
the Illinois administrative review law1. (Ord. 1289-09, 8-17-2009)
1-11-7: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
A. Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of
or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois administrative review law are a debt due and owing the village and
may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
B. After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of
the code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court for the purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings,
decision, and order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and orders against a
person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision, and
order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued
in accordance with this chapter and the applicable village ordinance. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any
method provided for by section 2-203 of the code of civil procedure or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that the total
amount of fines, other sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order does not exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and order was entered in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and the applicable village ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this chapter and for judicial
review as provided in this chapter:
1. The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the
recovery of money.
2. The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer
to correct a code violation. (Ord. 1289-09, 8-17-2009)
1-11-8: IMPACT ON EXISTING ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEMS:
This chapter shall not affect the validity of systems of administrative adjudication that were authorized by state law and in existence prior to
the effective date hereof. (Ord. 1289-09, 8-17-2009)
Title 2
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Chapter 1
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
2-1-1: BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby created a board of local improvements for the village. This board shall consist of the mayor of the village and the village
trustees. The village mayor shall be ex officio president of the board. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-1-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of local improvements shall have such powers and duties as are or may be given to it by the statutes of the state of Illinois1, or
the ordinances of the village. (Ord. 105-58, 7-15-1958)
Chapter 2
PLANNING, BUILDING AND ZONING COMMISSION
2-2-1: COMMISSION CREATED, APPOINTMENT, ORGANIZATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 25/426
A planning, building and zoning commission is hereby created. The word "board", "committee" or "commission" when used in this section
shall be construed to mean the planning, building and zoning commission. The said commission shall consist of seven (7) members
appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of trustees of the village. All members of the planning, building and zoning commission
shall be residents of the village and said members shall serve four (4) year staggered terms with half alternating every two (2) years. The
mayor of the village shall have the power to appoint the chair and remove any member of said commission for cause and after a public
hearing. Vacancies upon said commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the
manner herein provided for the appointment of such member. (Ord. 1339-10, 7-19-2010)
2-2-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The planning, building and zoning commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Official Comprehensive Plan:
1. To prepare and recommend to the mayor and board of trustees a comprehensive plan for the present and future development or
redevelopment of the village. Such plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or functional parts, each of which, when
adopted, shall be the official comprehensive plan, or part thereof, of the village. This plan may include reasonable requirements with
reference to streets, alleys, public grounds and other improvements hereinafter specified. The plan, as recommended by the
planning, building and zoning commission and as thereafter adopted, shall be applicable to land situated within the corporate limits
and contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality.
Such plan may be implemented by ordinance: a) establishing reasonable standards of design for subdivision and for resubdivision of
unimproved land and of area subject to redevelopment in respect to public improvements as herein defined; b) establishing
reasonable requirements governing the location, width, course and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public
service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for any purposes,
stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewer and sewage collection and treatment; and c) may designate land
suitable for annexation to the village and the recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation.
2. To recommend changes, from time to time, in the official comprehensive plan.
3. To prepare and recommend to the mayor and board of trustees, from time to time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of
the official comprehensive plan.
4. To give aid to the village officials charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further
the making of these projects, and generally, to promote the realization of the official comprehensive plan.
B. Records And Report: The commission shall keep written records of its proceedings which shall be open at all times to public inspection.
The commission shall also file an annual report with the mayor and board of trustees setting forth its transitions and recommendations.
C. Subdivision Review: The planning, building and zoning commission shall review all plans for subdivision, and upon reviewing the same,
shall report its findings to the mayor and board of trustees of the village.
D. Hearings:
1. All changes in the nature of a general change in the zoning title of the village shall be enacted only after a public hearing before the
village planning, building and zoning commission, and after its recommendation to the mayor and board of trustees.
2. Changing the zoning classification as to a specific piece of property shall be done only after a public hearing before the planning,
building and zoning commission of the village, and after its recommendation to the mayor and board of trustees.
3. Before any special uses are granted or any planned unit development is approved, there shall be a public hearing before the
planning, building and zoning commission and said commission shall report to the mayor and board of trustees of the village its
findings in respect thereto.
E. Appearance Codes; Lists Of Approved Materials: To make recommendations to the mayor and board of trustees with respect to
proposed appearance codes and lists of approved materials for the village.
F. Review And Report: To review and report on all matters referred to the committee by the mayor and board of trustees or the chief
operating officer.
G. Consult With Others: To consult with and cooperate with other committees, commissions, departments, officers and other governmental
bodies on matters affecting the appearance of the village.
H. Study Proposed Public Improvements: To study exterior design drawings, landscape and site plans and materials for any proposed
public works or public improvements (except for repair, replacement or substitution of existing structures) and to make
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 26/426
recommendations thereon to the mayor and board of trustees.
I. Appearance Of Property; Applications For Certificates Of Approval: To administer all matters under this code relating to the appearance
of property, review all applications for certificates of approval, and make recommendations to the village board of trustees with respect
to all certificates of approval required under title 9, "Zoning", of this code. (Ord. 1339-10, 7-19-2010)
J. Applications For Special Uses: Notwithstanding any provision contained in title 9, "Zoning", of this code, to the contrary, to hear
applications for and thereafter submit reports of findings and recommendations thereon to the village board with respect to the following
special uses:
Personal wireless service facilities.
Signs.
Temporary sales trailers.
All applications shall be processed and hearings conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 9-14-4 of this code. (Ord. 1388-
11, 11-21-2011)
K. Additional Powers: The planning, building and zoning commission shall exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by
this section as may be conferred by the mayor and board of trustees or the chief operating officer. (Ord. 1339-10, 7-19-2010)
2-2-3: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The village clerk shall furnish the planning, building and zoning commission for its consideration a copy of all ordinances, plans and data
relative to public improvements of any nature. The planning, building and zoning commission may report in relation thereto if it deems a
report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the board of trustees. (Ord. 1339-10, 7-19-2010)
2-2-4: EXPENDITURES:
The commission may, at the discretion of the board of trustees, employ necessary help whose salaries, wages and other necessary
expenses shall be provided for by adequate appropriation made by the board of trustees from public funds. If said planning, building and
zoning commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the chief operating
officer or the board of trustees and appropriations by the board of trustees therefor. (Ord. 1339-10, 7-19-2010)
2-2-5: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL:
A. Consideration Of Applications: All applications for certificate of approval shall be filed with the village clerk or the building department.
The village clerk shall forward such applications to the planning, building and zoning commission for consideration in a timely manner.
B. Conduct Of Review By Commission: Procedures for conduct of the commission's review of applications and the submission of all
information deemed necessary to enable the commission to make its recommendations shall be in accordance with the commission's
rules of procedure. Such rules shall specify the type and quantity of plans, color samples and material samples to be submitted. (Ord.
1339-10, 7-19-2010)
2-2-6: CERTIFICATES OF APPROVAL:
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall be construed as herein defined:
APPEARANCE: The outward aspect visible to the public.
APPURTENANCES: The visible, functional objects necessary to and part of buildings.
ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER: The composite or aggregate of the characteristics of structure, form, materials and function of a
building, group of buildings, or other architectural composition.
ARCHITECTURAL CONCEPT: The basic aesthetic idea of a building, or group of buildings or structures, including the site and
landscape development, which produces the architectural character.
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: A prominent or significant part or element of a building, structure or site.
ARCHITECTURAL STYLE: The characteristic form and detail, as of buildings of a particular historic period.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 27/426
ATTRACTIVE: Having qualities that arouse interest and pleasure in the observer.
BERM: A raised form of earth to provide screening or to improve the aesthetic character.
COHESIVENESS: Unity of composition between design elements of a building or a group of buildings and the landscape development.
COMPATIBILITY: Harmony in the appearance of two (2) or more buildings, structures and landscape developments in the same vicinity.
CONSERVATION: The protection and care which prevent destruction or deterioration of historical or otherwise significant structures,
buildings, or natural resources.
DECORATIVE SCREEN: A wall or fence intended to partially or entirely cut off visibility to the area behind it.
EXTERIOR BUILDING COMPONENT: An essential and visible part of the exterior of a building.
EXTERNAL ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: The architectural style and general arrangement of such portion of a building or structure as
is designated to be open to view from a public street, place, or way, including the kind, color and texture of the building material of such
portion and the type of windows, doors, lights, attached or ground signs and other fixtures appurtenant to such portion.
HARMONY: A quality which produces an aesthetically pleasing whole as in arrangement of varied architectural and landscape
elements.
LANDSCAPE: Elements of nature, topography, buildings and other manmade objects combined in relation to one another.
LOGIC OF DESIGN: Accepted principles and criteria of validity in the solution of the problem of design.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT: Equipment, devices and accessories, the use of which relates to water supply, drainage, heating,
ventilating, air conditioning and similar purposes.
MISCELLANEOUS STRUCTURES: Structures, other than buildings, visible from public ways. Examples are: memorials, stagings,
antennas, water tanks and towers, sheds, shelters, fences and walls, kennels, transformers, drive-up facilities.
PLANT MATERIALS: Trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, grasses, perennials, annuals and bulbs.
PROPORTION: Relationship of parts of a building, landscape, structures or buildings to each other and to the whole - balance.
RULES OF PROCEDURE: Regulations adopted by the commission for the administration of duties delegated by the mayor and board
of trustees.
SCALE: Harmonious relationship of the size of parts to one another and to the human figure.
SCREENING: Structure of planting which conceals from view from public ways the areas behind such structure or planting.
SHRUB: A multistemmed woody plant other than a tree.
SITE BREAK: A structural or landscape device to interrupt long vistas and create visual interest in a site development.
STREET HARDWARE: Objects other than buildings, structures and plantings located in streets and public ways and outside of
buildings. Examples are: lampposts, utility poles, traffic lights, traffic signs, benches, litter containers, planting containers, letter boxes,
fire hydrants.
STREETSCAPE: The scene as may be observed along a public street or way composed of natural and manmade components,
including buildings, paving, plantings, street hardware and miscellaneous structures.
UTILITY HARDWARE: Devices such as poles, cross arms, transformer and vaults, gas pressure regulating assemblies, hydrants and
buffalo boxes that are used for water, gas, oil, sewer, cable TV and electrical services to a building or project.
B. Purpose: The purpose of the certificate of approval is to foster the aesthetic growth of the village, and protect against deterioration of its
visual character, harmony and beauty, in order to preserve and enhance the property values, tax base and public health, safety and
welfare of the village. The certificate of approval process is not intended to restrict imagination, innovation or variety, but rather to focus
on design principles which will preserve and enhance the visual appearance of the village and prevent decay and blight.
C. Criteria For Issuance Of A Certificate Of Approval:
1. Relationship Of Buildings To The Site:
a. The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape, and to provide for adequate planting, pedestrian
movement and parking areas.
b. Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of restriction is encouraged to provide an interesting relationship between
buildings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 28/426
c. Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, building wall extensions, plantings, berms or other innovative means so as
to largely screen parking areas from view of public ways.
d. The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and adjoining buildings.
e. Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be underground.
f. The architectural character of the building shall be in keeping with the topographical dictates of the site.
g. Adjacent buildings of different styles shall be made compatible by such means as screens, site breaks and materials.
h. Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided.
i. Harmony in texture, lines and masses is required. Monotony shall be avoided.
j. Buildings shall have similar scale to those in the surrounding area.
2. Landscape And Site Treatment: Landscape elements included in these criteria consist of all forms of planting and vegetation, ground
forms, rock groupings, water patterns and all visible construction except buildings and utilitarian structures.
a. Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved.
Modification to topography will be permitted where it contributes to good appearance.
b. Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces and other paved areas shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking and,
if seating is provided, for sitting.
c. Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas and important axes, and provide shade.
Spectacular effects shall be reserved for special locations only.
d. Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials, and by correlation with adjacent
developments.
e. Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture and color and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous
to the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the design and of good appearance shall be used.
f. In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs,
tree guards or other devices.
g. Parking areas and trafficways shall be enhanced with landscaped spaces containing trees or tree groupings. Shrubs shall be used
only where they will not require excessive maintenance.
h. Shade trees in parking areas or areas of extensive hard surfacing should be given special drainage considerations. They could be
tiled, have curbs put around them and have the soil mounded up in the curbed areas.
i. Screening of service yards and other places which tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls or plantings or
combination of both. Screening shall be equally effective in winter and summer.
j. In areas where general planting will not prosper, other materials, such as walls and pavings of wood, brick, stone, gravel and
cobbles, shall be used. Carefully selected plants shall be combined with such materials where possible.
k. Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and fixtures shall
be of a design and size compatible with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design, and excessive
brightness and brilliant colors avoided.
3. Building Design:
a. Quality Of Design: Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on quality of its design and relationship to
surroundings.
b. Scale: Buildings shall have good scale and be in harmonious conformance with permanent neighboring developments.
c. Material Requirements:
(1) Materials shall have good architectural character and shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings.
Materials shall be limited to those materials included on the list of approved materials, as adopted and amended from time to
time by the mayor and board of trustees, a copy of which shall be on file with, and available from, the village clerk. An application
for a certificate of approval may include a request that specified new materials be added to the list of approved materials.
(2) Materials from the list of approved materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of buildings and the design in which they
are used. Buildings shall have the same materials, or those which are architecturally harmonious, used for all building walls and
other exterior building components wholly or partly visible from public ways.
(3) Inappropriate materials and methods, and those which will produce inconsistency with the structure of the building, shall be
avoided.
(4) Materials shall be of durable quality.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 29/426
(5) In a design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall meet the other criteria for materials.
d. Building Components: Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets shall have good proportions and
relationship to one another.
e. Colors: Colors shall be harmonious, with bright or brilliant colors used only for accent.
f. Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground or buildings shall be screened from public
view with materials harmonious with the building or they shall be located so as not to be visible from any public ways.
g. Exterior Lighting: Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards, mailboxes and all exposed
accessories shall be harmonious with building design.
h. Refuse: Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards and exterior work areas shall be screened from view from
public ways using materials as stated in criteria for equipment screening. In addition to the above, refuse/recycling container
enclosures shall be constructed in accordance with such standards as shall be established by ordinance from time to time by the
board of trustees.
i. Variation Of Detail: Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form and siting
shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting of individual buildings may be used to prevent a
monotonous appearance.
j. Exotic Designs: Inappropriate, incompatible, bizarre and exotic designs shall be avoided.
4. Signs:
a. Wall signs, where permitted, shall be part of the architectural concept. Size, color, lettering, location and arrangement shall be
harmonious with the building design and shall be compatible with signs on adjoining buildings. Signs shall have good proportions.
b. Ground signs shall be designed to be compatible with the architecture of the building. The same criteria applicable to wall signs
shall apply to ground signs.
c. Identification signs of a prototype design shall conform to the criteria for building and ground signs.
d. Materials used in signs shall have good architectural character and be harmonious with building design and surrounding
landscape.
e. Every sign shall have good scale in its design and in its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.
f. Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. Excessive brightness and brilliant colors shall be avoided. Exterior ground
mounted lighting shall be harmonious with the design. No internal lighting shall be used.
5. Miscellaneous Structures And Street Hardware:
a. Miscellaneous structures include any structures, other than buildings, visible to view from any public way or ways. Street hardware
includes all objects not commonly referred to as structures and located in streets and public ways and outside buildings.
b. Miscellaneous structures and street hardware located on private property shall be designed to be part of the architectural concept
of design and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale shall be good, colors shall be in harmony with buildings
and surroundings and proportions shall be attractive.
c. Miscellaneous structures and street hardware located in public ways and other public property shall be harmonious with design of
adjacent buildings, other structures and landscaping.
d. Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall meet the criteria applicable to site, landscape,
buildings and signs.
6. Maintenance; Planning And Design Factors:
a. Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together
with the types of finishes and other protective measures, must be conducive to easy maintenance and upkeep.
b. Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures and devices shall
be incorporated for protection against the elements, neglect, damage and abuse.
c. Provision for washing and cleaning of buildings and structures and control of dirt and refuse, shall be included in the design. Such
configurations that tend to catch and accumulate debris, leaves, trash, dirt and rubbish shall be avoided.
7. Bulk Regulations: That all buildings, structures and/or uses are in conformance with all applicable bulk regulations contained in title 9,
"Zoning", of this code.
D. Issuance Of Certificates Of Approval:
1. The commission shall review all applications for certificates of approval. The commission shall review the information and materials
submitted and determine whether the proposed development or project meets all of the criteria specified hereinabove. The
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 30/426
commission shall forward its findings and recommendations to the village board of trustees within ninety (90) days of the date of
application. The commission may, in its discretion, offer suggestions as to modifications to any proposed development plan which
would further advance the goals of this section. The commission shall specify the reason, or reasons, for any recommended denial of
any application. The village board of trustees shall issue a certificate of approval, or deny the application for same, within sixty (60)
days of receipt of the commission's recommendation.
2. The issuance of a certificate of approval under this section shall not obviate compliance with any other statute, ordinance, section,
rule or regulation of the village or any other governmental body. All construction under a certificate of approval shall be in substantial
conformity to the plans and specifications submitted to, and approved by, the village. Any substantial deviation from said plans and
specifications shall render the certificate of approval void. (Ord. 1339-10, 7-19-2010)
Chapter 3
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
2-3-1: BOARD CREATED, APPOINTMENT, ORGANIZATION:
A board of appeals is hereby created. The word "board" when used in this chapter shall be construed to mean the board of appeals. The
board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of trustees of the village. The members of
said board shall serve respectively for the following terms: one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4)
years, one for five (5) years, one for six (6) years, and one for seven (7) years, the successor to each member so appointed to serve for a
term of five (5) years. One of the members so appointed shall be named as chairman at the time of his appointment by the mayor and
board of trustees. The village mayor shall have the power to remove any member of said board for cause and after a public hearing.
Vacancies upon said board shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the manner herein
provided for the appointment of such member. The mayor may appoint the same members to the zoning board of appeals as are appointed
to the plan commission with the approval of the board of trustees. (Ord. 226-76, 7-13-1976; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-3-2: JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY:
The zoning board of appeals is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority:
A. To hear and decide an appeal from an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector under
the zoning title1 and to report its recommendations to the village board.
B. To hear all other matters referred to it upon which it is required to decide under the zoning title and to report its recommendations to the
village board.
C. To give its recommendations on matters as authorized by the zoning title in a specific case and after public hearing.
D. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the village board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the building inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under the
zoning title. (Ord. 226-76, 7-13-1976)
2-3-3: MEETINGS AND RULES:
A. All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman or at such other times as the board may determine.
Said meetings shall be open to the public.
B. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in the zoning title shall be given under oath and the chairman, or in his absence
the vice chairman or the secretary, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
C. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating the fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Findings of fact shall be included in the
minutes of each case of a requested variation, specifying the reasons for making or denying such variation.
D. Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
E. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with the statutes in such case made and provided. (Ord. 226-76, 7-13-
1976)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 31/426
Chapter 4
RESERVED
(Ord. 1609-15, 11-23-2015)
Chapter 5
RESERVED
(Ord. 1609-15, 11-23-2015)
Chapter 6
RESERVED
(Ord. 1339-10, 7-19-2010)
Chapter 7
RESERVED
(Ord. 1609-15, 11-23-2015)
Chapter 8
FINANCE COMMITTEE
2-8-1: CREATION, MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS:
A finance committee is hereby created in and for the village. Said committee shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be residents of
the village. All members shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and board of trustees of the village. All such members shall serve without
compensation. Appointments shall be made by the mayor with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. Members of the committee
shall not be deemed to be officers of the village. (Ord. 881-99, 11-8-1999; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-8-2: OFFICERS:
A. The mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, annually appoint one of the members of the committee as the
chairperson and one of the members as the vice chairperson thereof. Each officer shall serve in such capacity until a successor is
appointed. (Ord. 1492-14, 6-16-2014)
B. The chairperson of the committee shall be the chairperson for all meetings thereof, and shall make such reports to the mayor and board
of trustees of the village as may from time to time be requested. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson shall assume
the duties of the chairperson. (Ord. 881-99, 11-8-1999; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-8-3: MEETINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 32/426
A. Prior to December 1 of each year, the committee shall provide to the village board a list of the dates on which the committee shall
conduct its regular meetings during the forthcoming year. The village clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper having general
circulation within the village, notice stating the time and location of all meetings of the committee. Regularly scheduled meeting may be
rescheduled and special meetings may be called from time to time.
B. All meetings of the committee shall be held in conformity with the Illinois open meetings act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq.,
as amended from time to time. A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. No meeting of the committee
shall be held without a quorum being present. A majority vote of the members present at a duly constituted meeting shall be required for
any action of the committee. (Ord. 1709-16, 11-28-2016)
2-8-4: ORGANIZATION, RECORDS:
The members of the committee shall, at their first regularly scheduled meeting in or after January of each year, elect a secretary and such
other officers as they deem necessary or appropriate. The committee shall adopt its own rules of procedure, and shall keep written record
of its proceedings. Minutes of committee meetings shall be filed with the village clerk as public record. (Ord. 1709-16, 11-28-2016)
2-8-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The committee is an advisory body, and shall have such powers and duties as the mayor and board of trustees may, from time to time,
determine. The initial powers and duties of the committee shall be as follows:
A. Review proposed village appropriation ordinances and budgets, and make recommendations with respect thereto, to the mayor and
board of trustees or as otherwise directed by the mayor and board of trustees. (Ord. 881-99, 11-8-1999; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
B. Investigate potential additional and/or alternative revenue sources and methods of financing fiscal obligations of the village. (Ord. 881-
99, 11-8-1999)
C. Review and report on proposed ordinances and developments, and such other matters that may have a fiscal impact on the village, as
may be referred to the committee by the mayor and board of trustees. (Ord. 881-99, 11-8-1999; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
Chapter 9
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
2-9-1: PURPOSE:
It is declared to be the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the village that all emergency management programs of this village be
coordinated to the maximum extent with the comparable functions of the federal and state governments, including their various
departments and agencies, of other municipalities and localities, and private agencies of every type, to the end that the most effective
preparation and use may be made of manpower, resources, and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may occur. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-
2000)
2-9-2: LIMITATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
A. Interfere with the course of conduct or a private labor dispute, except that actions otherwise authorized by this chapter or other laws may
be taken when necessary to forestall or mitigate imminent or existing danger to public health or safety;
B. Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public affairs, but any communications facility or organization (including, but not
limited to, radio and television stations, wire services, and newspapers) may be requested to transmit or print public service messages
furnishing information or instructions in connection with a disaster;
C. Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces, firefighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States, or of any
personnel therefor, when on active duty, but state and local emergency operations plans shall place reliance upon the forces available
for performance of functions related to disaster emergencies; (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 33/426
D. Limit, modify, or abridge the authority of the village mayor and the village board to exercise any other powers vested in them under the
constitution, statutes, or common law of this state, independent of or in conjunction with any provisions of this chapter, or prohibit any
contract or association pursuant to article VII, section 10 of the Illinois constitution. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-
2005)
2-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and terms shall have the definitions hereinafter
ascribed:
ASSISTANT COORDINATOR: The person assigned as the assistant to the emergency management coordinator. The assistant coordinator
will complete, within the prescribed time, all training required by the Illinois emergency management agency.
COORDINATOR: The person assigned as emergency management coordinator with the duty of carrying out the requirements of this
chapter. The coordinator will complete within the prescribed time all training required by the Illinois emergency management agency.
DISASTER: An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or
technological cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, hazardous materials spill or other water contamination
requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended periods of severe and inclement
weather, drought, infestation, explosion, critical shortages of essential fuels and energy, riot, or hostile military or paramilitary action.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The efforts of this village to develop, plan, analyze, conduct, implement and maintain programs for disaster
mitigation.
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN: The written plan of the village describing the organization, mission and functions of the government
and supporting services for responding to and recovery from disasters.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: The coordination of functions by the village, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, as may be necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury and damage resulting from any natural or
technological causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, emergency aviation services,
medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons of
defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility
services and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to protecting life and
property.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION: Any village, city, or incorporated town or township, or other taxing body. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
2-9-4: CREATION:
A. There is hereby created a Hawthorn Woods emergency management agency and the position of coordinator of the Hawthorn Woods
emergency management agency, herein called the "coordinator", who shall be the head thereof. The village mayor, with the advice and
consent of the village board, shall appoint the coordinator. He/she shall serve at the pleasure of the village mayor. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-
2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
B. The Hawthorn Woods emergency management agency shall obtain, with village board approval, such technical, clerical, stenographic
and other administrative personnel, and may make such expenditures within their appropriation thereof as may be necessary to carry
out the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
C. The coordinator, subject to the direction and control of the village mayor, shall be the executive head of the Hawthorn Woods emergency
management agency, and shall be responsible under the direction of the village mayor for carrying out the program for emergency
management operations of this village. The coordinator shall coordinate the activities of all organizations for emergency management
operations within this village and shall maintain liaison, and cooperate with the civil defense and emergency management agencies and
organizations of Lake County, other counties and municipalities, and the federal and state governments.
D. In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve by the coordinator, the assistant coordinator or any persons
designated by the village mayor, shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 893-
00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
E. The Hawthorn Woods emergency management agency shall take an integral part in the development and revision of the local
emergency operations plan.
F. In the development of the emergency operations plan, the Hawthorn Woods emergency management agency shall interrelate with
business, labor, industry, agriculture, civic and volunteer organizations, and community leaders.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 34/426
G. The Hawthorn Woods emergency management agency shall:
1. Determine the requirements of Hawthorn Woods for food, clothing and other necessities in the event of an emergency;
2. Develop an emergency operations plan that meets the standards promulgated by the Illinois emergency management agency, and
submit said plan to the Illinois emergency management agency for approval. Said emergency operations plan shall provide for the
emergency management of this village, shall be integrated into and coordinated with disaster plans of the county, state and federal
governments and of other political subdivisions, and may include:
a. Prevention and minimization of injury and damage caused by disaster;
b. Prompt and effective response to disaster;
c. Emergency relief;
d. Identification of areas particularly vulnerable to disasters;
e. Recommendations for zoning, building and other land use controls, safety measures for securing permanent structures and other
preventative preparedness measures designed to eliminate or reduce disasters or their impact;
f. Authorization and procedures for the erection or other construction of temporary works designed to protect against or mitigate
danger, damage or loss from flood, conflagration or other disaster;
g. Organization of village manpower and chains of command;
h. Coordination of local emergency management activities;
i. Other necessary matters;
3. Review and revise the local emergency operations plan every other year;
4. Establish a register of persons with types of training and skills in emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery;
5. Establish a register of government and private response resources available for use in a disaster; (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
6. Prepare, for issuance by the village mayor, ordinances, proclamations and regulations as necessary or appropriate in coping with
disasters; (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
7. Prepare and distribute to all appropriate officials in written form a clear and complete statement of the emergency responsibilities of
all local departments and officials and of the disaster chain of command;
8. Cooperate with the federal, state, county and village governments and any public or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose
of this chapter and in implementing programs for disaster prevention, preparation, response, and recovery;
9. Initiate and coordinate planning for the establishment of an emergency operations center, and ensure the emergency operations
center is maintained and ready for use immediately when needed;
10. Do all other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
2-9-5: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT POWERS OF THE VILLAGE MAYOR:
A. The Hawthorn Woods village mayor shall have the general direction and control of the emergency management agency, and shall be
responsible for the carrying out of the provisions of this chapter.
B. In performing the duties under this chapter, the village mayor is authorized to cooperate with county, state and federal governments and
with other municipalities and political subdivisions in all matters pertaining to emergency management operations defined in this
chapter.
C. In performing the duties under this chapter, the village mayor is further authorized: (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-
2005)
1. To make, amend and rescind all lawful necessary orders, rules and regulations of the emergency operations plan to carry out the
provisions of this chapter within the limits of the authority conferred upon him.
2. In accordance with the emergency operations plan, and out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to procure and preposition
supplies, medicines, materials and equipment to institute training programs and public information programs, and to take all other
preparatory steps, including the partial or full mobilization of emergency management organizations in advance of actual disaster to
ensure the furnishing of adequately trained and equipped forces for disaster operations.
3. Out of funds appropriated for such purposes, to make such studies and surveys of the industries, resources and facilities in this
village as may be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the village for the emergency management phases of mitigation,
preparedness, response, and recovery, and to plan for the most efficient emergency use thereof. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 35/426
D. The village mayor is authorized to designate space in a village building, or elsewhere for the Hawthorn Woods emergency management
agency as its office.
E. The village mayor shall annually notify the Illinois emergency management agency of the manner in which the village is providing or
securing emergency management, identify the coordinator and furnish additional information relating thereto as the Illinois emergency
management agency requires. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-9-6: FINANCING:
A. It is the intent of the village board and declared to be the policy of the village that every effort shall be made to provide funds for disaster
emergencies. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
B. It is the village board's intent that the first recourse shall be to funds regularly appropriated to the Hawthorn Woods emergency
management agency. If the village mayor finds that the demands placed upon these funds in coping with a particular disaster are
unreasonably great, and, the governor has proclaimed the village a disaster, the village mayor may make application for funds from the
state disaster relief fund. If monies available from the fund are insufficient, and if the village mayor finds that other sources of money to
cope with the disaster are not available or are insufficient, the village mayor may issue a call for an immediate session of the village
board for the purpose of enacting ordinances as the board may deem necessary to transfer and expend monies appropriated for other
purposes, to borrow monies from the United States government or other public or private sources. If less than a quorum of the members
of the board is capable of convening in session to enact such ordinances for the transfer, expenditure or loan of such monies, the village
mayor is authorized to carry out those decisions until such time as a quorum of the board can convene. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd.
Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
C. In carrying out the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the Illinois emergency management agency act, the village may enter
into contracts and incur obligations necessary to place it in a position effectively to combat the disasters, to protect the health and safety
of persons, to protect property and to provide emergency assistance to victims of those disasters. If a disaster occurs, the village may
exercise the powers vested under this chapter in the light of the exigencies of the disaster and, excepting mandatory constitutional
requirements, without regard to the procedures and formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work,
entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of
supplies and materials, and the appropriation, expenditure, and disposition of public funds and property. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
D. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the village mayor's authority to apply for, administer and expend grants, gifts,
or payments in aid of disaster prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response or recovery. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05,
5-16-2005)
2-9-7: LOCAL DISASTERS:
A. Only the village mayor or the successors as described in this chapter may declare a local disaster. When declared by the village mayor,
any disaster declaration shall not be continued for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the village
board. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity, and
shall be filed promptly with the village clerk. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
B. The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activate the response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable local emergency
operations plans and to authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance thereunder. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
C. During a local disaster, the village mayor may suspend the provisions of any village ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct of
village business, or the orders, rules and regulations of any village agency, if strict compliance with the provisions of any ordinance, rule
or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency, as authorized by the "Illinois
emergency management agency act", provided that, if the village board meets at such time, the village mayor shall act subject to the
directions and restrictions imposed by the body. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-9-8: TESTING OF CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER WARNING DEVICES:
The testing of disaster warning devices including outdoor warning sirens shall be held only on the first Tuesday of each month at ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. Other disaster warning devices such as auto dialers and auto call-notification systems shall be tested annually on the first
Tuesday of March. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
2-9-9: MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The coordinator for the Hawthorn Woods emergency management agency may, in collaboration with other public agencies within his
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 36/426
immediate vicinity, develop or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements with other political subdivisions, municipal corporations or
bodies politic within this state for reciprocal disaster response and recovery in case a disaster is too great to be dealt with unassisted. The
mutual aid shall not, however, be effective unless and until approved by each of such political subdivisions, municipal corporations or
bodies of politic as are parties thereto, in the manner provided by law, and unless and until filed with and approved in writing by the director
of the Illinois emergency management agency. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state and local emergency management
operations plan and program, and in the event of such a "disaster" as defined in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the Hawthorn Woods
emergency management agency to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements. (Ord. 893-00, 3-
13-2000)
2-9-10: COMMUNICATIONS:
The Hawthorn Woods emergency management agency shall ascertain what means exist for rapid and efficient communications in times of
disaster emergencies. The agency shall consider the desirability of supplementing these communications resources or of integrating them
into a comprehensive system or network. In studying the character and feasibility of any system or its several parts, the agency shall
evaluate the possibility of multi-purpose use thereof for general village purposes. The agency shall make recommendations to the village
mayor as appropriate. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-9-11: IMMUNITY:
Neither the village nor, except in cases of negligence or wilful misconduct, the village mayor, or their agents, employees or representatives,
engaged in any emergency management operations or disaster activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this chapter or
any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, are liable for the death of or any injury of persons, or damage to property, as
a result of such activity. This section does not, however, affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be
entitled under this act, under the workers' compensation act or the workers' occupational diseases act, or under any pension law, and this
section does not affect the right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act of congress. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-
2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-9-12: PROFESSIONS, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS:
If such "disaster" as defined in this chapter occurs in this village and the services of persons who are competent to practice any profession,
trade or occupation are required in this village to cope with the disaster situation and it appears that the number of persons licensed or
registered in this village to practice such profession, trade or occupation may be insufficient for such purpose, then any persons who are
licensed elsewhere to practice any such profession, trade or occupation may, if a member of another political subdivision rendering aid in
this village pursuant to the order of the head of that political subdivision and upon the request of the village, or if otherwise requested so to
do by the village mayor or the coordinator of the village, during the time the disaster condition continues, practice such profession, trade or
occupation in this village without being licensed or registered in this village. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-9-13: APPROPRIATIONS FOR EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT OPERATIONS:
The village board may make appropriations for emergency management operations in the manner provided by law for making
appropriations for the ordinary expenses of such political subdivision. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
2-9-14: AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS OR LOANS:
Whenever the federal or state governments or any agency or officer thereof, or whenever any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the
village services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift or grant for purposes of emergency management, the village, acting
through the village mayor or through the village board, may accept such offer and upon such acceptance the village mayor or the village
board may authorize any officer of the village to receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the village.
(Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-9-15: ORDERS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. The village mayor shall file a copy of every rule, regulation or order and any amendment thereof made by him pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
B. The Hawthorn Woods emergency management agency established pursuant to this chapter, and the coordinator thereof, shall execute
and enforce such orders, rules and regulations as may be made by the governor under authority of the Illinois emergency management
agency act. The Hawthorn Woods emergency management agency shall have available for inspection at its office all orders, rules and
regulations made by the governor, or under this authority. The Illinois emergency management agency shall furnish such orders, rules
and regulations to the agency. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 37/426
2-9-16: UTILIZATION OF EXISTING AGENCIES, FACILITIES AND PERSONNEL:
In carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the village mayor and the coordinator of the Hawthorn Woods emergency management
agency are directed to utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of the village to
the maximum extent practicable, and the officers and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies are directed, upon request,
to cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the coordinator and the Hawthorn Woods emergency management agency.
(Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-9-17: NO PRIVATE LIABILITY:
A. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants a license or privilege, or
otherwise permits the designation or use of the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering
persons during an actual or impending disaster, or a mock or practice disaster response activity together with his successors in interest,
if any, shall not be civilly liable for negligently causing the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises
under such license, privilege or other permission, or for negligently causing loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
B. Any private person, firm, or corporation and employees and agents of such person, firm or corporation in the performance of a contract
with, and under direction of, the village under the provisions of this chapter, shall not be civilly liable for causing death of, or injury to,
any person or damage to any property except in the event of wilful misconduct.
C. Any private person, firm or corporation, and any employee of agency or such person, firm or corporation, who renders assistance or
advice at the request of the village during an actual or impending disaster, shall not be civilly liable for causing the death of, or injury to,
any person or damage to any property except in the event of wilful misconduct. The immunities provided in this subsection shall not
apply to any private person, firm or corporation, or to any employee or agent of such person, firm or corporation whose act or omission
caused in whole or in part such actual or impending disaster and who would otherwise be liable therefor. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
2-9-18: SUCCESSION:
A. In the event that the village mayor is unavailable, the powers of the office shall be exercised and duties shall be discharged by his
designated emergency interim successors in the order specified. The emergency interim successors shall exercise the powers and
discharge the duties of the office to which designated until such time as a vacancy which may exist shall be filled in accordance with
statutes, or until the village mayor, or a preceding emergency interim successor, again becomes available to exercise the powers and
discharge the duties of his office.
B. Emergency interim successors in the following order of succession are hereby designated for the village mayor: (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-
2000; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
1. Most senior village trustee.
2. Second most senior trustee. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
3. Chief operating officer. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
4. Chief of police. (Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
2-9-19: COMPENSATION:
The village board by its annual appropriations ordinance, may provide for the payment of the salary of the coordinator and such other office
staff and personnel as may be expressly provided for in this chapter. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any member of the agency
from receiving compensation from the state of Illinois emergency management agency under any provisions of that agency. (Ord. 893-00,
3-13-2000)
2-9-20: PERSONNEL OATH:
Each person, whether compensated or noncompensated, who is appointed to serve in any capacity with the Hawthorn Woods emergency
management agency, shall, before entering upon his duties, take an oath, in writing, before the coordinator of the Hawthorn Woods
emergency management agency or before a person authorized to take oaths in this village, which oath shall be filed with the coordinator of
the Hawthorn Woods emergency management agency, and which oath shall be as follows:
I, , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States
and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies,
foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 38/426
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force
or violence; and that during such time I am affiliated with the Hawthorn Woods Emergency Management Agency, I will not advocate nor
become a member of any political party or organization that advocate the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State
by force or violence.
(Ord. 893-00, 3-13-2000)
Chapter 10
TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE
(Rep. by Ord. 1198-07, 2-26-2007)
Chapter 11
BOARD OF POLICE COMMISSIONERS
2-11-1: CREATION; TERMS:
There is hereby created a board of police commissioners which shall consist of three (3) members, whose terms of office shall be three (3)
years and until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified, except as provided in section 2-11-3 of this chapter. (Ord.
980-02, 4-15-2002)
2-11-2: APPOINTMENT; VACANCIES:
The board of police commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the board of trustees. No such appointment,
however, shall be made by the mayor within the thirty (30) days before the expiration of his term of office. (Ord. 980-02, 4-15-2002; amd.
Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
Vacancies on the board of police commissioners shall be filled in the same manner as herein provided. (Ord. 980-02, 4-15-2002)
2-11-3: FIRST APPOINTMENTS:
Within thirty (30) days after this chapter becomes effective, the mayor shall appoint the first members of the board. One of the members
shall be appointed to serve until the end of the current municipal fiscal year, another to serve until the end of the municipal fiscal year next
ensuing, and the third to serve until the end of the municipal fiscal year second next ensuing, but every member shall serve until his
successor is appointed and has qualified. (Ord. 980-02, 4-15-2002; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-11-4: CHAIRMAN; SECRETARY; QUORUM:
The board members shall elect from its membership a chairman and secretary to serve during the municipal fiscal year. In addition, the
board may employ such clerical staff as may be reasonably necessary to assist the board in fulfilling its duties. A majority of the board
constitutes a quorum for the conduct of all business. (Ord. 980-02, 4-15-2002)
2-11-5: QUALIFICATIONS; OATH; BOND; REMOVAL:
The members of the board shall be considered officers of the village, and shall file an oath and a fidelity bond in such amount as may be
required by the mayor and board of trustees of the village. No person holding an office within any municipality shall be a member of the
board of police commissioners or the secretary thereof. The acceptance of any such office by a member of the board shall be treated as a
resignation of his office as a member of the board or the secretary thereof. No person shall be appointed a member of the board of police
commissioners who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the state of Illinois or comparable laws of any other state or the
United States. No person shall be appointed a member of the board of police commissioners who is related, either by blood or marriage, up
to the degree of first cousin, to any elected official of the village. No more than two (2) members of the board shall belong to the same
political party existing in the village at the time of such appointments and as defined in 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2. If only one or
no political party exists in the village at the time of such appointments, then state or national political party affiliations shall be considered in
making such appointments. Party affiliations shall be determined by an affidavit of the person appointed as a member of the board.
Members shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard within thirty (30)
days in his or their own defense, before a regular meeting of the mayor and board of trustees of the village. The majority vote of the mayor
and board of trustees of the village shall be required to remove any such member from office. (Ord. 980-02, 4-15-2002; amd. Ord. 1125-05,
5-16-2005)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 39/426
2-11-6: POWERS; DUTIES:
The board of police commissioners shall have all the powers and authority, and shall perform such duties as are provided and set forth in
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-1 et seq. (Ord. 980-02, 4-15-2002)
2-11-7: SECRETARY OF BOARD; DUTIES; SEAL:
The secretary of the board shall have all the powers and authority and shall perform such duties as are provided and set forth in 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-20, including:
A. Keep the minutes of the board's proceedings;
B. Be the custodian of all records pertaining to the business of the board;
C. Keep a record of all examinations held;
D. Perform all other duties the board prescribes; and
E. Be the custodian of the seal of the board, if one is adopted, and the board is hereby authorized to adopt an official seal and then
prescribe the form thereof by resolution of the board. (Ord. 980-02, 4-15-2002)
2-11-8: CHIEF OF POLICE; APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL:
Pursuant to the authority contained in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-4 and 5/3.1-30-5, the village mayor, with the advice and
consent of the corporate authorities, shall appoint the chief of police. The chief of police may be removed or discharged by the village
mayor. In such case, the village mayor shall file with the corporate authorities the reason for such removal or discharge, which removal or
discharge shall not become effective unless confirmed by a majority vote of the corporate authorities. The terms of employment of the chief
of police may also be governed by an agreement between the chief of police and the village. (Ord. 980-02, 4-15-2002; amd. Ord. 1125-05,
5-16-2005)
If a member of the Hawthorn Woods police department is appointed chief of police prior to being eligible to retire on pension, he shall be
considered as on furlough from the rank he held immediately prior to his appointment as chief. If he resigns as chief or is discharged as
chief prior to obtaining eligibility to retire on pension, he shall revert to and be established in such prior rank and thereafter be entitled to all
the benefits and emoluments of such prior rank without regard as to whether a vacancy then exists in such rank. (Ord. 980-02, 4-15-2002)
2-11-9: DEPUTY CHIEF; APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL:
Pursuant to the authority contained in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/10-2.1-4, the position of deputy chief is hereby established, such
position to be appointed by the chief of police. The deputy chief position shall be an exempt rank immediately below that of chief of police.
The deputy chief may be appointed from any rank of sworn, full time officers of the Hawthorn Woods police department, but must have at
least five (5) years of full time service as a police officer in such department. The deputy chief shall serve at the discretion of the chief of
police and, if removed from the position, shall revert to the rank held immediately prior to appointment to the deputy chief position. (Ord.
980-02, 4-15-2002)
2-11-10: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS OF BOARD:
The mayor and board of trustees may fix the compensation to be paid to the members of the board, but until the mayor and board of
trustees make provision thereof, the members of the board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 980-02, 4-15-2002; amd. Ord. 1125-05,
5-16-2005)
2-11-11: ATTORNEY FOR BOARD:
The mayor, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, shall appoint the attorney for the board of police commissioners. (Ord.
980-02, 4-15-2002; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
Chapter 12
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 40/426
2-12-1: POLICE PENSION FUND ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a police pension fund in and for the village in accordance with the provisions of 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/3-101. (Ord. 946-01, 6-18-2001)
2-12-2: BOARD CREATED:
There is hereby created a board of trustees of the police pension fund of the village ("board"), composed of five (5) members, to administer
the police pension fund. (Ord. 946-01, 6-18-2001)
2-12-3: APPOINTED TRUSTEES; TERM; VACANCIES:
Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the village mayor.
Within thirty (30) days after this chapter becomes effective, the village mayor shall appoint two (2) members of the board for a term to
expire on the second Tuesday in May 2002. Thereafter, the village mayor shall appoint one member of the board for a term of one year
commencing on the second Tuesday in May 2002, and appoint the second member of the board for a term of two (2) years, commencing
on the second Tuesday in May 2002. (Ord. 946-01, 6-18-2001; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
The successors to any of the above appointed members of the board shall serve for a term of two (2) years. All appointed members of the
board shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. (Ord. 946-01, 6-18-2001)
Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any appointed member of the board, the village mayor shall appoint a successor to fill the
unexpired term of any such member. (Ord. 946-01, 6-18-2001; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
2-12-4: ELECTED TRUSTEES; ELECTION PROCEDURE; TERM; VACANCIES:
Two (2) members of the board shall be elected from the active participants of the pension fund by such active participants. One member of
the board shall be elected by and from the beneficiaries of the police pension fund. (Ord. 946-01, 6-18-2001)
Within thirty (30) days after their appointment, the two (2) members of the board appointed by the village mayor shall call a special election
to fill the three (3) elective offices provided for in this section. The members so elected shall each serve for a term expiring on the second
Tuesday in May 2002. Thereafter, each elected member of the board shall serve for a term of two (2) years, commencing on the second
Tuesday of May in the year of such election. All elected members of the board shall serve until their successors have been elected and
qualified. (Ord. 946-01, 6-18-2001; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
The regular election for board members shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April. All elections shall be held at such place(s) in
the village as may be designated by the appointed members of the board. All elections shall be conducted under the Australian ballot
system and such other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed members of the board.
The active pension fund participants shall be entitled to vote only for the active participant members of the board. All beneficiaries eighteen
(18) years or older shall be entitled to vote only for the member chosen from among the beneficiaries. No person shall be entitled to cast
more than one ballot at any such election.
Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any member of the board elected under this section, a successor shall be elected for any
unexpired term at a special election, to be called by the board and conducted in the same manner as the regular biennial election. (Ord.
946-01, 6-18-2001)
2-12-5: MEETINGS OF THE BOARD:
The board shall hold regular quarterly meetings in July, October, January and April annually, and special meetings as called by the
president of the board. (Ord. 946-01, 6-18-2001)
2-12-6: OFFICERS OF THE BOARD; QUORUM:
At the regular July meeting, the board shall elect from its members a president, vice president, secretary and assistant secretary to serve
for a term of one year and until his or her respective successor is elected and qualified.
The vice president of the board shall perform the duties of the president during any vacancy in that office, or during such time as the
president is absent from the village or for any other reason is disqualified or by reason of illness or other causes is unable to perform his
duties.
The assistant secretary shall act for the secretary whenever necessary to discharge the functions of that office.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 41/426
A majority of the board constitutes a quorum for the conduct of all business. (Ord. 946-01, 6-18-2001)
2-12-7: POWERS; DUTIES:
The board of trustees of the police pension fund shall have all the powers and authority, and shall perform such duties as are provided and
set forth in 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (Ord. 946-01, 6-18-2001)
2-12-8: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS OF BOARD; EMPLOYMENT OF PENSIONERS:
Members of the board shall not receive or have any right to receive any salary from the pension fund for services performed as a member
of the board. No person drawing a pension under this chapter shall be employed by the board in any capacity. (Ord. 946-01, 6-18-2001)
2-12-9: MEMBERSHIP IN POLICE PENSION FUND:
Any person appointed as a police officer in and for the village, after the effective date of this chapter, shall make application to participate in
the police pension fund within three (3) months after such appointment. (Ord. 946-01, 6-18-2001)
Chapter 13
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMITTEE
2-13-1: CREATION:
An environmental committee is hereby created in and for the village. (Ord. 1349-10, 11-15-2010)
2-13-2: MEMBERS AND TERMS:
The environmental committee shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the village. All members shall serve at the
pleasure of the mayor and board of trustees. All such members shall serve without compensation.
Appointments to the committee shall be made by the mayor with the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
Members of the environmental committee shall not be deemed to be officers of the village. (Ord. 1349-10, 11-15-2010)
2-13-3: OFFICERS:
A. The mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, annually appoint one of the members of the committee as the
chairperson and vice chairperson thereof. Such officer shall serve in such capacity until a successor is appointed.
B. The chairperson of the committee shall be the chairperson for all meetings of said committee and make such reports to the mayor and
board of trustees of the village as may from time to time be requested. In absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson shall assume
the duties of the chairperson. (Ord. 1349-10, 11-15-2010)
2-13-4: MEETINGS:
A. Prior to January 1 of each year during which the committee is in operation, the committee shall cause to be published in a newspaper
having a general circulation within the village a list of those dates on which the committee shall conduct its meetings during the
forthcoming year. Such notice shall state time and location of all regularly scheduled meetings of the committee. Regularly scheduled
meetings shall be conducted not less frequently than four (4) times a year. Regularly scheduled meetings may be rescheduled and
special meetings may be called from time to time.
B. All meetings of the committee shall be held in conformity with "the open meetings act", 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1-6, as amended
from time to time. A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum.
No meeting shall be conducted by the committee without a quorum being present. A majority vote of the members present at a duly
constituted meeting shall be required for any action of the committee. The absence of any member from two (2) consecutive regularly
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 42/426
scheduled meetings shall create a vacancy in that member's position, unless good cause for such absence is established. (Ord. 1349-
10, 11-15-2010)
2-13-5: ORGANIZATION AND RECORDS:
The members of the committee shall, at their regularly scheduled meeting in January of each year, elect a secretary, chair and vice chair
and such other officers as they may deem necessary. The term of such officers shall be for one year and until their successors are
appointed. The committee shall follow "Robert's Rules Of Order" and shall keep written records of its proceedings.
Minutes of meetings shall be signed, dated and filed with the village clerk as public records and will be posted for public viewing. (Ord.
1349-10, 11-15-2010)
2-13-6: MISSION AND POWERS AND DUTIES:
The environmental committee is an advisory body and shall have powers and duties as the village board may, from time to time, determine.
The initial powers and duties of the committee shall be as follows:
A. Mission Statement: The environmental committee (EC) is dedicated to enhancing the quality of life in the Hawthorn Woods community
by raising awareness of environmental issues and encouraging positive action. The EC shall work with the mayor, village board,
residents and other village committees of Hawthorn Woods by making recommendations on policy, programs, grants, volunteer
opportunities, environmental education, cooperation with other municipalities, agencies and districts and current/future ordinances
related to the village's environment in order to encourage conservation and enhancement of the village's natural resources. Additionally,
the EC shall work to raise public awareness that will foster respect and appreciation of our natural surroundings, and to increase public
awareness of the fragile balance between nature and humankind.
B. Powers And Duties:
1. Research and assist in planning recycling programs for the village of Hawthorn Woods' residents and employees. Review fee
structures for recycling programs and report to the village board recommended changes for action, or report to the board as otherwise
may be directed by the board.
2. Review and implement urban forestry and park enhancement programs and report to the village board recommended action, or
report to the board as otherwise may be directed by the board.
3. Serve as village tree board.
4. Review and periodically update the village's insect and disease control ordinances and report to the village board changes for action,
or report to the board as otherwise may be directed by the board.
5. Review wetland and natural area management programs and report to the village board changes for action, or report to the board as
otherwise may be directed by the board.
6. Design and promote village "green programs".
7. Review natural areas management plans and promote educational programs for residents to adopt environmentally friendly
landscape and natural habitat practices.
8. Raise public awareness of environmental issues by hosting public events or articles written for the village newsletter as the board so
approves.
9. Seek grant opportunities to fund special environmental projects, environmental education or programs approved by the board.
10. Foster positive relationships with neighboring schools or other agencies or districts to partner environmental conservation outcomes
that the board authorizes.
11. Encourage natural resource stewardship by working with homeowners, associations or being present at village events to raise
awareness as the board directs.
12. Plan or sponsor villagewide programs for Earth Day, Arbor Day or any special nature appreciation workshop the board authorizes.
13. Review and report on all matters referred to the committee by the mayor and board of trustees. (Ord. 1349-10, 11-15-2010)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 43/426
Chapter 1
GENERAL BUSINESS AND LICENSE PROVISIONS
3-1-1: PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION:
Because each business located in the village is a basic part of and affects the physical and economic well being of the village, necessitating
special services from the village in the form of health and police inspections and services, such businesses shall in all respects be in full
compliance with the provisions hereinafter contained in this chapter. This chapter is designed to provide for the means whereby the village
may render the necessary inspections and services to businesses in order to promote, protect and safeguard the public safety, health and
welfare of the citizens of Hawthorn Woods and to enable the maintenance of an accurate record of businesses located and carrying on
commercial activities or commerce within the village. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning is required by the
context:
BUSINESS: Any vocation, occupation, profession, enterprise, establishment, concern or any other type of activity, together with all devices,
machines, equipment, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, as set forth herein.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity, except for such person or persons as
may be organized as an Illinois not for profit corporation or governmental bodies properly organized under the law of the state of Illinois.
(Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-1-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on, or manage any business set forth in subsection 3-1-
20B of this chapter, either by himself or itself, or through an agent, employee, or partner, without first having obtained a license for such
business; provided, however, that on one day each year, which day is designated as "Hawthorn Woods' garage sale day" by the Hawthorn
Woods Women's Club, a person may conduct a garage, rummage or similar sale without a permit.
A license is required when any person, by himself or through an agent, employee, or partner, is held forth as being engaged in the
business, or if he solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or if he performs or attempts to perform any part of such business in the
village. (Ord. 1187-06, 10-23-2006)
3-1-4: APPLICATION:
Applications for all licenses required by this code shall be made in writing to the chief operating officer, except as may otherwise be
provided by this code. If the applicant is an individual, the application shall contain the individual's name, residential address, and
residential telephone number. If the applicant is a partnership or other noncorporate business entity, the application shall contain the name
and residential address and residential telephone number of each partner, principal, or member thereof. If the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall contain the name, residential address, and residential telephone number of each principal officer and the registered agent
thereof. Each application shall also contain such information as may be prescribed by the chief operating officer including, but not limited to:
(Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
A. The license desired;
B. The location to be used;
C. The license period;
D. The fee to be paid;
E. The number of the certificate of registration required under the retailers' occupation tax act, service occupation tax act, and/or use tax
act, if applicable; and
F. Such additional information as may be needed for the evaluation of the application. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
Forms for all licenses and applications therefor shall be prepared and kept on file by the village clerk. Each license issued shall bear the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 44/426
signature of the village mayor and the village clerk, except as may otherwise be provided by this code. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd.
Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
3-1-5: INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS:
A. Investigation Of Applicant:
1. Upon the receipt of an application for a license, where an investigation or inspection is required by this code before the issuance of
such license, or where an inspection or investigation shall be deemed reasonably necessary or appropriate, the chief operating
officer, within forty eight (48) hours of such receipt, shall refer the application to the appropriate official(s) for the making of such
investigation or inspection. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
2. The official(s) to whom the application has been referred shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten (10) days
after receiving such application or a copy thereof. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3. If it shall appear to the chief operating officer that the matters and circumstances relating to an application require further information
before a proper determination can be made, such application shall be returned to the applicant for the inclusion of such additional
information as may be specified by the chief operating officer.
B. Inspection Officials: The building inspector of the village, in consultation with the county health department, shall make or cause to be
made inspections regarding such permits and licenses as relate to the care and handling of food, the prevention of nuisances and the
spread of disease, and the protection of the health of the public. The building inspector shall make or cause to be made any inspections,
which relate to compliance with the building code, zoning ordinance and other related regulations. All other investigations, except where
otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of police or by some other officer, employee or agent designated by the chief operating
officer. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
C. Inspections; Analyses:
1. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided
for or required by this code or are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or regulation of
the village or to detect violation thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to admit thereto, for
the purpose of making the inspection, any officer or employee of the village who is duly authorized to make such inspection at any
reasonable time that such admission or entry is requested.
2. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of any
ordinance or regulation, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to
give to any duly authorized officer or employee of the village requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity.
(Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the village mayor may revoke the license of any owner or operator of a
licensed business in the village who refuses to permit any duly authorized officer or employee to make such inspection or to take an
adequate sample of said commodity or material, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties; provided, however, that no license shall be subject to revocation for such cause unless such officer or employee has been
refused permission to enter upon the premises in the name of the village after first having presented a warrant issued by the
appropriate circuit court authorizing such entry. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
4. In order to facilitate proper inspection in keeping with the provisions of this subsection, any official, sanitarian, inspector or other
employee or person designated to make such inspections under the supervision of the county health department shall be considered
to be an officer or official of the village for such purpose and for any purpose relative to the provisions of this chapter but for no other
purpose unless so designated by this code. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-1-6: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
If, after due consideration of the information contained within the application and the related investigative report, the chief operating officer
determines that the applicant does not meet the standards set forth in this chapter, he shall deny such license. Thereupon, the chief
operating officer shall promptly notify the applicant that no license will be issued, indicating the reasons therefor.
If, after due consideration of the information contained within the application and the related investigative report, the chief operating officer
determines that the applicant meets the standards set forth in this chapter, he shall grant such license and the chief operating officer shall
notify the applicant thereof. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
3-1-7: LICENSE TERM; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL:
Each license shall indicate its term. All annual licenses shall be operative and the license year for the village shall commence on February
1 of each year. No license shall be granted for a period longer than one year. Except where otherwise provided herein, every license shall
expire on January 31 following the date of issuance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 45/426
Except as otherwise provided herein, each license may be renewed upon proper application and payment of the required fee. The
requirements and procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal shall be the same as the requirements and procedures for granting
a new license. (Ord. 1474-13, 11-18-2013)
3-1-8: LICENSES NOT ASSIGNABLE; UNLAWFUL USE:
No license may be assigned, sold, loaned, transferred, used as collateral, or otherwise encumbered. No person shall use or display any
license that has been improperly acquired. No person shall alter, deface, forge, or counterfeit any license issued by the village. (Ord. 826-
98, 5-11-1998)
3-1-9: BUILDING AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business if the premises and building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with
all applicable ordinances and regulations of the village and the state. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-1-10: LOCATION:
A. No license for the operation of a business in the village shall be construed to permit the operation of a licensed business in more than
one location in the village; a separate license shall be required for each location of a licensed establishment. For the purposes of this
chapter, the existence of a single location shall be evidenced by the fact that all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses
shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or parcel, shall be operated and managed by the same person or owner and shall
be an establishment with the same classification. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
B. The location of any licensed business may be changed provided that ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the chief operating officer in
the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, however, that all applicable ordinances and regulations of the village shall be
complied with. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
3-1-11: NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
A. No business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact; and no
building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part thereof, shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in connection with any
business or establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to life or detrimental to health. Any charge of
conducting or operating a nuisance may be made under this chapter or under the provisions of this code prohibiting nuisances
generally.
B. No building or structure, utilized, constructed or maintained in connection with any business or occupation shall evidence an unsanitary,
unsafe or dangerous condition.
C. No substance, matter or thing of any kind whatever which shall be dangerous or detrimental to health shall be allowed to exist in
connection with any business or occupation or be used in any work or labor performed in the village.
D. It shall be the duty of the occupant of every building, structure or premises used or maintained in connection with any business to cause
to be removed at his own cost and expense at least once each week all refuse produced therein; provided, however, that such removal
shall occur more frequently as necessary to prevent nuisances from odor, vermin and/or litter. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-1-12: WORKING CONDITIONS:
A. Health Requirements:
1. No owner, lessee, manager or superintendent of any store, factory, workshop or other place where persons are employed shall cause
or permit such place, or any room or part thereof, to be overcrowded or inadequate or faulty in respect to light, ventilation, heat or
cleanliness.
2. All such places of employment shall be kept in a clean condition, free from the effluvia of a sewer, drain, privy, stable or other
nuisance; also as far as practicable, such premises shall be free from all gases, vapors, dust or other impurities generated by
manufacturing processes or otherwise which are injurious to health. Sufficient washroom facilities for male and female employees
shall be provided and such facilities shall be properly ventilated.
B. Heating Requirements:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 46/426
1. It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling the heating plant which furnishes heat to any factory or workshop, to
maintain a temperature within such factory or workshop of not less than sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68F) without such undue
restriction of ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein at such times as employees are required to be on the
premises from October 1 of each year to June 1 of the succeeding year, Sundays and holidays excepted; provided, however, that this
requirement shall not apply to any factory or workshop where the business conducted therein is of such a nature that a higher or
lower temperature than sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68F) is necessary or expedient for the work or manufacturing process of
such business.
2. It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling the heating plant which finishes heat to any office, store or other place of
employment to maintain a temperature therein of not less than sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68F) without such undue restriction of
ventilation as to interfere with proper sanitary conditions therein, at such times as employees are required to be on the premises from
October 1 of each year to June 1 of the succeeding year, Sundays and legal holidays excepted.
C. Inspections: The building inspector shall visit or cause to be visited all such places of employment in the village as often as they shall
deem necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and to have such arrangements made as may be deemed
necessary for the health and safety of the employees. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-1-13: BUSINESSES OPEN TO PUBLIC:
All businesses licensed under this chapter that invite the public generally into their establishments for the purpose of conducting business,
shall be subject to the following regulations in addition to all other applicable provisions of this code:
A. All areas within the licensed premises where the public may enter shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition.
B. All businesses subject to this section shall refrain from all deceptive trade practices as defined by state or federal law or regulation and
shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations regarding consumer protection and deceptive trade practices. In the event of any
such violation, the business license of the establishment may be revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-
1998)
3-1-14: ENFORCEMENT:
The chief operating officer shall take all necessary and appropriate action to compel compliance with the regulatory provisions of this
chapter. When necessary and expedient, he may call on the chief of police to assist in such enforcement, and it shall be the duty of the
chief of police to perform such enforcement acts as may be required of him. All municipal employees duly authorized and acting as license
inspectors shall be conservators of the peace with police powers for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this code and other village
ordinances relating to the licensing of businesses and occupations and their regulations. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-
17-2009)
3-1-15: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Suspension Of Business Operation: When the conduct or operation of any business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall
constitute a nuisance in fact and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the village mayor shall be
authorized to summarily order the cessation of business, the closing of the premises and the suspension of any license for a period not
to exceed ten (10) days. Within eight (8) days after he has so acted, the village mayor shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining
whether or not the license should be suspended for an additional period of time or revoked.
B. Revocation Of License: Licenses issued under the ordinances of the village, unless otherwise provided, may be suspended for up to
thirty (30) days or revoked by the village mayor after notice and hearing as provided in subsection C of this section for any of the
following causes: (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the license; (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
2. Any violation by the licensee of ordinance provisions relating to the license, the subject matter of the license or the premises
occupied, or any violation by the licensee of any conditions of any permit issued to the licensee in connection with the licensed
business; (Ord. 1187-06, 10-23-2006)
3. Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor when such conviction indicates his inability to operate a safe, honest, or
legitimate business operation within the village;
4. Failure of the licensee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the village;
5. Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the
performance of his duties in making such inspections, as provided in section 3-1-5 of this chapter; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 47/426
6. Any other violation of this code.
Such suspension or revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the
violation of other applicable ordinances of the village.
C. Hearing: Notice of the hearing for suspension or revocation of a license shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of
the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee
at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
At the hearing, the village attorney shall present the complaint and shall represent the village. The licensee shall be permitted counsel
and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. A stenographic or electronically recorded record of the
hearing shall be kept. The village mayor shall preside and shall render the decision within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the
hearing, but not later than thirty (30) days after such conclusion. The decision shall be in writing and shall summarize the evidence and
state the reasons for the decision.
Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked shall pay to the village the costs of the hearing before the village mayor. The
village mayor shall determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but not limited to, court reporter fees, the costs
of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses
incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the village mayor may allow.
The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the village mayor. Failure to pay said
costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this section and may be cause for license suspension or revocation, or the
levy of a fine. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
D. Prohibition On Future Licenses: Any licensee whose license is revoked shall be prohibited from obtaining another business license from
the village for a period of three (3) years following such revocation. (Ord. 1187-06, 10-23-2006)
3-1-16: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief operating officer in regard to the denial of an application for a business license, as
provided in this code, or the village mayor in connection with the suspension or revocation of a license, or the closing of an establishment
dangerous to the public, as provided in this code, shall have the right to appeal to the board of trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the chief operating officer, within ten (10) days after the notice of a denial of an application or a revocation of a license, a written
statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The board of trustees shall thereupon set the time and place for a
hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee in the same manner as provided in section 3-
1-15 of this chapter. The decision of the board of trustees on such appeal shall be by a vote of a majority of the trustees then holding office
and shall be final. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005; Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
3-1-17: LICENSE TO BE POSTED; DESTRUCTION; REMOVAL OF LICENSE:
With the exception of home businesses/brokers, it shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the village to keep his
license displayed at all times in a prominent place on the premises, machine, or vehicle used for such business. (Ord. 1610-15, 11-23-
2015)
No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove, or carry away without the consent of the owner any license, certificate, plate, or sticker
that has been issued by the village except when such license, certificate, plate or sticker has been discontinued or the licensed premises
have been abandoned. Nothing herein shall prevent the village mayor or his duly authorized representative from removing any license,
certificate, plate, or sticker from the possession of a former licensee, his premises, any vehicle, or any machine when said license has been
revoked under the provisions of this code. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
3-1-18: BUSINESS VEHICLES:
Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis, in whole or in part, for a license fee, the village clerk shall furnish the licensee with a
tag or sticker for each vehicle covered by the license, and such tag or sticker shall be posted or affixed in a conspicuous place on each
such vehicle. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-1-19: COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING ORDINANCE:
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to authorize or permit a use of property not otherwise authorized and permitted under the
zoning ordinance of the village. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-1-20: LICENSE FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 48/426
A. Payment Of License Fees: In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in
advance at the time application therefor is made to the chief operating officer in the amounts prescribed in this section. Except as
otherwise provided, all license fees shall become a part of the general corporate fund to reimburse said fund for the costs incurred in
investigations and processing applications for the licenses required herein, and for the costs of regulating the subject businesses or
establishments. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license fee, or part thereof, by reason of death or departure of
the licensee; nor shall any rebate or refund be made by reason of nonuse of the license or discontinuance of the operation or conduct of
the licensed establishment, business or activity. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
B. Fee Schedule: License fees under the terms of this chapter for the businesses, occupations, and business activities and uses set forth
shall be as follows:
Activity Or Purpose Fee Or Charge
After hour clubs $100.00
Ambulance service:
Each ambulance 100.00
Each attendant or driver 25.00
Amusements:
Athletic contests 100.00
Automobile show (per day) 100.00
Balloon contest (per day) 100.00
Billiard and pool halls:
5 tables or less 250.00
Each table more than 5, add 25.00
Each table in other than billiard or pool hall 50.00
Bowling alleys:
10 lanes or less 250.00
Each lane more than 10, add 25.00
Carnivals (per day) 100.00
Circus or sideshows (per day) 100.00
Commercial playground or amusement park 500.00
Concert, minstrel, or musical entertainment (per day) 100.00
Fireworks display (per day) 100.00
Horse or dog show (per day) 50.00
Public dance hall 100.00
Public skating rink 50.00
Raffles (per annum) 25.00
Rodeo (per day) 100.00
Stock or poultry show (per day) 100.00
Tennis clubs (except as part of golf club) 100.00
Theater (motion picture or dramatic and cabaret):
Seating capacity 1 - 500 100.00
Seating capacity 501 - 1,000 250.00
Seating capacity over 1,000 500.00
Theatrical exhibitions 100.00
Vending and/or coin operated units 50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 49/426
Auctioneers:
Per day 50.00
Per year 100.00
Automotive repair establishment 100.00
Bankers and brokers (other than insurance and real estate):
Bankers 100.00
Brokers/sales 100.00
Barbers 100.00
Barbershops:
3 chairs or less 100.00
Each chair more than 3, per chair, add 25.00
Bathing beaches 100.00
Bed and breakfast establishments 100.00
Boats and harbors 100.00
Breweries and distilleries 250.00
Brick, firewood, coal, hay 100.00
Carters, expressmen, movers, messengers and storage of carting and express vehicles and
trailers:
Each vehicle with capacity not exceeding 3 tons 60.00
Each vehicle with capacity exceeding 3 tons 250.00
Additionally, for each 1,000 square feet of real property for vehicle storage 50.00
Coal and lumber yards 150.00
Convention hall 100.00
Detectives 100.00
Dry cleaners 150.00
Electrical equipment 100.00
Elevator operators 100.00
Exhibitions 100.00
Explosive or combustible materials - storage and handling 200.00
Fire extinguisher service and repair 100.00
Florists and plant shops 100.00
Food establishments:
Bakeries 100.00
Candy, confectionery stores 100.00
Catering services and establishments 100.00
Coffeehouses 100.00
Delicatessens 100.00
Fish markets 100.00
Food and ice cream delivery vehicles and mobile food dispensers 100.00
Fruit stores 100.00
Grocery stores, including convenience stores, and supermarkets:
5 or fewer employees 100.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 50/426
More than 5 employees 250.00
Ice cream manufacturers and dealers 100.00
Ice cream parlors 100.00
Meat dealers 100.00
Milk and milk products 100.00
Restaurants:
Seating capacity of not more than 25 persons 100.00
Seating capacity of not more than 50 persons 200.00
Seating capacity of more than 50 persons 300.00
Foundries 100.00
Fuel oil, solid fuel dealer:
Fuel oil dealer:
Storage capacity not exceeding 20,000 gallons 100.00
Each additional 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof 10.00
Each vehicle used 50.00
Fuel oil store:
Storage capacity not exceeding 1,000 gallons 100.00
More than 1,000 gallons but not exceeding 5,000 gallons 200.00
More than 5,000 gallons 300.00
Sale of solid fuel:
Less than 10,000 tons sold during preceding fiscal year 100.00
More than 10,000 tons sold during preceding fiscal year 250.00
Each delivery vehicle used 250.00
Storage of solid fuel (not for resale) 250.00
Gasoline filling stations 150.00
Home business/brokers 75.00
Hospitals:
Capacity of 50 beds or fewer 250.00
Each bed in excess of 50 75.00
Hotels, motels and inns 250.00
Junk dealers 250.00
Laundry and laundromat 100.00
Livery stables 100.00
Lumberyards and lumber storehouses 250.00
Machine shops 100.00
Medical dispensaries 100.00
Nursing homes, sheltered care homes and residential units, homes for the aged or infirmed,
assisted living, skilled care, rehab centers:
Up to and including 50 beds 250.00
Each bed in excess of 50 75.00
Parking lot or public garage 250.00
Pawnbrokers 250.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 51/426
Rooming houses 250.00
Scavenger:
Commercial 1,500.00
Residential 1,500.00
Secondhand dealers, garage, rummage and similar sales 250.00
Solicitors See section 3-4B-1 et seq.,
of this title
Street sales $100.00
Tanneries 150.00
Taxicabs and limousines:
Each operator 25.00
Each vehicle 250.00
Theatrical ticket brokers 100.00
Tobacco dealers 100.00
Tree experts or arborists 100.00
Undertaking establishment/funeral home 150.00
Used car dealers 250.00
Watercraft 100.00
(Ord. 1315-10, 2-16-2010; amd. Ord. 1325-10, 6-21-2010; Ord. 1411-12, 7-16-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
C. Late Fees: Any business license fee set forth in the fee schedule in subsection B of this section that is not paid by January 31 of each
year, shall be assessed a late fee of fifty percent (50%) of the original fee for the month of February of each year. Thereafter, any
business license fee set forth in the fee schedule in subsection B of this section that is not paid by the end of February of each year,
shall be assessed a late fee of one hundred percent (100%) of the original fee. (Ord. 1474-13, 11-18-2013)
3-1-21: ENFORCEMENT COSTS:
By being issued and accepting a license pursuant to this chapter, a licensee agrees to the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction finds that any licensee has violated any provision of this chapter, or any other provision of this code,
such court shall award to the village all of the village's costs related to the enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, court
costs, attorney fees, and administrative costs.
B. In the event any court fails or refuses to award the village all of its costs as provided for hereinabove, such unpaid costs shall constitute
an additional license fee which shall be due and payable prior to the renewal of any license hereunder. Such additional license fee shall
be in addition to the license fee otherwise required by the provisions of this chapter. No license shall be renewed until such time as all
costs provided for by this section have been paid. (Ord. 1187-06, 10-23-2006)
3-1-22: PENALTY:
In addition to any and all penalties provided for in this chapter, any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter, or any
licensee found to have violated any provision of this code, shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition, stop work orders may be issued pursuant to the provisions of section 8-2-6 of this code. (Ord. 1187-06, 10-23-2006)
Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, the following shall be the penalties for a violation of chapter 5, article B of
this title:
Misdemeanors
Minimum
Penalty Maximum Penalty
Code
Section
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 52/426
Illegal conduct of
raffle
$50.00 Any penalties prescribed for a class C misdemeanor in the Illinois criminal
code
3-5B-10
(Ord. 1325-10, 6-21-2010)
Chapter 2
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
3-2-1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property at retail in the
Village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this Section is in
effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1.
B. Report Required: Every such person engaged in such business in the Village shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month,
the report to the State Department of Revenue required by section three of "An Act in Relation to a Tax Upon Persons Engaged in the
Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption," approved June 28, 1933, as amended1.
C. Payment of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby
imposed on account of the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (Ord. 398-87, 12-8-87, eff. 1-1-
88)
3-2-2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the Municipality in the business of making sales of service at the rate
of one percent (1%) of the cost price of all tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in
accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5.
B. Report Required: Every supplier or serviceman required to account for Municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of the Municipality
shall file, on or before the last day of each month, the report to the State Department of Revenue required by section nine of the
"Service Occupation Tax Act", approved July 10, 1961, as amended2.
C. Payment of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby
imposed. (Ord. 397-87, 12-28-87, eff. 1-1-88)
Footnote 1: S.H.A. 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
Footnote 2: S.H.A. 35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
Chapter 3
LIQUOR CONTROL
3-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public. Temperance in the consumption of alcoholic
liquors shall be fostered and promoted by sound and careful control and regulation of the manufacturing, sale and distribution of alcoholic
liquor. It is the policy of the village to limit the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail primarily to the sale in its original package, by restaurants, or
at licensed establishments. It is not deemed conducive to the promotion of this public policy to allow the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail for
consumption on the licensed premises where sold as a sole or primary business to be conducted within the village. Further, it is the policy
of the village to limit the purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor to persons of the age of twenty one (21) years or older
and to prevent intoxication, disorderly conduct, trespasses, unruly disturbances at public or private assemblies, and similar conduct that
often results from the purchase, consumption or possession of alcoholic liquor by persons under the lawful age. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases defined in an act entitled "an act relating to alcoholic liquors" approved January 31, 1934, as amended from time to
time, as set forth generally in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq., are hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter. Unless
the context otherwise requires, the following, as used in this chapter, shall be construed as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 53/426
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any spirits, wine, beer, ale, or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which
is fit for beverage purposes.
BANQUET FACILITY: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where the catering of
private parties are performed, whereat there is service for food consumption at tables, at a prearranged fixed unit price, of a full multiple
course meal, hors d'oeuvres, buffet or smorgasbord, and at which alcoholic liquor may be served or sold in conjunction with such services;
provided that each of such private parties is prearranged pursuant to a written contract under the sponsorship of a particular person or
organization.
BEER: A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and
includes among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
BREWPUB: A "microbrewery", as defined herein, that conducts the retail sale of beer manufactured on the premises, and other alcoholic
liquor not manufactured on premises, in conjunction with the operation of a restaurant on the premises.
CONTROL OF PREMISES: To be in control of premises or to have a premises under one's control shall mean a legal or beneficial
ownership, rental, lease or license. Control may also exist where none of the aforesaid legal relationships apply, but where an adult is
otherwise clearly in charge of and controlling a particular premises.
DELIVERY OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: The sale, gift or exchange of an alcoholic liquor from one person to another, with or without
consideration. Delivery includes furnishing of any alcoholic liquor of whatever kind or nature from one person to another.
FALSE IDENTIFICATION: Any document used for identification or proof of age that has been altered or defaced or that contains false or
misleading information or that contains a name that is not the actual name of the person using it.
GROWLER: A glass jug no larger than a U.S. half gallon (1,890 milliliters) used to transport draft beer, sold at breweries and brewpubs, as
a means to sell takeout beer.
IMPAIRMENT: Any diminution or compromise of a person's physical, mental or perceptual abilities due to the consumption of alcoholic
liquor. Impairment does not require that the blood alcohol content be in excess of any particular gram of alcohol to milliliters of blood or
breath ratio.
LICENSED PREMISES: Every building or other structure or area adjacent thereto where such alcoholic beverages are served, dispensed
or sold, by a licensee.
LICENSEE: Any person or entity holding a license under the provisions of this chapter.
LIQUOR CONTROL ACT: The provisions of "an act relating to alcoholic liquors", approved January 31, 1934, as amended, and as set forth
in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-1 et seq.
MICROBREWERY: A brewery that produces less than thirty thousand (30,000) barrels (35 300 hectoliters) of beer or ale per calendar year
from malt and hops by infusion, bailing and fermentation.
OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE: Shall include physical control of a motor vehicle. It shall mean the operation or control of a motor
vehicle anywhere in the village of Hawthorn Woods, whether on private property or public property. To be in physical control, the person
need not be actually driving the motor vehicle and the vehicle need not be running. If there is only one person inside of a motor vehicle that
person shall be presumed to be in physical control, regardless of the person's location in the vehicle. If there is only one person in a front
seat or front passenger area of a motor vehicle, that person shall be presumed to be in physical control regardless of the person's location
in the front passenger area. If there are persons in the vehicle, but not in the front passenger area, the owner of the vehicle or the person to
whom permission was given to operate the vehicle, shall be presumed to be in physical control of the vehicle.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or
capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.
PARENT: A natural or adoptive parent or a court designated guardian.
RESTAURANT: Any public place, kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where the primary business is the
service of complete meals off a printed menu and prepared in the premises' kitchen, and where complete meals are actually and regularly
served, and where adequate provision is made for on premises sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and a sufficient
number of employees to prepare, cook and serve complete meals for its customers off such menu. The mere availability and service at any
premises of cold or hot sandwiches, hors d'oeuvres, popcorn, nachos, pretzels, potato chips, hot dogs or other snack foods will not,
standing alone, be deemed sufficient to constitute such premises a restaurant within the meaning of this definition.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption, and not for resale.
SPECIAL EVENT: An event conducted by an educational, fraternal, political, civic, government, religious or nonprofit organization. Vendors
holding current liquor licenses, excluding special event liquor licenses, from either the village of Hawthorn Woods or another Illinois
municipality may apply for a special event liquor license.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any person under twenty one (21) years of age.
VICARIOUS LIABILITY: The liability that is implied as a matter of law even though the person may not have directly caused an injury to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 54/426
another person.
WINE: A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of grapes or other fruits or plants. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-3: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
A. Village Mayor To Serve As Commissioner: The village mayor shall be the "local liquor control commissioner" as defined in the liquor
control act, paragraph 5/4-2 and shall be charged with the administration of the liquor control act and of such ordinances and resolutions
related to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted by the mayor and board of trustees of the village.
B. Compensation: The compensation, if any, otherwise provided for the office of village mayor, as set forth in this code shall be deemed to
include compensation to the mayor for acting in his or her capacity as local liquor control commissioner.
C. Powers And Duties: The local liquor control commissioner shall have all of the powers and duties set forth in the liquor control act,
including:
1. To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke for cause, all local licenses issued to persons or entities for
licensed premises within the village. In addition to any suspension, the local liquor control commissioner may levy a fine on the
licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in fines may be imposed against any
licensee during any license year.
2. To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter, at any time, upon a premises licensed hereunder, to determine whether
any of the provisions of the state statutes or this code, or any rules or regulations adopted by the local liquor control commissioner or
by the Illinois liquor control commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in
connection therewith.
3. To receive complaints from any citizen within the village when any provision of the state statutes or this code have been or are being
violated and act upon such complaints in the manner provided by law.
4. To receive local liquor license fees and deposit same to the credit of the village.
5. To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a local license or for the renewal thereof, or any licensee upon
whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, or any licensee against whom a
citation proceeding has been instituted by the Illinois liquor control commission; to examine, or cause to be examined, the books and
records of any such applicant or licensee; and to hear testimony and take evidence for his information in the performance of his
duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of
the information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this subsection, he may authorize his agent to act on his
behalf.
6. To order, by issuance of a written order, any licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an
opportunity to be heard during that period, if the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation
of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the village; except, that if such licensee shall also be
engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other
business or businesses.
7. To make such reasonable rules and regulations as he may deem necessary in the performance of his duties. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-
2013)
3-3-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided for by the liquor control act, it shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to deliver or to keep with the
intention of selling at retail or delivering alcoholic liquor within the village without having a local retail liquor dealer's license. Further, it shall
be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail or to deliver alcoholic liquor within the village in violation of the terms of a local retail liquor
dealer's license issued by the village. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the local liquor control commissioner, in writing, under oath, and signed by the applicant, in
accordance with the directions set forth in the application. Liquor license personal interest forms shall be completed in writing, under oath,
for each person signing the application and each manager employed or to be employed at the licensed premises. Effective January 1,
2014, applications for class A, B, E, F or G liquor licenses shall be accompanied with proof of completion of a state certified beverage
alcohol sellers and servers educational training (BASSET) program for all owners, managers, anyone acting in a management capacity,
bartenders, anyone dispensing alcoholic liquor, and anyone whose job description includes the checking of identification for the purchase of
alcoholic liquor. Complete application for any license renewal (i.e., liquor license application and all liquor license personal interest forms,
and all attachments thereto) shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the beginning of any license year. Failure to do so may
result in a delay in the renewal license being issued. The form of liquor license application and liquor license personal interest form shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 55/426
on file in the office of the village clerk. Effective January 1, 2014, applications for class C or D liquor licenses shall be accompanied with
proof of completion of a state certified beverage alcohol sellers and servers educational training (BASSET) program for at least one person
who will be present to oversee the event at all times during the period of time that alcoholic liquor is being sold and served during the
special event. The names, addresses and dates of birth of all other persons serving alcoholic liquor shall accompany the application. (Ord.
1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-6: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSE:
No such license shall be issued under this chapter to any person not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license nor to any applicant
made ineligible under the liquor control act as it may from time to time be amended. Any person shall be deemed ineligible to hold a license
pursuant to 5/6-2 of the Illinois liquor control act of 1934, as amended. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-7: EXAMINATION AND INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT/LICENSEE:
A. Examination: The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant
for a local retail liquor dealer's license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been
served, or records of any such applicant or licensee, to hear testimony and take proof for his information in the performance of his
duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the
information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this section, he may authorize his agent to act on his behalf, as
provided by statute. The failure of any applicant or licensee to appear at the time and place fixed by the local liquor control
commissioner for his examination or to produce books and records requested, unless for good cause shown, shall be deemed to be an
admission that the objections or charges are true and that the applicant is not qualified to receive a license. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
B. Investigation; Fee: No license shall be issued until the applicant(s) shall have been investigated by the local liquor control commissioner
and a report filed in the records of said commissioner approving the new applicant(s). New applicant(s) or renewal applicants who have
incurred any infractions according to this chapter during the current license year shall not be licensed until said applicant(s) and
managers, if any, have been fingerprinted and photographed by the village chief of police and record searches made of the files of any
police record agency that the chief of police shall deem necessary. A copy of the fingerprints and photographs shall be retained in the
files of the chief of police, and a report from the chief of police clearing the applicant(s) shall be filed with the local liquor control
commissioner.
On all applications for class A, B, C, E, F and G licenses, there shall be a nonrefundable charge of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each
applicant and individual required to file a liquor license personal interest form to defray the costs of fingerprinting and/or investigation by
the chief of police, however, for class E licenses, no fee shall be required if the applicant provides a copy of a current liquor license from
either the village of Hawthorn Woods or another Illinois municipality, however, such liquor license may not be for a special event. (Ord.
1710-16, 11-28-2016)
3-3-8: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS:
The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to grant local retail liquor dealers' licenses for the selling at retail of alcoholic
liquor. Such licenses shall be divided into the following classes and none other:
A. Class A: Shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the licensed premises where sold when the primary business
conducted upon said licensed premises is that of a restaurant, banquet facility, or recreational entertainment establishment, including,
but not limited to, a bowling alley, movie theater, or golf course.
1. There may be a common entrance for both a restaurant and banquet facility. Class A licenses shall be issued only to restaurants,
banquet facilities, or recreational entertainment establishments that have dining facilities as stated.
2. At least fifty percent (50%) of the gross sales (in dollars) at the licensed premises must be derived from food sales or other retail
sales (excluding all alcoholic beverage sales). Each licensee shall keep an accurate accounting of the dollar amount of sales derived
from food sales, other retail sales and alcoholic beverage sales.
3. When any class A licensee has a golf course, the class A license also permits the sale of alcoholic liquor from one or more beverage
carts, the clubhouse, and the consumption of alcoholic liquor on the golf course grounds. All alcoholic liquor served from a beverage
cart shall be served in other than glass containers. The hours of operation for the beverage carts shall be the same as the hours of
operation of the golf course.
4. The local liquor commissioner, in his sole discretion may permit the holder of a class A license to conduct wine sampling or tasting
promotions upon the licensed premises. Such wine sampling or tasting promotions shall only be permitted if specifically authorized on
the face of the class A license or otherwise approved in writing.
B. Class B: Shall permit the sale of original packaged alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the licensed premises where sold.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the local liquor control commissioner, in his sole discretion, may permit the holder of a class B license to
conduct alcoholic liquor sampling or tasting promotions upon the licensed premises; provided, that no charge shall be made therefor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 56/426
Such alcoholic liquor sampling or tasting promotions shall only be permitted if specifically authorized on the face of the class B license.
If no authorization for alcoholic liquor sampling or tasting promotions is specifically on the face of the class B license, such alcoholic
liquor sampling or tasting promotions are prohibited.
C. Class C: Shall only be issued for special events and shall authorize the sale on the licensed premises specified of alcoholic liquor, for
consumption on said licensed premises. A class C license shall not be issued for more than forty eight (48) hours' duration, except that
by action of the corporate authorities, it may be extended so as to have a total duration of not more than one week. In addition to the
usual requirements for applicants of liquor licenses in the village, whoever is approved by the local liquor control commissioner for a
class C license must provide to the village, through the village clerk for approval by the local liquor control commissioner, an insurance
policy saving the village harmless from any damage or injury sustained by anyone both as to personal injury and property damage in
such amounts and companies as required by the local liquor control commissioner before any application for a class C license shall be
approved by the said commissioner. Class C license applications must be filed with the village clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
special event in connection with which same is issued, unless the applicant seeks an extension beyond forty eight (48) hours, for which
the class C license application must be filed with the village clerk at least forty five (45) days prior to the special event in connection with
which same is issued.
D. Class D: Shall be issued for special events in or at any Village owned facility or any Village owned park, and shall authorize the retail
sale on the licensed premises specified of alcoholic beverages for consumption on said licensed premises. A Class D license shall not
be issued for more than forty eight (48) hours' duration, except that by action of the Corporate Authorities, it may be extended so as to
have a total duration of not more than one week. In addition to the usual requirements for applicants of liquor licenses in the Village,
whoever is approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for a Class D license must provide to the Village, through the Village
Clerk for approval by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, an insurance policy saving the Village harmless from any damage or injury
sustained by anyone both as to personal injury and property damage in such amounts and companies as required by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner before any application for a Class D license shall be approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. Class
D license applications must be filed with the Village Clerk at least fifteen (15) days prior to the special event in connection with which
same is issued, unless the applicant seeks an extension beyond forty eight (48) hours, for which the Class D license application must
be filed with the Village Clerk at least forty five (45) days prior to the special event in connection with which same is issued. (Ord. 1447-
13, 4-15-2013)
E. Class E: Shall be only issued for the Village sponsored Concert in the Parks events and shall authorize the sale on the licensed
premises specified of alcoholic liquor for consumption on said licensed premises. This license shall also allow for the sale of alcoholic
liquor at any Village sponsored event on Village park property, subject to approval by the Chief Operating Officer. A Class E license shall
be issued for the continuous months of June through September per calendar year, except at the discretion of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner, it may be extended. In addition to the usual requirements for applicants of liquor licenses in the Village, whoever is
approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for a Class E license must provide to the Village in addition to all other required
documents, through the Village Clerk for approval by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, an insurance policy saving and holding the
Village harmless from any damage or injury sustained by anyone both as to personal injury and property damage in such amounts and
companies as required by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner before any application for a Class E license shall be approved by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner. Class E license applications must be filed with the Village Clerk at least thirty (30) days prior to the
commencement of the annual Village sponsored Concerts in the Park in connection with which same is issued. (Ord. 1847-18, 4-23-
2018)
F. Class F: Shall permit the retail sale, at a bar or table, of the beer and ale manufactured on the premises where sold, and other alcoholic
liquor not manufactured on the premises, when the primary business conducted upon said licensed premises is that of a brewpub. The
licensee is authorized to produce less than thirty thousand (30,000) barrels of beer or ale per license year in compliance with State and
Federal licenses authorizing the production, storage and distribution of an alcoholic beverage.
1. The sale of beer and ale dispensed into growlers for consumption off premises shall be allowed, provided the growlers are properly
sealed for transport in compliance with State law.
2. As part of a brewpub tour, the consumption of up to four (4) samples, which do not exceed four (4) fluid ounces per sample of the
beer and ale produced on the premises, may be provided without charge.
3. The sale of beer or ale produced on premises and dispensed into kegs for consumption off premises shall be allowed provided the
kegs are sold in accordance with section 3-3-26 of this chapter.
G. Class G: Shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the licensed premises. Said premises shall have a full service
bar thereon. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-9: LICENSE FEES:
A. Fees Established: The fees for the various classes of licenses authorized in this chapter shall be as set forth in subsection 11-1-1I of this
Code. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
B. Proration Of License Fee: For new businesses receiving a liquor license on or after August 1 of any license year, a prorated license fee
of one-half (1/2) of the amount set forth in subsection 11-1-1I of this Code shall apply. The proration of license fee shall not apply when
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 57/426
there is a change in licensee pursuant to section 3-3-14 of this chapter. There shall be no proration of license fees if a liquor license
holder sells his business to which the liquor license has been issued. (Ord. 1493-14, 6-16-2014)
C. Disposition Of Fees: At the time application is made to the local liquor control commissioner for the original issuance or renewal of a
license of any class, the applicant shall pay to the village the fee provided in subsection 11-1-1I of this code for the class of license for
which the application is filed. In the event the license applied for is issued or renewed, the fee shall be applied to the license; however,
in the event the class A, B, C, F or G license applied for is denied, the fee, except for a processing charge of two hundred dollars
($200.00) per applicant and/or individual as more fully described in subsection 3-3-7B of this chapter shall be returned to the applicant.
In the event the class D or E license applied for is denied, the entire fee shall be forfeited.
D. Forfeiture Of License Fee: Whenever any license hereunder has been revoked as provided for in this chapter, the licensee shall incur a
forfeiture of all monies that have been paid for said license. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-10: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The number of liquor licenses shall not exceed the following:
License Number Of Licenses
Class A 2
Class B 1
Class C No limit
Class D No limit
Class E 2
Class F None authorized
Class G None authorized
(Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-11: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
A. No license shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the local liquor control
commissioner that such applicant is covered by a policy of liquor liability insurance.
B. Each licensee shall furnish the local liquor control commissioner with a certificate of such insurance and in the event of cancellation, the
local liquor control commissioner shall be notified immediately of such cancellation. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-12: CERTIFICATE OF CONFORMANCE:
At the time of the application for a license, the applicant shall submit a certification from the Lake County board of health and from the
village building inspector that the proposed licensed premises are in conformity with all of the regulations and ordinances of the village and
of the county. If the current Lake County board of health certificate is not available at the time of application, the licensee shall submit the
certification to the village clerk within thirty (30) days of issuance of such certification. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-13: TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWALS; FORFEITURES:
A. Term Of License: All licenses, except class C, D, or E licenses, shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year after issuance, unless
sooner terminated, revoked or suspended as provided in this chapter. All licenses except class C, D, or E licenses shall expire on
January 31 next following their issuance. Due to the change in the term of license effective in 2014, for current liquor license holders
only, a prorated fee of three-fourths (3/4) the amount set forth in subsection 11-1-1I of this code shall be due by January 31, 2015.
Thereafter, liquor license fees enumerated in subsection 11-1-1I of this code shall apply. (Ord. 1493-14, 6-16-2014)
B. Renewal Of License: Any licensee may apply for renewal of a license at the expiration thereof; provided, that he is then qualified to
receive a license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; provided, further, that the
renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the mayor and board of
trustees from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the village or to be issued within the village within any class.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 58/426
C. Cessation Of Business; Forfeiture Of License: Any licensee who ceases to do business or closes his place of business for a period of
more than thirty (30) successive days shall be subject to having his license declared forfeited and lapsed by order of the local liquor
control commissioner. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-14: TRANSFER OF LICENSE; CHANGES IN LICENSEE:
A. Transfer Of License: A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for a period of not to exceed one year after issuance, unless
sooner revoked, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be
alienable or transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the
death of the licensee and shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate succession; provided, that executors or administrators of
the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of
alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of sale of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court and may exercise the
privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the
expiration of such license but no longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.
B. Changes In Licensee:
1. Any changes in partnership, officers, directors, or persons holding directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the stock or
ownership interest, or managers of establishments licensed under this chapter, shall be reported in writing to the local liquor control
commissioner within ten (10) days of the change. All new personnel shall meet all of the standards of this chapter and must otherwise
qualify to hold a liquor license. In addition, an investigation fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) must be submitted in accordance with
the provisions of subsection 3-3-7B of this chapter.
2. When a license has been issued for a partnership and a change of ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is
not eligible to hold a liquor license, said license shall terminate.
3. When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes place in officers, directors, managers or shareholders of more
than five percent (5%) of the stock resulting in the holding of such office, position or such shares of stock by one who is not eligible for
a license, said license shall terminate.
4. When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer eligible for a license, said license shall terminate.
5. In the event a proposed stock acquisition results in a change of stock ownership of a corporation in excess of fifty percent (50%) of
the total issued and outstanding stock of the corporation as it existed at the time the corporation's existing license was first issued, the
acquisition shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a transfer of the license, and if completed shall cause the license to cease
and terminate unless, prior to such completion, an application for a new license is filed with, and a new liquor license is issued, by the
local liquor control commissioner.
6. Failure to report to and file the required application and liquor license personal interest form with the local liquor control commissioner
as above required, or any transfer of stock in violation of the determination of the local liquor control commissioner shall be grounds
for revocation of the corporation's liquor license by the local liquor control commissioner upon proof of such violation established at a
hearing called by the local liquor control commissioner in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-15: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
A. Display Of License: All local retail liquor dealers' licenses issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be displayed in a
prominent place in the licensed establishment.
B. Hours Of Sale:
1. No person holding a class E license, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall sell, or permit to be sold, offer for sale, give away or deliver
any alcoholic liquor between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M. No person holding a class A, C, D, F,
or G license, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall sell, or permit to be sold, offer for sale, give away or deliver any alcoholic liquor
between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. No person holding a class B license issued pursuant to this
chapter, shall sell, or permit to be sold, offer for sale, give away or deliver any alcoholic liquor between the hours of one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. All patrons and customers shall leave the licensed premises not later than fifteen (15) minutes
following the closing hours herein established; except, that on New Year's Eve in any given year, holders of such licenses shall be
permitted to remain open to sell alcoholic liquor for one additional hour.
2. In the case of restaurants and licensees selling original packaged liquors, where the sale of alcoholic liquor is conducted on licensed
premises which are utilized primarily for other retail sale activities, such establishments may be kept open for business after the hours
of sale set forth herein, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold, offered for sale, given away, delivered or consumed after said closing
hours, and no person shall be permitted to remain in or upon that portion of the licensed premises used for the sale or dispensing of
alcoholic liquor.
C. Refilling Original Packages: No person licensed under this chapter shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic
liquor with the same or any other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor; and it shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 59/426
sale at retail any bottles, casks or other containers of alcoholic liquor, except in original packages.
D. Gambling: It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling on any premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor.
E. Lewdness: It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to permit or allow any lewd person to remain in and about any such licensed
premises, or to allow any soliciting or prostitution practices or lewdness.
F. Intoxication, Disorderliness: It shall be unlawful for any licensee, individually or through his agents or employees, to allow intoxicated
persons to loiter on or about that part of the licensed premises described in the license, which part is in use by or in view of the general
public, or permit any conduct which shall tend to disturb the people or quiet of the neighborhood or the licensed premises.
G. Peddling Liquor: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-16: BUILDING AND LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Location Restrictions: No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor for any location, when otherwise prohibited
by the liquor control act as it may from time to time be amended.
B. Multiple Locations: Where two (2) or more locations, places or premises are under the same roof or at one street address, a separate
local retail liquor dealer's license shall be obtained for each such location, place or premises selling or delivering alcoholic beverages.
C. Change Of Location: All licenses issued hereunder shall embrace only one place of business. A license issued hereunder shall permit
the sale of alcoholic liquor only on the licensed premises described in the application and license. A license may be transferred upon the
approval of the local liquor control commissioner from one location or licensed premises to another only when and upon the written
permit to make such change is issued by the local liquor control commissioner and upon the payment of fifty dollars ($50.00). No
change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is in compliance with the provisions and regulations of this
chapter. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-17: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
A. Premises: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance
with the ordinances regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption.
B. Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ in the licensed premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted
with, or who is a carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or
is a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any licensed premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or
distribution of such liquor, except as may be otherwise required by federal law. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-18: ATTIRE AND PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
A. Every licensee and every employee, associate, agent, member, officer, representative or independent contractor of such licensee,
whether compensated or not, shall be properly and decently attired during the course of the sale, distribution, service, pouring, mixing,
drawing, dispensing or delivery of alcoholic liquors of every description, either independently or in conjunction with food or foodstuffs,
across a bar or at a table. Topless, bare midriff, bikini wear or similar attire is prohibited.
B. The following kinds of conduct on premises in the village licensed to sell alcoholic liquor are prohibited:
1. The performance of acts, or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any
sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
2. The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus, genitals or vulva;
3. The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts at or below the top of the areola, buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals;
4. The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of his
or her breasts at or below the top of the areola, buttocks, pubic hair, genitals, anus or vulva;
5. The displaying of films, DVDs or pictures depicting acts, a live performance of which is prohibited by this section.
6. Nude dancing, lingerie or bikini shows, adult novelty shows and sales, and dance poles are prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 60/426
C. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person described in subsection A or B of this section to violate any of the
provisions hereof. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-19: PROHIBITED ACTS AND EXCEPTIONS:
A. Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any "alcoholic liquor", as defined by law, on any public way in the Village,
or in or about any motor vehicle upon a public way in the Village.
B. Exceptions:
1. At a special event held on Village owned property when a Class D license is issued to a vendor at such property; or
2. At a function that is authorized on Village owned property where a facility rental agreement is executed by the applicant and Village;
or
3. At the Village sponsored Concerts in the Park; or
4. At the Village sponsored Fourth of July festivities at Community Park; or (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
5. At the Village sponsored Concert in the Park event when a Class E license is issued at such property. (Ord. 1847-18, 4-23-2018)
C. Open Bottle Law: No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in or upon or about any motor vehicle upon a
public way in the Village, except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
D. Prohibited Sale: No licensee or officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any intoxicated person, or to any person known by him to be
a habitual drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-20: MINORS:
A. Sale, Possession And Consumption Prohibited:
1. No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic
liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years.
2. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall consume, purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic
liquor in his or her possession; provided, the possession and dispensing or consumption of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a
religious service or ceremony, or the possession or delivery of alcoholic liquors in pursuance of a person's employment by a licensee
under this chapter as allowed in subsection D of this section is not prohibited.
3. No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person
under the age of twenty one (21) years, except as allowed under this subsection A.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or negligently permit, on premises under his or her control, the consumption of
alcoholic liquor by an underage person unless such possession and/or consumption is otherwise permitted under subsection A2 of
this section. This section shall apply to residential and commercial premises.
5. Any person found guilty of violating subsection A3 or A4 of this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
Code for each offense.
B. Presence On Licensed Premises: Except as permitted in subsection D of this section, it shall be unlawful for any holder of a liquor
license, or his agent or employee, to suffer or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to be or remain in any room or
compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located; provided, that this
subsection shall not apply to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian,
or to that portion of any licensed premises which derives its principal business from restaurants or the sale of service or commodities
other than alcoholic liquor.
For the purpose of preventing the violation of this subsection, any licensee, or his agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve
alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over
the age of twenty one (21) years, as required by this chapter.
C. Identification Requirements:
1. If a licensee or his agent or employee believes, has reason to believe or should have reason to believe that a sale or delivery of
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient is underage, then he shall, before making such sale or delivery,
demand presentation of at least two (2) separate forms of positive identification, each containing proof of age, each issued by a public
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 61/426
officer in the performance of his official duties and one of those forms of identification must contain a picture of the holder thereof. A
traffic citation shall not be accepted as identification or evidence of age.
2. No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card issued by a federal, state, county, or municipal government or
subdivision or agency thereof, use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged identification card, or obtain an
identification card by means of false identification.
3. No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor by the use of an altered, forged or defaced
identification card or by the use of an identification card of another person.
4. No person shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the village
where alcoholic liquor is sold at retail.
5. Any underage person found guilty of attempting to obtain delivery of alcoholic liquor by use of false proof of age identification shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense.
D. Employment Of Minors:
1. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to
engage, employ or permit any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to attend bar and/or to draw, pour or mix any alcoholic
liquor in any licensed premises; provided, that the provisions of this subsection D shall not be construed to prevent the employment of
persons who are at least nineteen (19) years of age as waiters or waitresses in restaurants for the purpose of taking orders for and
serving food and alcoholic liquor on the licensed retail premises.
2. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to
engage, employ or permit any person under twenty one (21) years of age to sell any alcoholic liquor in any licensed premises.
E. Parental Responsibility:
1. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit his or her child or ward to commit any violation of a village ordinance or state
statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property.
2. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit his or her child or ward, if under the age of twenty one (21) to consume,
purchase or accept delivery of alcoholic liquor, except as permitted by subsection A of this section.
3. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit his or her residence to be used by a child or ward who is under the age of
twenty one (21), or by an invitee of any child or ward if the invitee is under the age of twenty one (21), in a manner which constitutes a
violation of subsection A of this section. A parent or guardian shall be deemed to have permitted his or her residence to be used if he
or she knowingly authorizes such use, enables such use or negligently allows or permits such use to occur by failing to control access
to either the residence or the alcoholic liquor maintained or brought therein.
4. Every parent or guardian shall be presumed to have permitted the conduct prohibited in this subsection E unless the contrary is
established by a preponderance of the evidence.
F. Additional Penalty For Sale To Minors: In addition to all other fines and penalties, the local liquor control commissioner may revoke,
suspend or refuse to renew any license of a licensee who violates the provisions of this chapter or whose employee or agent violates
the provisions of this chapter.
Proof that the licensee, or his employee or agent, demanded, was shown, and reasonably relied upon written evidence of identification,
as required by subsection C of this section, in any transaction forbidden by subsection A or B of this section, or subsection 3-3-19C of
this chapter, is competent evidence and may be considered in any ordinance violation prosecution or in any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based on a violation of subsection A or B of this section, or subsection 3-3-19C of this chapter.
G. Vicarious Liability: The following persons shall be liable to any individual who has been injured by an alcohol impaired underage person
when the impairment is a contributing cause of the injury:
1. Any person who delivered to the underage person any alcoholic liquor which contributed to the impairment. The person making the
initial delivery to an underage person remains liable to anyone injured by the same or different underage person regardless of how
many times the alcoholic liquor changed hands.
2. Any person in control of a premises, who knowingly or negligently fails to maintain supervision to such an extent that alcoholic liquor
is consumed on the premises by an underage person.
3. Any person who knowingly or negligently permits the operation of a motor vehicle under his or her control by an underage person,
when the person knew or in the exercise of ordinary judgment should have known that the underage person was either impaired or
had consumed any amount of alcoholic liquor prior to when the permission was granted.
The vicarious liability established by this subsection G shall not be subject to the limitations on damages as set forth in 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-21.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 62/426
H. Operation Of A Motor Vehicle While In Possession Or Under The Influence Of Alcohol: The following shall apply when any underage
person is found in the village operating any motor vehicle in which or on which is found any alcoholic liquor of any kind or nature, or
when the underage person is in a state of impairment due to consumption of alcoholic liquor:
1. The motor vehicle shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the police department;
2. The motor vehicle may be released only to another person showing proof of ownership or lease rights to the motor vehicle;
If the vehicle operator is under eighteen (18) years of age and is the owner or lessee of the vehicle, then the vehicle may be released
only to a parent or legal guardian of the underage owner/lessee;
3. The motor vehicle may not be released to any person who was a passenger in the motor vehicle at the time the alcoholic liquor was
found unless at least twenty four (24) hours have passed from the time of the finding;
4. The vehicle shall not be released until the person seeking the release has paid an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
to the police department, plus any towing or storage costs;
5. The following factors shall not be considerations in determining whether or not to impound the motor vehicle:
a. Whether the alcoholic liquor is in an opened or unopened container, unless it is in an unopened container under the control of the
parent or guardian of the underage person. The parent or guardian must be in the vehicle and the underage person must not be in
a state of impairment due to consumption of alcoholic liquor;
b. Whether the operator is the owner of the alcoholic liquor or the vehicle;
c. Whether the operator had knowledge of the existence of the alcoholic liquor within the motor vehicle;
6. The above obligations and penalties shall be in addition to the penalties that may be assessed in a court of law for any charges
incident to the stop;
7. Any law enforcement officer, the police department and the village and any of its officers or agents shall be absolutely immune from
any liability or exposure to liability of any kind or nature for the enforcement or implementation of this subsection H. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-
15-2013)
3-3-21: VIOLATIONS OF RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX ACT:
In addition to other grounds specified in this chapter, the local liquor control commissioner may refuse the issuance or renewal of a retail
liquor dealer's license or suspend or revoke such license for any of the following violations of the retailers' occupation tax act, approved
June 28, 1933, as amended:
A. Failure to make a tax return.
B. The filing of fraudulent return.
C. Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally determined to be due.
D. Failure to keep books and records.
E. Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificates of registration.
F. Wilful violation of any rule or regulation of the state department of revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability.
(Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-22: APPLICATION OF OTHER PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the licensee, owner, proprietor or person in charge of any place in the village where alcoholic
liquor is sold from the restrictions and requirements of any other provision of this code or of the statutes of the state. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-
2013)
3-3-23: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES:
A. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: The local liquor control commissioner may, in accordance with the liquor control act, revoke or
suspend any license issued under the provisions of this chapter if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of
the liquor control act, this chapter or any other ordinance or resolution enacted by the corporate authorities of the village, or any
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 63/426
applicable rules or regulations established by the local liquor control commissioner or the Illinois liquor control commission, or any state
and/or federal statute which is not inconsistent with this chapter.
B. Fine In Addition To Suspension: In addition to any suspension of a local license, the local liquor control commissioner may levy a fine on
the licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in fines may be imposed against any
licensee during any license year.
C. Immediate Closure Of Business: If the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a
particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the village, he may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the
reasons or such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving
the licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period; except, that if the licensee is also engaged in another business on the
licensed premises such order shall not be applicable to such other business.
D. Public Hearing: No such license shall be so revoked or suspended and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the
local liquor control commissioner with a three (3) day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and
defend against the charges contained in such notice. The three (3) day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery by
certified or registered mail or by personal service.
E. Decisions: The local liquor control commissioner shall, within five (5) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the
license should be revoked or suspended or that the licensee should be fined, states the reason for such determination in a written order
and either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked and serve a copy of such order within
the five (5) days upon the licensee.
Review of the decisions of the local liquor control commissioner shall be pursuant to the Illinois administrative review law and limited to
a review of the official record of the local liquor control commissioner.
F. Costs: Any licensee determined by the local liquor control commissioner to have violated any of the provisions of the liquor control act, or
any ordinance or resolution of the village, or any rule or regulation established by the local liquor control commissioner, or the Illinois
liquor control commission, shall pay to the village the costs of the hearing before the local liquor control commissioner on such violation.
The local liquor control commissioner shall determine the costs incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but not limited to:
court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the local liquor control commissioner may allow.
The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the local liquor control commissioner.
Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this section and may be cause for license suspension or
revocation, or the levy of a fine.
In the event of an appeal to the Illinois liquor control commission, and in cases where the appeal is taken pursuant to the administrative
review act, payment is due forty (40) days after the entry of an order finally affirming the determination of the local liquor control
commissioner.
G. Effect Of License Revocation: When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to any licensee for
the period of one year thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling alcoholic liquor at retail in the premises described in such
revoked license. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-24: RECORDS KEPT:
The village clerk shall keep a complete record of all local retail liquor dealers' licenses issued and shall immediately give written notice to
the chief of police of the issuance, renewal, revocation or suspension of any license. The village clerk shall process all applications for local
retail liquor dealers' licenses and any renewal thereof. In addition, at the request of the local liquor control commissioner, the village clerk
shall perform such other duties as may be necessary to administer the provisions contained in this chapter. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-25: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Liability For Violations: Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any
officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or
licensee and such employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by
him personally.
B. Penalties Generally: Unless another penalty is expressly provided for in this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than the maximum amount permitted by section 1-4-1 of this code
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 64/426
addition to any other penalty, a licensee convicted of violating any provision of this chapter may be subject to having his license
revoked, suspended or not renewed by the local liquor control commissioner.
C. License Revocation As Additional Penalty: Whenever any licensee shall have been convicted by any court of a violation of any of the
provisions of the liquor control act, or of this chapter or any other ordinances of the village controlling or regulating the sale of alcoholic
liquors, the licensee shall, in addition to all other penalties for such offense, incur a forfeiture of any local retail liquor dealer's license
issued pursuant to this chapter and all monies that have been paid therefor. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
3-3-26: SALE OF KEGS:
A. Only a licensee holding a class F liquor license can sell kegs.
B. A licensee who sells a keg shall affix to each keg sold a tag, furnished by the local liquor control commissioner, containing an
identification number enabling the purchaser to be identified.
C. The licensee shall keep a logbook of all kegs sold, showing the identification number on the tag affixed to each keg, and the purchaser's
name, address, telephone number, driver's license/state identification number, description of the second form of identification, if
required, date of birth, and signature of party purchasing keg. The logbook shall be available for inspection by the village police
department during normal working hours.
D. The licensee shall require the purchaser to deposit, at the time of the sale of a keg, at least fifty dollars ($50.00) for the sale of a keg with
a pumper and at least ten dollars ($10.00) for sale of a keg without a pumper. The deposit shall be refunded only upon the return of the
keg with the tag properly affixed. Only one deposit fee will be required from a purchaser of more than one keg at a time.
E. The licensee shall require the purchaser, at the time of the sale, to sign a form to be provided by the local liquor control commissioner,
setting forth the provisions of this section and informing the purchaser that the deposit will be forfeited if the keg is not returned with the
tag properly affixed. The licensee shall retain this form for ninety (90) days after the sale.
F. Any keg not returned with the tag properly affixed within sixty (60) days following the date of sale shall be considered lost, and the
deposit shall be forfeited.
G. A licensee may retain the forfeited deposit.
H. It is unlawful to possess a keg within the village which does not have a proper tag affixed or, if the keg was purchased outside the
village, without proof of purchase for the keg, including the name and address of the seller. (Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013)
Chapter 4
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
ARTICLE A. PEDDLERS
3-4A-1: DEFINITION:
The following word used in this article shall have the following meaning unless a different meaning is required by the context:
PEDDLING: The act of traveling by foot, vehicle or any other means of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from street
to street carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and
delivering articles to purchasers or, without traveling from place to place, the selling or offering for sale of goods, wares or merchandise
from a vehicle or other means of conveyance. Peddling shall not include: a) the sale of newspapers, b) delivering goods, wares or
merchandise to homes pursuant to regularly established routes or pursuant to prior individualized invitation from the homeowner, c)
"charitable solicitation" by "charitable organizations" as those terms are defined in section 3-4B-1 of this chapter, or d) parking of a vehicle
by the owner thereof for the purpose of displaying it for sale on the driveway of the private property where the owner resides, but only in
conformance with section 6-3-4 of this code. (Ord. 1046-03, 10-27-2003)
3-4A-2: PROHIBITION:
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to engage in peddling within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 773-96, 10-14-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 65/426
ARTICLE B. SOLICITORS
3-4B-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases as used in this Article shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning is required by the
context:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS: Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, not-for-profit, religious or eleemosynary person or one purporting
to be such which solicits and collects funds for charitable purposes.
CHARITABLE PURPOSE: Any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, not-for-profit, religious or eleemosynary purpose.
CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS: Any request for the donation of money, property or anything of value, or the pledge of a future donation of
money, property or anything of value; or the selling or offering for sale of any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, whether of
value or not, including, but not limited to, goods, books, pamphlets, tickets, publications or subscriptions to publications or brochures, upon
the representation, express or implied, that the proceeds of such sale will be used for a "charitable purpose" as such term is herein defined.
Unless otherwise indicated, for purposes of this Article, the term "solicitation" shall refer to charitable solicitation.
COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind,
character or description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever; seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
etc.
PERSONS: Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any combination thereof.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as hereinafter provided, which certificate is in
the possession of the solicitor, conspicuously displayed on his or her person while engaged in solicitation. (Ord. 773-96, 10-14-1996)
3-4B-2: PROHIBITION OF COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to engage in commercial solicitation within the corporate limits of the Village. (Ord. 773-
96, 10-14-1996)
3-4B-3: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any charitable organization to engage in charitable solicitation for charitable purposes within the corporate limits of
the Village unless such organization shall have first obtained a certificate of registration from the Village as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 773-
96, 10-14-1996)
3-4B-4: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form provided by the Village. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the
information requested on the application, as follows:
A. The name and address of the charitable organization/person and the name or names under which it/he intends to engage in solicitation.
B. The name and address of the person in charge of solicitation in the Village and an address within the State of Illinois where service of
process may be had.
C. The full name including middle initial and address of all persons who will engage in solicitation in the Village; provided, however, that
such information does not need to be provided for minors who will engage in solicitation.
D. The dates and time of day such solicitations are to be made and the geographic area within the Village wherein such solicitation shall be
conducted at a particular time and day.
E. The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for a certificate under this Article, if any.
F. A written statement of recent date issued by the Attorney General of Illinois that the charitable organization has complied with the
provisions of the Solicitation for Charity Act, 225 Illinois Complied Statutes 460/1 et seq., or a written statement by the Attorney General
of exemption under 225 Illinois Complied Statutes 460/3. (Ord. 773-96, 10-14-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 66/426
3-4B-5: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
An application for a certificate of registration shall be submitted to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall acknowledge receipt of such
application in writing within five (5) working days of such receipt and shall act upon such application within ten (10) days after its receipt. No
application shall be effective until acted upon by the Chief of Police. If the Chief of Police finds and determines that all the requirements of
this Article have been met, the Chief of Police shall issue said certificate of registration forthwith.
The failure of an applicant to fulfill the requirements of this Article shall be the sole basis for the denial of a certificate of registration by the
Chief of Police. In the event that any certificate of registration to engage in charitable solicitation is denied for failure to comply with the
requirements of this Article, the Chief of Police shall immediately notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for said denial. If said
application is not cured within ten (10) days after the date on which the Chief of Police denies the issuance of said certificate of registration,
the Village Attorney shall be and is hereby authorized to apply to the Circuit Court of Lake County, Illinois, or the United States District
Court for the Northern District of Illinois for a judicial determination as to whether the charitable solicitation described in the application may
be prohibited. The applicant shall be named in any action as a party defendant. The Village shall assert every possible and reasonable
effort to have the case heard on its merits without undue delay as soon as legally possible. If a judicial determination is not made within
thirty (30) days after the date of denial, an interim certificate of registration shall be deemed issued, which shall be valid until such judicial
determination is made. (Ord. 773-96, 10-14-1996)
3-4B-6: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
Any person owning or occupying any premises within the Village may post a notice indicating that solicitors are not invited at said premises.
Any such notice shall be given in the following manner:
A weatherproof card not less than three inches by four inches (3" x 4") in size shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
premises indicating as follows:
NO SOLICITORS INVITED.
The letters shall be at least one-third inch (1/3") in height.
Such cards so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of the determination by the owner or occupant of the premises that
solicitors are not invited. (Ord. 773-96, 10-14-1996)
3-4B-7: DUTY OF SOLICITORS:
It shall be the duty of every solicitor, upon going onto any premises in the Village, to first examine the notice provided for in Section 3-4B-6
of this Article, if any is attached. If such notice is attached, the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. (Ord.
773-96, 10-14-1996)
3-4B-8: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to remain upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon
or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the owner or occupant of such premises for
the purpose of securing an audience with the owner or occupant thereof, and engage in solicitation as herein defined in defiance of the
notice exhibited at the premises in accordance with the provisions of Section 3-4B-6 of this Article.
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any premises, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises
when requested to do so by the occupant. (Ord. 773-96, 10-14-1996)
3-4B-9: TIME LIMIT FOR SOLICITING:
No person shall engage in solicitation as herein defined prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. (Ord. 773-96, 10-
14-1996)
3-4B-10: PROHIBITIONS:
A. Felons And Persons Convicted Of Sex Offenses As Solicitors: It shall be unlawful for any person to be a solicitor who has been
convicted of a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois, or any equivalent law of any other state, or under the Federal laws of the
United States, within five (5) years of the date of application. It shall be unlawful for any person to be a solicitor who has been convicted
of a sex offense as defined by 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes, act 5 article 11, or any equivalent law of any other state, within five (5)
years of the date of application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 67/426
B. Fraud: No person shall misrepresent his name, occupation, financial condition, social condition or residence, and no person shall make
or perpetrate any other misstatement, deception or fraud, in connection with any solicitation, or in any application or report filed under
this Article. (Ord. 773-96, 10-14-1996)
3-4B-11: SOLICITATION OF CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS ON HIGHWAYS:
Solicitation of charitable contributions on highways within the Village shall be permitted; provided, however, that all such activity shall be
conducted in strict conformity with and shall be limited to that activity permitted under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code paragraph
5/11-1006(c) and this Village Code. (Ord. 773-96, 10-14-1996)
3-4B-12: REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
The Chief of Police shall revoke a certificate of registration for a violation of any of the regulations listed in Sections 3-4B-6 through 3-4B-10
of this Article, inclusive. Immediately upon such revocation, notice thereof shall be given by the Chief of Police to the holder of the
certificate by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. Notice may also be given by the Chief of Police orally; provided, however
that such notice shall be followed by written notice via certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. Upon receipt of notice of
revocation, all solicitation activity shall cease.
In the event the Chief of Police revokes any certificate of registration for charitable solicitations, the Village shall seek a judicial
determination of such action in the same manner as is provided for in Section 3-4B-5 of this Article. If a judicial determination is not made
within thirty (30) days after the date of revocation, an interim certificate of registration shall be deemed issued which shall be valid until such
judicial determination is made. (Ord. 773-96, 10-14-1996)
3-4B-13: RECORDS KEPT:
The Chief of Police shall cause to be kept an accurate record of every application received and acted upon together with all other
information and data pertaining thereto, all certificates of registration issued under the provisions of this Article, and a record of the denial of
any and all applications. (Ord. 773-96, 10-14-1996)
Chapter 5
ENTERTAINMENTS AND AMUSEMENTS
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter and unless otherwise distinctly expressed, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set out
herein:
ADMISSION CHARGE: Any charge for the right or privilege to any entertainment or amusement and shall include, among others, the
following: all charges for seats, chairs, tables, benches, tents and structures, reserved or otherwise, and other similar accommodations; all
charges made for food and refreshment where any free entertainment is provided other than by mechanical means; all charges made for
the use of rental of equipment or facilities for purposes of entertainment and amusement unless persons not using the equipment or
facilities are admitted free; and all automobile parking charges.
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER: The collector of village taxes for the village of Hawthorn Woods.
ENTERTAINMENT OR AMUSEMENT: Includes, any entertainment or recreational activity offered for public participation among others, the
following: amusement parks and all forms of recreation therein, billiards, bowling, skating (ice and roller), horseback riding, public golf
course fees, public driving ranges.
In addition, included in this definition is any exhibition, performance, presentation or show for entertainment purposes, viewed outside
a home or hotel guestroom, including, but not limited to, any theatrical, dramatic, musical or spectacular performance, promotional
show, motion picture show, flower, poultry or animal show, animal act, circus, rodeo, athletic contest, sport, game or similar exhibition
such as boxing, wrestling, skating, dancing, swimming, racing or riding on animals or vehicles, baseball, basketball, softball, football,
tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games, bowling or billiard games charged by the hour and any other activity or event where
persons engage in or observe a recreational or physical activity, game or performance.
The amusement tax is not applicable to private golf use at country club facilities but will be applicable to public golf courses and public
driving ranges. In addition, any event open to the public where tickets are purchased (including those held at private clubs) will be
subject to the amusement tax.
Amusements shall not include those actions where the manner in which one participates in a recreational activity is instructional in
nature and constitutes lessons or classes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 68/426
PERSON: Includes an individual, firm, corporation, company, partnership, association, and unincorporated association and any person
acting in a fiduciary capacity.
TAXPAYER: Any person who conducts or engages in the business of providing entertainment or amusement. (Ord. 1303-09, 11-16-2009)
3-5-2: LICENSE TAX BASED ON ADMISSION:
There is hereby imposed on every person conducting or engaging in the business of providing entertainment or amusement to which a
charge is made for admission within the limits of the village of Hawthorn Woods, a license tax of five percent (5%) of each admission
charge. Said license tax is in addition to all other taxes imposed by law. (Ord. 1303-09, 11-16-2009)
3-5-3: FILING OF STATEMENT AND PAYMENT OF TAX:
Every person conducting or engaging in the business of providing entertainment or amusement and imposing a charge for admission within
the limits of the village of Hawthorn Woods shall, on or before the tenth day of each month, file with the chief financial officer a statement
signed and sworn to by such person indicating the number and respective prices of admission charges collected by such person during the
next preceding calendar month. A remittance for the amount of the tax levied by this chapter shall accompany the statement. The failure of
the taxpayer to collect the tax shall not exclude or release the obligation to pay the tax. (Ord. 1303-09, 11-16-2009)
3-5-4: EXCLUSIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to any person conducting or engaging in the business of providing entertainment or amusement where
admission charges are to be used exclusively for charitable, eleemosynary, educational or religious purposes. (Ord. 1303-09, 11-16-2009)
3-5-5: TEMPORARY AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT; BOND AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
Every person conducting or engaging in the business of providing temporary or transitory amusement or entertainment and receiving
admission charges for the same shall be subject to the tax levied by this chapter. Such person shall obtain a permit from the chief financial
officer at least forty eight (48) hours in advance of any operations conducted within the village of Hawthorn Woods. Such person shall file a
statement and remittance on the day following times as the chief financial officer shall determine; provided, however, that before a permit
shall be issued under this section, the applicant for the same shall deposit with the chief financial officer a sum of money, or bond in lieu
thereof, conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this section, in an amount to be determined by the chief financial officer as
sufficient to cover the admission taxes which shall become due and owing upon the conclusion of temporary or transient operations. (Ord.
1303-09, 11-16-2009)
3-5-6: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
The chief financial officer either personally or through his/her authorized agents, shall have the right to inspect and examine the records of
every person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 1303-09, 11-16-2009)
3-5-7: RECORDS:
All records of every person conducting or engaging in the business of providing entertainment or amusement shall be retained for a period
of three (3) years. (Ord. 1303-09, 11-16-2009)
3-5-8: LIENS FOR UNPAID TAXES:
A tax due and unpaid under this chapter shall be a debt due to the village of Hawthorn Woods. It shall be a personal obligation of the
taxpayer and shall be a lien upon all of the property of the taxpayer. Said lien shall have priority over all other liens and obligations except
those due to the state of Illinois and the United States. Said lien shall be enforced by the chief financial officer as any other lien would be
enforced against a default debtor. (Ord. 1303-09, 11-16-2009)
3-5-9: PENALTIES FOR NONPAYMENT:
A taxpayer who fails to remit the amount of the tax when due shall, in addition to all other penalties, pay a penalty of one percent (1%) of
the amount of the tax due. For each successive thirty (30) days elapsing before payment there shall be added an additional penalty of ten
percent (10%). (Ord. 1303-09, 11-16-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 69/426
3-5-10: DETERMINATION OF TAX DUE BY CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER:
If a taxpayer fails to file a statement, or the chief financial officer has reasonable cause to believe that an erroneous statement has been
filed, the chief financial officer may proceed to determine the amount of the tax due and in connection therewith shall make such
investigations and take such testimony and evidence as may be necessary; provided, however, that the taxpayer shall be given notice and
an opportunity to be heard before any determination is made by the chief financial officer. (Ord. 1303-09, 11-16-2009)
3-5-11: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief financial officer shall have power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the terms of this chapter for the purpose of
carrying out and enforcing the payment of the tax herein levied; and copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file and available for
public examination in the chief financial officer's office. Failure or refusal to comply with any rules and regulations promulgated under this
section shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1303-09, 11-16-2009)
3-5-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Every person who wilfully violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall
be liable to a fine or penalty of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation. (Ord.
1303-09, 11-16-2009)
ARTICLE A. COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND VENDING
MACHINES
3-5A-1: DEFINITIONS:
COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Includes any and all instruments, games, machines, equipment and other devices the operation
of which is governed or controlled by the insertion of or deposit of a coin or token.
VENDING MACHINE: Any coin operated device which dispenses merchandise. (Ord. 403-88, 3-8-1988)
3-5A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
A. License Required, Term: No person shall keep, install, maintain, operate or permit any of the devices designated in section 3-5A-1 of this
article in any building or place within the village for use by the public and/or for gain without first having obtained a license for each such
device. All licenses shall be annual licenses with effective dates of May 1 to April 30 of the respective year. (Ord. 403-88, 3-8-1988;
amd. Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
B. Application Fee: The applicant shall pay an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each device. Said fee shall be payable on issuance of
the license or licenses and annually thereafter. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-5A-3: LICENSE APPLICATION CONTENTS:
Any person desiring a license shall make application therefor to the chief operating officer. The application shall set forth the name and
address of the applicant, the owners of the machine or machines and the address of the building where such device or devices will be
located, maintained and operated, and the charge to be made to the customer for such operation, and, in the case of vending machines,
the identity and form of the products to be dispensed. (Ord. 403-88, 3-8-1988; amd. Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
3-5A-4: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
A. Amusement Devices:
1. Upon approving the application and upon payment of the license fee(s), the chief operating officer shall deliver a license to the
licensee. The license shall indicate the number of devices licensed and their location. This license shall be posted in a prominent
place at the location of the devices.
2. Each device shall be clearly identified on the device as belonging to the licensee.
3. The licensee shall be permitted to substitute and/or exchange devices, providing the total number of devices does not exceed the
number licensed. Substituted or exchanged devices shall be subject to the approval of the village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 70/426
B. Vending Machines: Upon approval of the applicant(s) and upon payment of the license fee(s), the chief operating officer shall deliver a
license to the licensee. The license shall be displayed on each vending machine in a prominent place at the location of each
machine(s). The license shall not be transferable or substituted to another vending machine. (Ord. 403-88, 3-8-1988; amd. 1995 Code;
Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
3-5A-5: NUMBER OF MACHINES OR DEVICES:
No more than one jukebox or musical box, three (3) other coin operated amusement devices and three (3) vending machines shall be
permitted in any business establishment to which a village business license has been issued. (Ord. 403-88, 3-8-1988)
3-5A-6: MAINTENANCE OF DEVICES:
All devices shall be kept and maintained in good repair and operating condition at all times. In the event of a malfunction of a device, the
operator of the premises, his agents, servants or employees on the premises shall return to the user the monies inserted therein. (Ord. 403-
88, 3-8-1988)
3-5A-7: VIOLATION, PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation.
After the village gives the licensee notice of a violation, each day during which the violation remains uncorrected shall be deemed to be a
separate violation. (Ord. 403-88, 3-8-1988)
ARTICLE B. RAFFLES
3-5B-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them below. All terms not expressly defined herein
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Illinois raffles act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/1 et seq.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable sums expended for prizes, village license fees, and other
reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-2(b) of the "criminal code of 1961", conducted by an
organization licensed under this article in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of
numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning chance; and
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set
of acts or the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the
outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest. (Ord. 1325-10, 6-21-2010)
3-5B-2: LICENSE:
A. License Required: No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances without having first obtained a license therefor
pursuant to this article.
B. Applications: The license and application for license must specify the area or areas within the village of Hawthorn Woods in which the
raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of
winning chances and the location or locations at which winning chances will be determined. All organizations applying for a license
issued under this article shall be required, as a condition of receiving a license, to attest that the organization has elected to waive the
requirement for the raffle manager designated by the organization to post a fidelity bond.
C. Sworn Statement: The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the prospective
licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and secretary of the organization.
D. Validity Of License: Each such license shall be valid for only one raffle or for a specific number of raffles to be conducted during a
specified period not to exceed one year; further such license may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police in the event of
violation of the terms of this article or any applicable law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 71/426
E. Eligibility: The following are ineligible for any license under this article:
1. Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
2. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambler promoter;
3. Any person who is not of good moral character;
4. Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection E1, E2, or E3 of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit
interest, or in which such person is active or employed;
5. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection E1, E2, or E3 of this section is to participate in the management or
operation of a "raffle" as defined in this article. (Ord. 1325-10, 6-21-2010)
3-5B-3: NOT FOR PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS:
Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational, or veterans' organizations which
operate without profit to their members, or to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the chief of police determines is organized for the
sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the
result of illness, disability, accident or disaster; or is otherwise in compliance with 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/2(b) of the act. (Ord.
1325-10, 6-21-2010)
3-5B-4: LIMITATIONS:
A. The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single raffle under this article is limited to one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00). The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a single raffle is limited to one million dollars
($1,000,000.00). The maximum prize which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or sold is limited to one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), and the maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold is limited to three hundred sixty four (364)
days.
B. The sale of chances, and any person engaged in the sale of chances, for any raffle licensed under this article must comply with chapter
4 of this title, regulating the conduct of peddlers and solicitors.
C. No person may engage in the sale of raffle chances unless the raffle for which chances are being sold has been licensed in any
jurisdiction in the state in accordance with the raffles act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/1 et seq. (Ord. 1325-10, 6-21-2010)
3-5B-5: FEES:
Fees for such license to conduct a raffle shall be the amount described in the village fee schedule, subsection 3-1-20B of this title; provided,
that fees may be waived for qualifying organizations falling into one of the following categories:
A. Having a membership of which fifty five percent (55%) or more reside within the corporate limits of the village;
B. Having a charter or other official recognition by a parent, state or national organization that designates it a Hawthorn Woods chapter; or
C. Having a principal or sole place of business located in corporate limits of the village; or
D. Being an organization supporting exclusively a local unit of government which provides services to residents of the village. (Ord. 1325-
10, 6-21-2010)
3-5B-6: APPROVAL:
The village of Hawthorn Woods shall, within thirty (30) days, evaluate and either approve or disapprove of said application. The village clerk
shall issue the license provided that the applicant is eligible for a license and meets the requirements of this article. (Ord. 1325-10, 6-21-
2010)
3-5B-7: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 72/426
A. Use Of Proceeds: The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the licensee.
B. Participation In Management: No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may participate in the management
or operation of the raffle.
C. Remuneration: No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
D. Locations: Winning raffle chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license.
E. Age Of Participants: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles. A person under the age
of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent or
guardian. (Ord. 1325-10, 6-21-2010)
3-5B-8: RECORDS:
Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep such records and shall handle the receipts from the operation of such raffles as
required in accordance with state law. The village waives receipt of any records kept and maintained by the licensee, provided that
acceptance of a license by the applicant represents the licensee's agreement to provide any records related to the conduct of the raffle
within five (5) days of receiving a written demand therefore from the chief of police, or his designee. (Ord. 1325-10, 6-21-2010)
3-5B-9: RAFFLES MANAGER:
All operations of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization in the
application. (Ord. 1325-10, 6-21-2010)
3-5B-10: PENALTIES:
Any person found to have conducted any raffle in violation of this article shall be subject to the penalty provided in section 3-1-22 of this
title. (Ord. 1325-10, 6-21-2010)
Chapter 6
TOBACCO DEALERS
3-6-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND DECLARATION:
The mayor and board of trustees expressly finds and declares that: (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
A. Cigarette smoking is dangerous to human health.
B. There exists substantial scientific evidence that the use of tobacco products causes cancer, heart disease and various other medical
disorders.
C. The surgeon general of the United States has declared that nicotine addiction from tobacco is similar to addiction to cocaine, and is the
most widespread example of drug dependence in this country.
D. The director of the national institute on drug abuse concluded that the majority of the three hundred twenty thousand (320,000)
Americans who die each year from cigarette smoking became addicted to nicotine as adolescents before the age of legal consent.
E. The national institute on drug abuse found that cigarette smoking precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illicit drug use.
F. The present legislative scheme of prohibiting sales of tobacco products to persons under the age of eighteen (18) years has proven
ineffective in preventing such persons from using tobacco products.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 73/426
G. The enactment of this chapter directly pertains to and is in furtherance of the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the village,
particularly those residents under eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff,
chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of
payment, dispenses tobacco products. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-6-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, at retail, to give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or
delivering tobacco products within the village without having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license therefor pursuant to this chapter. Such
license shall be in addition to any other license required by this code. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-6-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
Application for a license hereunder shall be made, in writing, to the chief operating officer and shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 1 of this title. The license fee for a tobacco dealer's license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. (Ord.
1315-10, 2-16-2010)
3-6-5: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products within one hundred feet (100') of any school,
childcare facility or other building, used for education or recreational programs for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 826-
98, 5-11-1998)
3-6-6: PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS:
It shall be unlawful:
A. Sales To: For any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products to any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years.
Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of
tobacco products and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible
and shall state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background; said letters to be at least one inch (1") high.
B. Sale By: For any licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or
permit any person under eighteen (18) years of age to sell tobacco products in any licensed premises.
C. Purchase: For any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to purchase tobacco products or to misrepresent his identity or age or to
use any false or altered identifications for the purpose of purchasing tobacco products.
D. Possession: For any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to possess any tobacco products; provided, that the possession by a
person under the age of eighteen (18) years under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the
parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited.
E. Penalties Generally: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor
more than the maximum amount permitted by section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition to any other penalty, a licensee convicted of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 74/426
violating any provision of this section may be subject to having his license revoked, suspended or not renewed by the village. (Ord. 826-
98, 5-11-1998)
3-6-7: CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco
products, or any employee or agent of any such licensee or person, in the course of such licensee's or person's business, to distribute, give
away or deliver tobacco products free of charge to any person on any right of way, park, playground or other property owned by the village,
any school district, any park district or any public library. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-6-8: VENDING MACHINES; LOCKING DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or
delivering tobacco products by use of a vending machine unless such vending machine is equipped with a manual, electric or electronic
locking device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years.
Any premises where access by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years is prohibited by law or premises where the public is generally
not permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of the business located at such premises shall be exempt
from the requirements of this section. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
3-6-9: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Administration: The village mayor shall be charged with the administration of this chapter.
B. Suspension Or Revocation Of License: The village mayor may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter
as he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions hereof.
C. Fine In Lieu Of Suspension Or Revocation: In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license, the village mayor may, instead, levy a fine on
the licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed the maximum amount permitted by section 1-4-1 of this code for each violation. Each
day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
D. Hearing; Decisions; Fees:
1. Notice Of Hearing: No such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the
village mayor with a seven (7) day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend against
the charges contained in such notice. The seven (7) day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by
personal service.
2. Mayor's Decision: The village mayor shall, within seven (7) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the
license should be revoked or suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written
order and either the amount of the fine, the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked and serve a copy of such order
within the seven (7) days upon the licensee.
3. Fees: Any licensee determined by the village mayor to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the village the
costs of the hearing before the village mayor on such violation. The village mayor shall determine the costs incurred by the village for
said hearing, including, but not limited to, court reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing
and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the village mayor
may allow.
The licensee shall pay said costs to the village within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the village mayor. Failure to pay
said costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this chapter and may be cause for license suspension or revocation or
the levy of a fine. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
E. Use Of Premises After License Revocation: When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to
said licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling "tobacco products", as defined in
section 3-6-2 of this chapter, in the premises described in such revoked license.
F. Responsibility Of Licensee For Agents And Employees: Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be
the act of such licensee and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted
by the licensee personally. (Ord. 826-98, 5-11-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 75/426
Chapter 7
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
3-7-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: The customer service and privacy protection law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501, and all regulations promulgated
thereunder, are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to cable and video providers offering services within the village.
B. Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection law or regulations promulgated thereunder that become
effective after the effective date of this section shall be incorporated herein by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video
providers offering services within the village. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for
adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated herein without formal action by the village board. (Ord. 1240-07, 11-26-2007)
3-7-2: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES:
A. Enforcement: The village hereby declares its intent to enforce all customer service and privacy protection standards set forth in the cable
and video customer protection law with respect to complaints received from residents of the village. It is the village's intent to impose
such penalties as are permitted by law to ensure the privacy of village residents and the provision of high quality cable and video
services thereto.
For the purposes of this section, the term "material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with
service quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law.
B. Penalties: Pursuant to section 70-501(r)(1) of the cable and video customer protection law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1),
the village hereby provides for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the cable and video customer protection law by cable
or video providers, in addition to such other and further penalties provided by law. The monetary penalties imposed herein shall apply
on a competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and
shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. Each day that a
material breach remains outstanding after the cable or video service provider has received notice thereof, shall constitute a separate
and distinct violation of this chapter.
C. Notice: The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such
provider no less than thirty (30) days but in no event more than ninety (90) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified
material breach. (Ord. 1240-07, 11-26-2007)
3-7-3: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations as set forth in section 70-501(s) of the cable and video customer
protection law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s). Said credit shall be applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next
billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the
credits to the customer; the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 1240-07, 11-26-2007)
Chapter 8
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAXES
3-8-1: MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX:
A. Tax Imposed: A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
1. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of the village of Hawthorn Woods, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
B. Tax Exemptions: No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to
which such business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any
political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas be subject
to taxation under the provisions of this section for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the "municipal retailers' occupation tax act" authorized by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 76/426
C. Utility Easements: Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to this municipality
by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein,
thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business.
D. Definitions: For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for
resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or
otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be
determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor
or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however that "gross receipts" shall not include any amounts specifically
excluded from the definition of gross receipts in section 8-11-2(d) of the Illinois municipal code.
PERSONS: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver,
trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.
E. Effective Date: This section shall take effect after publication and the tax provided for herein shall be based on the "gross receipts", as
herein defined, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after September 1, 2010.
F. Tax Remittance And Return: On or before October 31, 2010, each taxpayer shall make a return to the chief financial officer for the month
of September 2010, stating:
1. Taxpayer's name;
2. Taxpayer's principal place of business;
3. Taxpayer's gross receipts during the month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4. Amount of tax;
5. Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the chief financial officer for a
corresponding one month period.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the chief financial officer, the
amount of tax herein imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an amount
based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts
previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts.
G. Erroneous Returns: If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this section,
whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due,
under this section from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3)
years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
H. Recovery; Statute Of Limitations: No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this section shall be commenced
more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
I. Penalty For Violation: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
(Ord. 1337-10, 7-19-2010)
3-8-2: MUNICIPAL ELECTRICITY USE TAX:
A. Short Title: The tax imposed by this section shall be known as the MUNICIPAL ELECTRICITY USE TAX and is imposed in addition to all
other taxes imposed by the village, the state of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision therefor.
B. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words or terms shall have the meanings
respectively applied to them:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other representative appointed
by order of any court.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 77/426
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a
subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business,
or any employee, agent, or other representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other
affiliate, irrespective of permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do
business in this state.
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT: The public utilities act as amended1.
PUBLIC UTILITY: A public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the public utilities act.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall
not include the use of electricity by a public utility directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
VILLAGE: The village of Hawthorn Woods, Illinois.
C. Tax Imposed:
1. Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code2 and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the
privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the
village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
Kilowatt Hours
Used Or Consumed
Cents Per Kilowatt Hour
First 2,000 0.61
Next 48,000 0.40
Next 50,000 0.36
Next 400,000 0.35
Next 500,000 0.34
Next 2,000,000 0.32
Next 2,000,000 0.315
Next 5,000,000 0.31
Next 10,000,000 0.305
Excess of 20,000,000 0.30
2. The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the village, the state of Illinois, or any other political
subdivision of the state.
3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the
tax would violate the constitution of the United States, the Illinois statutes, or the constitution of the state of Illinois.
4. The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential and nonresidential customers beginning
with the first bill issued on or after October 1, 2010.
D. Collection Of Tax By Public Utility:
1. Subject to the provisions of subsection F of this section regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this
section shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity to such
purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the
original charge for delivering the electricity.
2. Any tax required to be collected by this section, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the person
delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of
electricity, the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the
delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.
3. Persons delivering electricity shall collect from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity.
Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 78/426
they collect to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting
the tax and supplying data to the village upon request. For purposes of this section, any partial payment of a billing amount not
specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity.
E. Tax Remittance And Return:
1. Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form prescribed by the village chief financial officer. The return and
accompanying remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or
is required to be collected under subsection D of this section.
2. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax, under subsection I of
this section, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the village chief financial officer and pay the tax directly to
the village chief financial officer on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is used or
consumed.
F. Resales:
1. Resale Of Electricity: Electricity that is delivered to a person in the village shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that
person unless the person receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the village chief financial officer and
furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially
nontaxable as a sale for resale.
2. Resale Number: If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall
apply to the village chief financial officer for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax
imposed by this section on any purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the village chief financial
officer may reasonably require.
3. Approval; Assignment: Upon approval of the application the village chief financial officer shall assign a resale number to the applicant
and shall certify the number to the applicant.
4. Cancellation: The village chief financial officer may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable
under this section for electricity used or consumed by the parties, or if the number: a) was obtained through misrepresentation, or b)
is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making resales.
5. Collection And Remittance:
a. If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this
section directly to the village chief financial officer pursuant to subsection C of this section on the amount of electricity that the
reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to subsection D of this section and remit the tax on the amount of
electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
b. Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this
section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that
the person reports to the village chief financial officer the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the chief financial officer may reasonably require.
G. Books And Records: Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this section, shall keep accurate books
and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or may
have given rise, to any tax liability under this section. The books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection by the
village at all times during business hours of the day.
H. Credits And Refunds: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the
village, no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this section unless the person files a claim for refund
or credit within one year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted with the village treasurer.
I. Exemptions: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or
collection of the tax would violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution of the state of Illinois.
J. Tax To Be In Addition To Payment For Use Of Streets, Alleys Or Public Places: Any of the taxes enumerated in this section may be in
addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to the village by the taxpayer as compensation for the use
of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 1338-10, 7-19-2010)
Title 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 79/426
Chapter 1
HEALTH CODE
4-1-1: COUNTY HEALTH CODE ADOPTED:
The Lake County Health Code, as amended, is hereby adopted by the Village. (Ord. 128-60, 8-9-60)
Chapter 2
NUISANCES
4-2-1: INTENT:
It is hereby found and determined that it is in the public interest to prohibit public nuisances within the village and to establish penalties for
the maintenance of public nuisances, all to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens served by this village. (Ord. 327-
83, 6-14-1983)
4-2-2: PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the village or within the police
jurisdiction of the village. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-1986)
4-2-3: PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED:
A "public nuisance" is a thing, act, occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to:
A. Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public; or
B. In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of property; or
C. Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
D. Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway,
navigable body of water or other public way. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-1986)
4-2-3-1: NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH:
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but shall not be
construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition of section 4-2-3 herein.
A. Unwholesome Food Or Drink: All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public.
B. Animal Carcasses: Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within twenty four (24)
hours after death.
C. Animal Premises: Any barn, stable or shed used for keeping animals, except as authorized by the corporate authorities.
D. Breeding Grounds For Insects And Vermin:
1. Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash, debris, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, abandoned
vehicles or machinery, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease carrying insects, rats or other vermin may
breed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 80/426
2. Garbage cans which are not flytight.
E. Stagnant Waters: All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can multiply.
F. Water Pollution: The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes
or other substances.
G. Air Pollution: The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the village limits in such
quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial injury to property.
H. Offensive Odors: Any use of property, substances or things, or failed septic systems within the village, emitting or causing any foul,
offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons
or which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any appreciable number of persons within the village.
I. Abandoned Wells: All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public use.
J. Watercourse Obstructions: Any obstruction in or across any watercourse, drainage ditch or ravine.
K. Deposits On Public Or Private Property: The deposit of garbage, rubbish or any offensive substance on any street, sidewalk or public
place, or on any private property, except as may be permitted by ordinance.
L. Noxious Weeds: Any noxious weeds on private property, as defined in 505 Illinois Compiled Statutes 100/1 et seq. (noxious weed law)1.
(Ord. 366-86, 4-8-1986)
4-2-3-2: NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY:
The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but
such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming within the provisions of this
section 4-2-3:
A. Improper Building Construction: All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the village
relating to materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures.
B. Dangerous Buildings: All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise
unfit for human use.
C. Unauthorized Traffic-Control Devices: All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport to be or may be mistaken as
official traffic-control devices placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing.
D. Obstructions To View From Vehicles: All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public
streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk.
E. Tree Limbs: All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than eight feet (8') above the surface thereof or less than ten feet
(10') above the surface of a public street.
F. Fireworks: All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of the state of Illinois and ordinances of the village2.
G. Utility Wires: All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung less than fifteen feet (15') above the surface of the street or
ground. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-1986)
H. Noise:
1. General: Producing or permitting to be produced any offensive noise to the disturbance of the peace or quiet of any person residing in
the vicinity.
2. Construction Activity Noise: All exterior construction activity generating noise or dust when:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 81/426
a. Such noise or dust prevents the peaceful use and enjoyment of property by persons of ordinary sensibilities; and
b. Such construction activity occurs on any Sunday or national holiday, or at any time other than the following:
(1) Seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., on any Monday through Friday which is not a national holiday; or
(2) Seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M., on any Saturday which is not a national holiday.
3. Electronic Sound Systems: The use of a stationary or portable electronic sound reinforcement and/or sound reproduction system
utilizing loudspeakers, such that loud or raucous sounds radiate from the dwelling unit and are clearly audible from a distance of fifty
feet (50') from such dwelling unit, or, if said dwelling unit is part of a multi-family building, are clearly audible beyond the perimeter of
the dwelling unit, shall be prohibited during the following hours:
Sunday 10:00 P.M. - Monday 7:00 A.M.
Monday 10:00 P.M. - Tuesday 7:00 A.M.
Tuesday 10:00 P.M. - Wednesday 7:00 A.M.
Wednesday 10:00 P.M. - Thursday 7:00 A.M.
Thursday 10:00 P.M. - Friday 7:00 A.M.
Friday 11:00 P.M. - Saturday 7:00 A.M.
Saturday 11:00 P.M. - Sunday 7:00 A.M.
4. Penalty: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any person violating any provisions of this subsection H shall be subject to
a fine in an amount not less than those established in the schedule set forth below and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00):
Description Of Violation Minimum Fine Amount
First violation in any 365 day period $100.00
Second violation in any 365 day period 300.00
Third violation in any 365 day period 400.00
Fourth violation in any 365 day period 500.00
Fifth and subsequent violations in any
365 day period
600.00
For purposes of this subsection H, and in determining the appropriate amount due hereunder:
a. A separate violation shall be deemed committed for each violation for which a citation is issued.
b. All violations of any provision of this subsection H that are committed by the same person, or any firm controlled by such person,
shall be counted, regardless of whether or not the violations occur at the same location.
c. Any finding or plea of guilty or no contest upon a citation shall be deemed a violation. (Ord. 935-01, 3-19-2001)
I. Obstructions And Excavations In Public Ways: All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and all excavations in or under
the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of the village or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are kept or
maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose thereof has been accomplished.
J. Open Wells, Basements, Etc.: All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused basements freely accessible from any public
street, alley or sidewalk.
K. Unauthorized Assemblies: Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street,
alley or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the streets or sidewalks.
L. Unauthorized Advertisements: Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building, wall, fence, sidewalk, street or other private or public
property without permission of the owner thereof.
M. Overhanging Signs And Awnings: Any sign, marquee or awning which is in an unsafe condition or which overhangs any roadway, or
which overhangs any sidewalk less than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk surface.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 82/426
N. Fire Hazards: Any structure, material or condition which constitutes a fire hazard or will impair the extinguishing of any fire. (Ord. 366-86,
4-8-1986)
O. Repeated False Alarms: Repeated false alarms from any property alarm system within the village. As used in this subsection, the term
"property alarm system" is defined as an electrically operated instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which
automatically transmits a prerecorded voice alarm, or visual and audible signals to be registered by indicators at a monitor panel at a
receiving terminal or to an exterior device, upon receipt of a stimulus from a sensory apparatus that has detected a force or condition
reasonably requiring police response. As used in this subsection, the term "repeated false alarms" is defined as any signal sent, in
excess of three (3) in any calendar year, by a property alarm system which is not triggered by an unauthorized intrusion or other
condition reasonably requiring police response. "False alarm" shall not include any signal sent by a property alarm system in
conjunction with a test of said system if prior notification for such test is made to the Hawthorn Woods police department or its dispatch
center prior to such test. The provisions of any other section of this code notwithstanding, the penalty for any person violating this
subsection shall, upon conviction, be a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation during any calendar year, a fine of seventy five
dollars ($75.00) for the second violation during any calendar year, and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each subsequent
violation during that same calendar year. (Ord. 889-00, 1-10-2000)
P. Statute Nuisances: Any nuisance so defined by the Illinois Compiled Statutes3. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-1986)
Q. Dangerous Dogs, Vicious Dogs, And Dogs Barking For Prolonged Periods: As used in this subsection, the following words and terms
shall be construed as herein defined:
ATTACK: Any aggressive, menacing or vicious physical contact between any dog and any person or other animal, including, but not
limited to, contact of the mouth or teeth of the dog with the victim of the attack and any striking or scratching of the victim of the attack
by the paws of any dog.
BITE: Seizing with the teeth or jaws so that the person or other animal seized has been nipped, gripped, cut, wounded or pierced, and
further includes the contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any dog which, unmuzzled, in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any person or other animal in an
apparent attitude of attack upon any street, sidewalk or any public grounds or place, or any private premises, provided that such
approach is unprovoked; when such dog is not at all times kept in a confinement structure, or at all times when it is outside of a
confinement structure, such dog is not securely muzzled, restrained on a leash and under the direct control and supervision of the
owner; provided, that in no event shall such dog be under the direct control or supervision of any person under the age of eighteen (18)
years.
DOG BARKING FOR PROLONGED PERIODS: Any dog which barks repeatedly and/or continuously so as to produce material
annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt to any person.
LEASH: A strap or chain, manufactured for use as a leash, securely fastened to the collar or harness of a dog which shall in no case be
longer than eight feet (8') and shall be of sufficient strength to keep such dog under control.
MUZZLE: A device constructed of strong, soft material or metal which will prevent a dog from biting any person or animal; provided, that
such muzzle must be made in a manner which will not cause injury to the dog nor interfere with its vision or respiration.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in a dog, or who keeps or harbors a dog, or who has it in his care, or acts as its
custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
PROVOCATION: Commission of a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises of the owner; or past or present teasing, tormenting,
abusing or assaulting of a dog; or commission or attempt to commit a crime.
VICIOUS DOG: Any dog which has, when unprovoked, bitten or attacked any person or other animal on public or private property; has a
known tendency, propensity or disposition to attack persons or animals without provocation; or has been found by the police department
to be a dangerous dog upon three (3) separate occasions.
Any person or persons who witness an incident involving a bite, attack or menacing behavior by any dog occurring in the village shall
make a report to the police department setting out the nature and date of the incident, the owner of the dog, the address of the owner
and description of the dog. The police department, upon receipt of a police report, shall investigate the complaint to determine whether
the dog is dangerous or vicious. If the police department finds that the dog is dangerous or vicious, the owner shall be notified by
certified mail or personal service of such finding. No dog shall be found dangerous or vicious if the attack or menacing behavior was the
result of provocation. (Ord. 729-95, 4-10-1995)
The owner of a dog found to be dangerous or vicious may, within seven (7) days of the mailing or service of notice by the police
department, make a written request to the chief operating officer for a review of such finding. Such review shall be made by the chief
operating officer within seven (7) days of such request and shall be based upon the police report and any statements or evidence
presented by the owner, witnesses to the incident, police department personnel or any other person possessing information relevant to
such finding. The chief operating officer shall issue the written findings within five (5) days after the review, sustaining or overruling the
finding made by the police department. During the pendency of any such review, the dog which is the subject of such review shall be at
all times kept in a confinement structure, or at all times when it is outside of a confinement structure, such dog shall be securely
muzzled, restrained on a leash and under the direct control and supervision of the owner; provided, that in no event shall such dog be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 83/426
under the control or supervision of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 729-95, 4-10-1995; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-
2009)
R. Housing More Than Three Dogs Or Cats Or Other Domestic Animals: The housing, keeping and/or maintenance within a single dwelling
unit of more than three (3) dogs or three (3) cats or three (3) other domestic animals, or any combination thereof, over the age of four
(4) months within the corporate limits of the village. (Ord. 798-97, 7-14-1997)
S. The Housing, Keeping And/Or Maintenance Of Any Dangerous Animal(s) Within The Corporate Limits Of The Village: As used in this
subsection, "dangerous animal(s)" shall mean any animal or animals which are wild or are not naturally tame and gentle, or which,
because of size, number, vicious nature, unpleasant odor, poisonous venom, tendency to run at large or propensity to serve as a
disease vector, or other characteristics of the same nature, could constitute a danger to human life, health or property, or produces
material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt to any person. The members of the police department are authorized to destroy
any dangerous animal of any kind when it is reasonably necessary for the protection of any person or property. Any expense incurred in
the handling of any animal under the provisions of this subsection shall be borne by the owner, including, but not limited to,
impoundment fee.
T. Housing Animals In Heat: The housing, keeping and/or maintenance of any animal in heat, when such animal is not within a confinement
structure, or under the direct control and supervision of its owner and restrained on a "leash", as defined in subsection Q of this section.
U. Animals Running At Large: As used in this subsection, "animal(s) running at large" shall mean any animal not upon the premises of its
owner or such other person having custody, possession or control over any such animal, which is not on a "leash", as defined in
subsection Q of this section, and under the control of a person physically able to control it. No owner or other person having custody,
possession or control over any animal shall suffer or permit such animal to enter upon the premises of another or to carry away any
vegetable, plant, fruit, shrub, tree, flower or other thing which is on such premises. Any animal running at large may be apprehended
and impounded, or, if such animal cannot be safely apprehended and impounded, such animal may be destroyed. Any expense
incurred in the handling of any animal and/or the provisions of this subsection shall be borne by the owner, including, but not limited to,
impoundment fees.
V. Animals Depositing Excrement: Animals depositing excrement on the property of someone other than their owner, unless such
excrement is promptly removed from such property by the owner or person having custody, possession or control over such animal, and
properly disposed of. No person who is the owner, or has custody, possession or control of any animal shall suffer or permit such animal
to deposit excrement on the property of someone other than the owner, unless such excrement is promptly removed from such property
and properly disposed of.
W. Exceptions: Notwithstanding any provision of subsections Q through V of this section to the contrary, guide dogs for the blind or hearing
impaired and law enforcement K-9 dogs shall be exempt from the provisions of subsections Q through V of this section, provided that
such dog is currently inoculated against rabies as provided for in 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8. (Ord. 729-95, 4-10-1995)
X. Watercraft, Snowmobiles Or Vehicles: The use of any device powered by a gasoline engine, including, but not limited to, personal
watercraft, any snowmobile or any vehicle, in, on, or across any lake, detention/retention basin or pond or other body of water in the
Village; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to watercraft, snowmobiles or vehicles being utilized in maintenance
activities for such body of water or in emergency rescue operations. (Ord. 922-00, 11-13-2000)
Y. Tarps Or Tarpaulins: Any tarps or tarpaulins in any yard used to cover structures, including but not limited to, accessory structures, motor
vehicles, firewood, and garden equipment or garden appurtenances, except portable outdoor cooking grills, outdoor furniture, fountains,
antique vehicles registered by the State of Illinois, and recreational vehicles as provided for in section 9-3-8 of this Code. (Ord. 1814-18,
2-26-2018)
4-2-4: INSPECTIONS:
Whenever complaint is made to the Corporate Authorities that a public nuisance exists, or has existed, within the Village, the Chief of Police
shall be promptly notified, or some other Village official whom the Mayor shall designate, who shall forthwith inspect or cause to be
inspected the premises and shall make a written report of his findings to the Mayor. Whenever practicable, the inspection officer shall cause
photographs to be made of the premises and shall file the same in the Office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 1125-
05, 5-16-2005)
4-2-5: ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A. Notice To Abate: If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private property and that there is great and
immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Village Mayor may direct the Chief of Police, or a Deputy
Sheriff, to serve a notice on the owner, or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining
such nuisance and to post a copy of the notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such nuisance within twenty four (24) hours and shall state that unless such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 84/426
nuisance is so abated, the Village will cause the same to be abated and will charge the cost thereof to the owner, occupant or person
causing or permitting or maintaining the same, as the case may be.
B. Abatement By Village: If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided, or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance
cannot be found, the building inspector, or some other Village official whom the Mayor shall designate, shall cause the abatement or
removal of such public nuisance. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
C. Abatement By Court Action: If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature
of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall
file a written report of his findings with the Corporate Authorities who shall cause an action to abate such nuisance to be commenced in
the name of the Village. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-1986)
4-2-6: COST OF ABATEMENT TO OWNER:
In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public
nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance, and, if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such cost shall be assessed
against the real estate as other special taxes. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-1986)
4-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, as amended, except for subsection 4-2-3-2O of this chapter, or failing or refusing
to comply with the provisions of any notice herein provided for within the time period as specified in said notice, or who shall resist or
obstruct any duly authorized representative of the Village in carrying out any provision of this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be subject to
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. Each day any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The
fine authorized by this section shall be in addition to any cost or expense reimbursed to the Village pursuant to any other provision of this
chapter. (Ord. 368-86, 6-10-1986; amd. 1995 Code)
Chapter 3
WEED AND PLANT CONTROL
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
IMPROPER GROWTH OF WEEDS OR GRASSES: All accumulations of weeds and grasses over ten inches (10") in height.
NOXIOUS WEEDS: Any plant which is defined as a "noxious weed" on the list published and incorporated in the rules and regulations of
the Illinois department of agriculture from time to time, pursuant to the Illinois noxious weed law, 505 Illinois Compiled Statutes 100/1 et
seq., as amended, or any successor statute thereto. (Ord. 446-90, 4-9-1990; amd. Ord. 887-99, 12-13-1999; Ord. 1366-11, 4-18-2011)
4-3-2: DESTRUCTION OF NOXIOUS WEEDS; NOTICE; LIEN:
A. Destruction By Owner Required:
1. Every owner of real property shall destroy noxious weeds growing on such real property before said noxious weeds reach the seed
bearing stage.
2. Every owner of real property shall cut or destroy improper growth of weeds or grasses located on such real property. (Ord. 446-90, 4-
9-1990)
B. Service Of Notice: The village shall cause a notice to be served upon any owner who violates any provision of subsection A of this
section. Said notice shall give a summary of the provisions of this chapter and shall require the owner to destroy or cut said noxious
weeds or improper growth of weeds or grasses within seven (7) days after the delivery of said notice. The written notice shall be in force
for a period of twelve (12) months from the date the notice was issued. (Ord. 1366-11, 4-18-2011)
C. Abatement By Village; Lien: Should any owner refuse or neglect to comply with any notice provided for hereinabove, the village or its
agents may enter upon such real property and may cut or destroy any such noxious weeds or improper growth of weeds or grasses.
Any cost thereof shall be paid by the owner of such real property. This cost is a lien upon the real property affected in accordance with
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-7. Should the village be required to file a lien against any owner, said owner shall also be liable to
the village for the cost involved in the filing and releasing of said lien, including attorney fees. (Ord. 1336-10, 7-19-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 85/426
4-3-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The following shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection 4-3-2A2 of this chapter; provided, however, that no vegetation located
within four feet (4') of any property line, other than trees and shrubs, shall exceed twelve inches (12"):
A. The use of native plant species for aesthetic and/or wildlife reasons.
B. The use of native and/or introduced plant species to attract wildlife.
C. Plantings designed to reduce soil loss.
D. Plantings that enrich or stabilize the soil.
E. Plantings carried out under federal, state or local programs that require the unimpaired growth of plants during a majority or all of the
growing season.
F. Plantings designated for educational purposes.
G. Any plant species or group of plant species native or introduced that is grown for consumption, pleasure, or business reasons. This
exemption shall not apply to lands in a fallow state.
H. Plantings of a particular species or groups of species which are used to control or replace a noxious or troublesome species.
I. Any and all public parks and open space lands maintained by federal, state or local agencies including private conservancies.
J. All areas that are predominately woods. (Ord. 887-99, 12-13-1999)
4-3-4: DELIVERY OF NOTICE:
The written notice required by section 4-3-2 of this chapter shall be deemed delivered when deposited in the United States mail, first class,
postage prepaid, addressed to the owner at the address of the property on which noxious weeds or improper growth of weeds or grasses
exist or in the case of vacant land, to the owner as listed in the village records. (Ord. 446-90, 4-9-1990)
4-3-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Compliance with a notice delivered pursuant to subsection 4-3-
2B of this chapter does not relieve an owner of liability for violation of subsection 4-3-2A of this chapter.
B. Any person found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 446-90, 4-
9-1990; amd. 1995 Code)
ARTICLE A. INFECTED, DEAD OR DISEASED TREES
4-3A-1: NUISANCES DECLARED:
A. Infected/Infested Trees: All species of trees that exhibit the symptoms of any infectious disease or an infestation of insects that can
spread to other trees and cause damage or death to said trees, upon verification by a certified arborist, laboratory or agronomist, shall
be declared a public nuisance.
B. Dead Trees/Hazardous Trees And Conditions: All species and varieties of trees that are dead, substantially dead or are determined to be
in a hazardous condition, upon verification by a certified arborist, laboratory, or agronomist, shall be declared a public nuisance. (Ord.
1397-12, 4-16-2012)
4-3A-2: REMOVAL OF INFECTED TREES1:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 86/426
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any lot or land in the village to permit or maintain on any such lot or land, any tree or dead wood which,
as provided in section 4-3A-1 of this article, is a public nuisance, and it shall be the duty of any such owner promptly to remove or cause to
be removed any such tree or dead wood under the supervision and direction of the building inspector or his representative. (Ord. 1397-12,
4-16-2012)
4-3A-3: RIGHT OF ENTRY, INSPECTIONS AND ANALYSIS:
In order to carry out the purposes of this article and to implement the enforcement thereof, the building inspector, or his representative, is
hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon any lot or land in the village at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting any tree
or dead wood situated thereon, and the building inspector or his representative may remove such specimens from any such tree as are
required for the purposes of the laboratory analysis referred to in section 4-3A-1 of this article or to determine whether such tree, because it
is dead or substantially dead, may serve as a breeding place for the aforesaid disease of elms, ash or other diseases or insects. It shall be
unlawful for any person to take any action to prevent the building inspector or his representative from entering on any lot or land in the
village for the purpose of such inspection, or to interfere with the building inspector or such representative in the performance of any of his
duties provided for under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1397-12, 4-16-2012)
4-3A-4: NOTICE TO REMOVE:
If, on laboratory analysis of any specimen removed from any tree on any lot or land in the village by the building inspector, it is determined
that such tree is a public nuisance as provided by section 4-3A-1 of this article, or if the building inspector determines that any infected,
dead or substantially dead tree or dead wood on any such lot or land is a public nuisance as provided by section 4-3A-1 of this article, the
building inspector shall serve notice with reference thereto or cause notice to be served as herein provided. Such notice shall be personally
served upon the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year on said lot or land or shall be sent by
registered mail to such person. Such notice shall advise that the owner will have thirty (30) days from and after the date of the service of
the notice within which to remove such tree, trees or dead wood and have same destroyed, and that in case of the failure of the owner to
do same or have same done within said thirty (30) day period, that the village will do so or cause same to be done at the cost and expense
of the owner. The notice otherwise shall contain the substance of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-12. (Ord. 1397-12, 4-16-2012)
4-3A-5: ALTERNATIVES TO REMOVAL:
A. Alternative To Removing Infected/Infested Trees: Once a tree has been declared a nuisance, the property owner has the option to
provide a chemical or biological treatment to the tree(s) by a certified arborist or a crew working under the direction of a certified
arborist. Said treatment must be recognized by the United States department of agriculture or the Illinois department of agriculture as a
viable treatment for the diagnosed disease or insect infestation. Certification must be provided to the village inspector to verify treatment
occurred. Should the said treatment fail, then tree removal is required. (Ord. 1397-12, 4-16-2012)
4-3A-6: COST OF REMOVAL:
If the village removes from any lot or land in the village pursuant to this article, any infected tree which is a public nuisance, or any dead or
substantially dead tree or dead wood, the assessment of the cost of the work done by the village against the owner of the lot or land
involved shall be in addition to the penalties imposed herein for any violation or noncompliance with any provision of this article. (Ord. 1397-
12, 4-16-2012)
4-3A-7: PROPERTY OWNED BY VILLAGE:
Any tree or dead wood on property owned by the village which is a public nuisance shall promptly be removed under the supervision of the
building inspector or his representative at the expense of the village. (Ord. 1397-12, 4-16-2012)
4-3A-8: PENALTY:
A. Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1397-12, 4-16-
2012)
4-3A-9: REMOVAL BY VILLAGE, LIEN:
In case the owner of such lot or land refuses or neglects to remove any such tree, trees or dead wood within thirty (30) days after the
aforesaid notice is so served, the building inspector shall proceed to remove or have same removed and duly destroyed, and to collect from
the property owner the reasonable cost thereof. This cost is a lien upon the real estate affected superior to all other liens and
encumbrances, except tax liens; provided, that notice has been given as herein described; and expense is incurred and the village or
person performing the service by authority of the village in his or its own name, files notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 87/426
Lake County. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: a) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof,
b) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service, and c) the date or dates when such cost
and expense was incurred by the village. However, the lien of the village shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such
real estate have arisen subsequent to the tree removal and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of the village shall not be valid as
to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienholder whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice. Upon
payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice
of lien. (Ord. 1397-12, 4-16-2012)
Chapter 4
LITTER
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings:
AIRCRAFT: Any contrivance used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE: A litter storage and collection receptacle as required under these regulations.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
A. Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or
B. Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either
directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
C. Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, handbill theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an
admission is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; or
D. Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or
distributor.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER: Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein, and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office of the
United States in accordance with Federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as
provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not
less than four (4) issues per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, handbill dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet,
newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included
in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.
PRIVATE PREMISES: Any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway,
porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public squares, spaces, grounds
and buildings.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings and
solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
4-4-2: LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES:
A. Use of Receptacles: No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the Village, except
in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for collections. Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 88/426
private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place.
B. Sweeping Sidewalks: No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Village, the accumulation
of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the
sidewalk, if any, in front of their premises free of litter. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
4-4-3: LITTER FROM VEHICLES:
A. No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the Village.
B. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Village unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent
any load or contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place; nor shall any person drive or
move any vehicle or truck within the Village, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place,
mud, dirt, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
4-4-4: LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT:
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the Village any litter, handbill or any other object. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
4-4-5: LIQUID SUBSTANCES ON PAVEMENT:
A. Cleansing Goods in Street: No person shall wash, rinse, cleanse or cause or procure to be washed, rinsed or cleansed any cloth, yarn or
garment in any street or public place in the Village.
B. Chemicals: It shall be unlawful for any person to spill any turpentine, kerosene, gasoline, benzine, naphtha, coal oil, or any product
thereof; or any oil used for lubricating, illuminating or fuel purposes; or to allow any of such fluids to escape to or upon any asphalt
pavement of the Village; or to operate or permit to be operated any tank, wagon or other vehicle from which any of such fluids to escape
to or upon any asphalt pavement of the Village; or to operate or permit to be operated any tank, wagon or other vehicle from which any
of such fluids are permitted to escape. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
4-4-6: ADVERTISEMENTS:
A. Handbills:
1. Distribution in Public Places: No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk,
street or other public place within the Village; nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public
place. It shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the Village for any person to hand out or distribute,
without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
2. Placing on Vehicles: No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle. It shall not
be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill
to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
3. Depositing on Vacant Premises: No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private
premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
4. Distributing at Private Premises: No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon
private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other
person then present in or upon such private premises. In case of inhabited private premises, such person, unless requested by
anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if such
handbill is so placed or deposited as to be secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or
sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by Federal postal law or
regulations.
B. Posting Signs:
1. In Street: No person shall paste, post, paint, nail or otherwise fasten any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on
any curbstone or any other part of any sidewalk or street, or upon any tree, lamppost, utility pole, hydrant, bridge, pier or upon any
structure within the limits of any street in the Village except such as may be required by law or the ordinances of the Village.
2. On Private Property: No person shall paste, post, paint, print, nail or otherwise fasten any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement, notice
or anything of any kind upon any other private structure, building or premises unless he is the owner, agent or lessee thereof, without
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 89/426
the consent, in writing, of the owner of such building, structure or premises. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
4-4-7: LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. Vacant Lots: No person shall throw or deposit litter or construction material on any open or vacant private property within the Village
whether owned by such person or not.
B. Occupied Premises: No person shall throw or deposit litter or construction material on any occupied private premises within the Village,
whether owned by such person or not, except in authorized private receptacles for collection.
C. Maintaining Premises Free of Litter: The owner or person in control of any private premises or vacant property shall at all times maintain
the private premises or vacant property free of litter. This subsection shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private
receptacles for collection nor prohibit the burial or composting of litter on a small scale when covered by soil in a gardening plot or rear
yard in a manner so as to prevent offensive odors. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
4-4-8: REMOVAL OF LITTER:
A. Notice to Remove: The Village may notify the owner of any open or vacant private property within the Village or the agent of such owner
to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be
by certified or registered mail, addressed to said owner, at his last known address.
B. Action by Village: Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare within five (5) days after receipt of written notice provided for in this Section or within five (5) days after
the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the Village by the post office because of its inability to make delivery thereof,
provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or agent, the Village may pay for the disposing of
such litter or order its disposal by the Village.
C. Cost of Removal to Owner: In the event the Village is required to remove such dangerous litter, the owner of the premises shall be liable
to the Village for expense incurred by the Village in removing and disposing of such litter. A statement shall be rendered to the owner of
the premises for the cost thereof, and if not paid, suit may be instituted. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
4-4-9: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86;
1995 Code)
Chapter 5
WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
4-5-1: POLICY; CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Policy: The board of trustees hereby finds that the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare requires a continuous
source of safe, clean, potable water and proper sanitary sewer service.
B. General Connection Requirement: It shall be the duty of the owner and/or occupant of any dwelling, building or structure which is built
after the effective date of this section and that is adjacent to any public water supply system or public sewer collection system, or later
becomes adjacent to any public water supply system or public sewer collection system, to cause such premises to be connected to
such system. No building or development permit shall be issued for any such dwelling, building or structure unless provisions have been
made for such connection, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any such dwelling, building or structure until after such
connections have been made properly. All nonresidential connections to the public water supply system shall be at least two inches (2")
in diameter. Water system connections for every unit within a multiple-unit development shall be individually metered.
For purposes of this chapter: 1) "public water supply system" shall be defined as any system owned and operated by a municipality, a
county or by a utility company regulated by the Illinois commerce commission, 2) "multiple-unit development" shall include, without
limitation, structures for townhouses, condominiums, multiple-family dwellings and industrial or commercial multiple-unit buildings, and
3) "public sewer collection system" shall be defined as any system owned and operated by a municipality, a county or by a utility
company regulated by the Illinois commerce commission.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 90/426
C. Adjacent Premises: For purposes of this section, premises shall be deemed to be adjacent to such public water supply system or a
public sewer collection system where a water or sewer main is located in a public right of way or easement contiguous to such premises
and said water main or sewer main extends along the entire frontage of such premises. Further, premises shall not be deemed to be
adjacent to such water or sewer system where connection to such system would require tunneling or boring for a distance of greater
than two hundred feet (200') under any roadway, building or flowing stream.
D. Application For Connection: No person shall make any connection to such public water supply system or public sewer collection system
without first having filed an application for and obtained a permit from the village, and, if applicable, the governmental unit or utility
company which owns such system. All connections shall be made in full compliance with all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances,
agreements, rules and regulations of any governmental unit having jurisdiction over the premises. (Ord. 1092-04, 12-20-2004)
E. Variations: The board of trustees may, by ordinance, grant variations from the regulations imposed under this chapter. An application for
a variation shall be filed with the chief operating officer, and shall identify the specific unique circumstances affecting the subject
property and the specific detriment which would result in the absence of the requested variation. The chief operating officer shall
promptly review each application and forward the same, along with recommendations thereon, to the board of trustees. No variation
shall be granted unless unique circumstances affecting the subject property, not of the property owner's creation, would result in some
substantial detriment in the absence of the requested variation, nor shall a variation be granted if any material detriment to the public
health, safety or welfare would result therefrom. Financial hardship shall not constitute unique circumstances or a substantial detriment
for the purposes of this subsection. The board of trustees may impose such conditions or restrictions upon the grant of any variation as
may be necessary or appropriate to further the purpose and intent of the connection requirements of this section. (Ord. 1092-04, 12-20-
2004; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
4-5-2: CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
All water lines and sewer lines constructed and all water and sewer connections made shall be in accordance with the "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", of September 1978, as amended. (Ord. 1092-04, 12-20-2004)
4-5-3: STREET OPENINGS:
A fee of seven dollars ($7.00) for each square foot of opening will be required with each permit issued to connect or reconnect to any water
system or sewer system lying within a public street. The fee shall pay the cost of restoration and repair of any damage to public property.
Permits to public utilities shall be in accordance with the ordinance administering franchise agreements. (Ord. 1092-04, 12-20-2004)
4-5-4: CROSS CONNECTIONS:
A. Definitions: Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this section, have the meanings indicated in this subsection:
AGENCY: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
AGENCY'S REGULATIONS: 35 Illinois administrative code 653.
APPROVED: Those backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research Foundation For Cross Connection Control of
the University Of Southern California, the American Waterworks Association, the American Society Of Sanitary Engineering, the
American National Standards Institute, or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water source or system on or available to any premises, other than the waterworks system, and
includes the water so supplied. Auxiliary water may include water from a public water supply system; or water from a private or
emergency water supply system; or water from a source such as wells, lakes, or streams; or process fluids; or used water. Auxiliary
water may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water supply system over which the village does not have
control.
BACK SIPHONAGE: Type of backflow in a pipe or plumbing device in which used, contaminated, or polluted water flows back from a
receptacle or other source into a negative pressure in such pipe or plumbing device.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system
from any source other than the intended source of the potable water supply system.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the waterworks system or other potable water supply system by entrance of any
substance to a degree that could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2) otherwise separate piping systems, one of which
contains potable water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one
system into the other. A "direct cross connection" is a cross connection formed when the waterworks system or other potable water
supply system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance. An "indirect cross connection" is a cross connection
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 91/426
through which an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by a vacuum or otherwise introduced into the waterworks system or other
water supply system.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE: Any approved assembly intended to prevent backflow into the waterworks system or
other potable water supply system. The term "backflow prevention device" shall be included in the definition of cross connection
control device. All devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois plumbing code and the
agency.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICE INSPECTOR: Any person approved by the agency who is responsible for inspecting
cross connection control devices.
CUSTOMER: The owner, occupant, and/or person in possession, charge or control of any premises.
CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM: All parts of the water facilities beginning at the service connection used to convey water from the
waterworks system to the premises, which facilities are deemed to be operated, controlled or owned by the customer.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently acting check valves approved under ASSE
standard 1015. A double check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable
connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve.
FIXED AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet
supplying water and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device, or practice in a water system or its operation resulting in a real or potential danger to a
person's health and well being. The term "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means a hazard to the health of the user that
could be expected to result in death or significant reduction in the quality of life.
ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE: 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all materials, fixtures, piping, and appurtenances, appliances,
and installations of a plumbing system for compliance with the requirements of the Illinois plumbing code and this section.
NONPOTABLE: The quality of water that does not meet public health standards for drinking water and is not suitable for human
consumption.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its
quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE: The quality of water that meets public health standards for drinking water and is suitable for human consumption.
PREMISES: Any lot or a part of a lot, any building or a part of a building, or any parcel or tract of land.
PROCESS FLUIDS: Any fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentration such as would constitute a health, pollution, or system hazard if introduced into the waterworks system, a customer's
water system, or any other potable water supply system. This includes, but is not limited to:
1. Polluted or contaminated water;
2. Used water originating from the waterworks system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
3. Cooling waters;
4. Contaminated natural water taken from wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
5. Chemicals in solution or suspension;
6. Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a minimum of two (2) independently
acting check valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves
and approved under ASSE standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two
(2) checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging
to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must
include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test
cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at a water main of the waterworks system through
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 92/426
which water is supplied to the customer.
SURVEY: The collection of information regarding the location of all connections between a customer's water system and the
waterworks system and must include the location, type, and most recent inspection and testing date of all cross connection control
devices and methods located within that customer's premises. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual
plumbing inspection.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by the waterworks system after it has passed through the service connection.
VILLAGE: The village of Hawthorn Woods.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM OR WATER SYSTEM: Any water source, supply, or system, including all pipes, fittings, and control
valves, as well as the water so supplied. The term "water supply system" shall not include the waterworks system, however.
WATERWORKS SYSTEM: The entire system operated, controlled, or owned by a municipality, a county or by a utility company
regulated by the Illinois commerce commission of pipes, hydrants, boxes, cocks, taps, meters, connections, reservoirs, tanks,
engines, property, and all appurtenances thereto, whereby water is or may be supplied to the public or to private parties within the
village. The term "water service system" shall be included in the definition of waterworks system.
B. Cross Connection Prohibited:
1. No Cross Connection: Connections between the waterworks system or other potable water supply systems and other systems or
equipment containing nonpotable water or other substances of unknown or questionable quality are prohibited except when and
where approved cross connection control devices or methods are installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper operation on a
continuing basis. No physical connection shall be permitted between the waterworks system or any potable water supply system and
any auxiliary water supply not of equal or better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the
agency. There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may enter the waterworks system or other
potable water supply system or an auxiliary water supply approved by the director of public works and the agency.
2. No Auxiliary Cross Connection: No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or maintain, or permit to be established or maintained,
any connection whereby an auxiliary water supply may enter the waterworks system or the customer's water system, unless such
auxiliary water supply and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the director of public works
and the agency.
C. General Requirements For Cross Connection Control Devices:
1. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to install, remove, or replace any cross connection control device without first having obtained a
permit therefor in accordance with the Hawthorn Woods building code.
2. Approved Devices Only: Only approved cross connection control devices or methods can be used to satisfy the requirements of this
section. No such device or method that contains or utilizes nonmetallic checks shall be permitted.
3. Type Of Protection: The type of protection required shall depend on the degree of hazard that exists as follows:
a. An approved fixed air gap separation shall be installed when the waterworks system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard.
b. An approved fixed air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed when
the waterworks system may be contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or health hazard.
c. An approved fixed air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device or a double check
valve assembly shall be installed when the waterworks system may be polluted with substances that could cause a pollution hazard
not dangerous to health.
d. An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be
installed on premises when it is impractical to determine whether cross connections exist or it is impossible to make a complete
cross connection survey or on premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished.
4. Fire Safety Systems: Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to
the waterworks system when:
a. The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant, or other chemicals;
b. Water is pumped into the system from a source other than the waterworks system;
c. Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source or water can be pumped into the fire safety system from any source other than the
waterworks system; or
d. There is a connection whereby a source other than the waterworks system can be introduced into the fire safety system.
All other fire safety systems connected to the waterworks system shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered
service lines and a double detector check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 93/426
5. All Other Systems: The type of cross connection control devices required for any other potable water supply system shall be
equivalent to the devices used to protect the waterworks system from similar hazards, unless the director of public works permits
otherwise.
D. Installation, Inspection, Maintenance, And Repair Of Cross Connection Control Devices:
1. Prevention; Removal Of Cross Connections: The customer shall prevent backflow and back siphonage into the waterworks system by
ensuring that either all cross connections are removed or cross connection control devices are installed, inspected, maintained, and
repaired.
2. General Installation Requirements: The customer shall ensure that a cross connection control device be installed wherever necessary
to prevent cross connections to the waterworks system or any other potable water supply system. Cross connection control devices
shall be installed by an Illinois licensed plumber and maintained and inspected by an Illinois licensed CCCDI as provided for in the
Illinois plumbing code and the agency's regulations and in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The manufacturer's
maintenance manual shall be available on the premises. All cross connection control devices shall be installed in a location
accessible for observation, maintenance, replacement, and testing, and shall be protected against freezing and flooding.
3. Specific Conditions Requiring Installation: In addition to the foregoing, the customer shall ensure that a cross connection control
device be installed on each service line to a customer's water system serving premises having any of the following conditions:
a. Premises for which the director of public works makes an independent determination that actual or potential hazards to the
waterworks system exist.
b. Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the director of public
works and the source is approved by the agency.
c. Premises on which any substance is handled that can create an actual or potential hazard to the waterworks system. Such
premises shall include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from the waterworks
system that are no longer under the sanitary control of the director of public works.
d. Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross connection survey.
e. Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished.
4. Specific Service Lines Requiring Installation: An approved cross connection control device shall be installed on each service line to a
customer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities, unless the director of public works
determines that no actual or potential hazard to the waterworks system exists:
a. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, and nursing homes;
b. Laboratories;
c. Piers, docks, and waterfront facilities;
d. Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, and storm water pumping stations;
e. Food or beverage processing plants;
f. Chemical plants;
g. Metal plating industries;
h. Petroleum processing or storage plants;
i. Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
j. Car washes;
k. Pesticide, herbicide, or extermination plants and trucks;
l. Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks;
m. All other commercial or industrial facilities;
n. Any facility utilizing a heat exchanger; and
o. All underground sprinkler systems.
5. Inspections; Maintenance: Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least annually, or
more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer, by a cross connection control device inspector. The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The customer shall cause all required
repairs or maintenance to be performed promptly, and in any event within three (3) days after notice that such repairs or maintenance
are required.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 94/426
6. Tagging: Each cross connection control device shall have a tag attached to it listing the date of the most recent test or visual
inspection, the name and CCCDI number of the cross connection control device inspector, and the type and date of repairs.
7. Maintenance Log: A maintenance log shall be maintained by the customer and shall include:
a. Date of each test or visual inspection;
b. Name and approval number of the person performing the test or visual inspection;
c. Test results;
d. Repairs or servicing required;
e. Repairs and date completed; and
f. Servicing performed and date completed.
The customer shall forward a copy of this maintenance log to the director of public works within fourteen (14) days after its
completion.
8. Costs: The installation, inspection, and maintenance of all cross connection control devices shall be at the sole cost and expense of
the customer. Whenever cross connection control devices required by these regulations are defective, they shall be repaired or
replaced at the sole cost and expense of the customer without delay.
9. No Bypasses Or Removal: Cross connection control devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed, or otherwise made
ineffective without specific authorization by the director of public works.
E. Survey And Investigations:
1. Village Surveys; Investigations: The director of public works shall cause surveys and investigations to be made of all premises served
by the waterworks system to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the waterworks system may exist. A reasonable fee
covering the cost of the surveyor investigation may be levied against each customer whose premises are surveyed and investigated.
Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least once every two (2) years, or
more often as the director of public works shall deem necessary. Such surveys may be conducted by telephone, mail, or personal visit
to the premises and is not intended to include an actual visual inspection of piping or of plumbing systems. Records of such surveys
shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years.
2. Information: On request by the director of public works, the customer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or systems
or water use within the customer's premises. The refusal of such information requested, shall, within the discretion of the director of
public works be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this section.
3. Customer Surveys And Inspections: The customer shall arrange periodic surveys and inspections of his or her water system and of
water use practices on his or her premises to determine whether the elements of the customer's water system comply with the Illinois
plumbing code and this section and whether there are actual or potential cross connections to the customer's water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into the customer's water system or the waterworks system. Such surveys and
inspections shall be conducted by a duly licensed and bonded plumber and a cross connection control device inspector and shall be
at the sole cost and expense of the customer, and a copy of the results shall be forwarded to the director of public works.
F. Booster Pumps: Cross connection control devices must be installed on the suction side of all booster pumps. When a booster pump has
been installed on the service line to or within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff device designed to
shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less. It shall
be the duty of the customer to maintain the low pressure cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the director of public
works, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
G. Cross Connection Violations:
1. Access To Premises: The customer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the cross connection control device inspector
and the director of public works or his or her designees for the purposes of verifying the presence or absence of cross connections,
inspecting the installation, testing, maintenance, and repair of cross connection control devices, verifying information submitted by the
customer regarding the required cross connection control device inspection, and ensuring that the requirements of this section have
been properly executed.
2. Notice To Install; Compliance: If, in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or in the judgment of the director of public works, a
cross connection control device is necessary for the safety of the waterworks system, the director of public works may, two (2) weeks
after serving a written notice on the customer to install a cross connection control device, take action to terminate water service to
such customer's premises if no proper cross connection control device is installed. The director of public works may, after two (2)
weeks' written notice to a customer, take action to terminate water service to any customer's premises wherein any cross connection
control device required by this section is not installed, tested, maintained, or repaired in a manner acceptable to the director of public
works, or if it is found that the cross connection control device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection
exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cutoff or other device required by this section is not installed and maintained in working
order, or if any person is found to be violating any provisions of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 95/426
3. Emergencies: If, in the judgment of the director of public works, an emergency exists whereby the waterworks system is immediately
threatened, then the director of public works shall have the right to enter the premises of a customer, providing oral notice only if such
is possible, and may immediately without any notice terminate water service to that customer's premises. In the event of such
termination, the director of public works, as soon as practical, shall serve written notice as herein provided.
4. Content Of Notice; Service: The written notice herein provided for shall state the nature of the request or violation and shall provide a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. This written notice may be served by personal service or by mailing such
notice upon the customer.
5. Restoration Of Service: Water service that has been terminated shall not be restored until the customer has corrected or eliminated
any conditions or defects in conformance with this section and to the satisfaction of the director of public works and a reconnection
fee in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) shall have been paid to the village.
6. No Liability Of Village: Neither the village nor the director of public works, their agents or assigns, shall be liable to any customer of
the waterworks system for any injury, damages, or lost revenue that may result from the termination of a customer's water supply,
whether such termination was with or without notice.
7. Liability Of Customer Or Other: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, in addition to the foregoing, shall become
liable to the village for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the village by reason of such violation, whether the same was
caused before or after notice. If contamination of the waterworks system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly
installed, maintained, or repaired cross connection control device, or a cross connection control device that has been bypassed, the
customer responsible for such contamination shall bear the cost of cleanup or repair to the waterworks system.
8. Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day
during which a violation occurs or continues.
H. Minimum Requirements; Inconsistencies: The provisions of this section shall be construed to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. When the provisions of this section impose greater requirements than those of any
other ordinance or regulation, then the provisions of this section shall be controlling. When the provisions of any other ordinance or
regulation impose greater requirements than this section, then the provisions of such other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
In the case of any inconsistency between any provision of this section and any provision of any other ordinance or regulation, the
provision imposing the greater requirements shall be controlling. (Ord. 1092-04, 12-20-2004)
4-5-5: REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS FOR SPECIFIC SERVICES:
A. Fire Service Connections: All connections to the water system which service suppression equipment shall be provided with flow
detection devices and central stationing alarms in accordance with village specifications.
B. Swimming Pools And Water Tanks: Abnormally large amounts of water for swimming pools or other water storage may not be drawn
during conservation restriction and may not be discharged into the sanitary sewer system at any time. (Ord. 1092-04, 12-20-2004)
4-5-5-1: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS; TREATMENT BY LAKE COUNTY:
A. This section governs the use of public sewers where sewage is treated by Lake County at the treatment facility known as the Des
Plaines River water reclamation facility.
B. No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any public sanitary sewer.
C. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the public works
director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the public works director, to a storm
sewer or natural outlet.
D. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a public sanitary sewer the following described substances, materials, waters, or
wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the public works director, that such can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process,
or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the public works director will give consideration to such factors
as the quantities of such waters or waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials or construction of the sewers, nature
of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 96/426
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewerage works.
4. Solid or viscous substance in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewerage system such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, woods, whole blood, paunch, manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cup, and milk
containers either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
5. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150F) and/or sixty five degrees Celsius
(65C).
6. Oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify
or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees (32) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150F) and/or zero
degrees (0) and sixty five degrees Celsius (65C).
7. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director.
8. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
9. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the village as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state,
federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
10. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
11. Any waters or wastes containing substances exceeding the following maximum concentrations of pollutants:
Pollutant Maximum Concentration
5 day BOD 300 mg /l
Total suspended solids 350 mg /l
Total dissolved solids 1000 mg /l
Chemical oxygen demand 500 mg /l
Ammonia 50 mg /l
Arsenic 0.1 mg /l
Borate (boron) 1.0 mg /l
Cadmium 1.0 mg /l
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.25 mg /l
Chromium (total) 4.2 mg /l
Copper (total) 1.0 mg /l
Cyanide 0.025 mg /l 1
Iron 10.0 mg /l
Lead 0.1 mg /l
Manganese 1.0 mg /l
Mercury 0.0005 mg /l 2
Nickel 1.0 mg /l
Oil (hexane soluble) 50.0 mg /l
Phenols 0.5 mg /l
Phosphorus 25.0 mg /l
Selenium 1.0 mg /l
Silver 1.0 mg /l
Zinc 0.1 mg /l
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 97/426
Notes:
1. IPCB regulations, chapter 3, section 703(a).
2. IPCB regulations, chapter 3, section 702(a).
12. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
13. Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 milligrams per liter as Hg at any time except as permitted by the village in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
14. Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 milligrams per liter at any time except as permitted by the village in compliance with applicable state
and federal regulations.
15. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);
c. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works;
d. Unusual volume flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
16. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
E. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sanitary sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection D of this section, and/or which are in violation of the standards for
pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA rules and regulations, subchapter D, water programs, part 403, "General Pretreatment
Regulations For Existing And New Sources Of Pollution" published in Federal Register volume 43, no. 123, Monday, June 26, 1978, and
any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the village may have deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the public works director may
reject the wastes; require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sanitary sewer; require control over the
quantities and rates of discharge; and/or require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing sewer charges. If the public works director permits the pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows, the design and
installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
F. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the public works director, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except
that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the public works director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
G. Where pretreatment of flow equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense.
H. Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required by the village, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required,
shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the village. The manhole shall be
installed by owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
I. The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and
analyses of waters and waste to demonstrate compliance with this section and any special conditions for discharge established by the
village or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be
performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete
analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and local standards are being
met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such manner as
prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the village. At
such times as deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis.
J. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by
the American Public Health Association and "USEPA Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures For Analysis Of Pollutants" pursuant to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 98/426
40 CFR part 136 and shall be determined at the control manhole, provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In
the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole
in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customary accepted methods
to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewerage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite sample or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24 hour composite sample, whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.)
K. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between Lake County,
the village, and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste or unusual strength or character may be accepted by the village for
treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern, provided such payments are in accordance with the applicable Lake
County ordinance governing sewer user service charges and industrial cost recovery. (Ord. 1256-08, 7-21-2008)
4-5-6: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION FEES:
A. Base Fees: Fees for connection to the public water supply system and/or the public sewer collection system shall be charged per
meter/water line size as follows:
Size Of Water
Line/Meter Line
Hawthorn Woods Out Of District
Water
Connection Fee
Sewer
Connection Fee Water Connection Fee Sewer Connection Fee
2" or less $ 2,000.00 $ 4,000.00 $ 3,000.00 $ 6,000.00
Greater than 2" to and including 4" 7,500.00 15,000.00 11,250.00 22,500.00
Greater than 4" to and including 6" 15,000.00 30,000.00 22,500.00 45,000.00
Greater than 6" to and including 8" 20,000.00 40,000.00 30,000.00 60,000.00
Greater than 8" 28,000.00 52,000.00 42,000.00 78,000.00
"Out of district" users would be those connecting to the water supply system and/or the public sewer collection system that are not
within the incorporated boundaries of the village of Hawthorn Woods.
In addition to the sewer connection fee(s) provided above, properties connected to Hawthorn Woods facilities which receive sewer
treatment services through the village of Lake Zurich, pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement with Hawthorn Woods, shall pay
additional charges as more fully described in section 4-5-7 of this chapter.
B. Fire Suppression Fees: Fees for connection to the public water supply system for fire suppression purposes only shall be as follows:
Size Of Water
Line/Meter Line Fire Suppression Fee
2" or less $ 2,000.00
Greater than 2" to and including 4" 7,500.00
Greater than 4" to and including 6" 15,000.00
Greater than 6" to and including 8" 20,000.00
Greater than 8" 28,000.00
C. Multiple-Unit Developments: Multiple-unit residential developments shall pay, in addition to the base fee provided in subsection A of this
section, a fee of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) per twenty five (25) units. For purposes of this section, multiple-unit
residential developments shall include, without limitation, structures for townhouses, condominiums or multiple-family dwellings.
Multiple-unit nonresidential developments shall pay, in addition to the base fee provided in subsection A of this section, a fee of seven
thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) per unit or building. For purposes of this section, multiple-unit nonresidential developments
shall include, without limitation, industrial, office or commercial multiple-unit buildings.
D. Expansion Of Existing Service: If any use with an existing connection to the water supply system shall expand, then the user shall pay
the difference, if any, between the base fee set forth in subsection A of this section applicable to the original connection and the base
fee set forth in said subsection applicable to the expanded use (not including capacity required solely for fire suppression purposes).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 99/426
E. Additional Terms, Conditions And Charges:
1. Public Water Supply System: Owners connecting to a public water supply system will also be subject to the rates, terms and
conditions of service specified in the then effective tariffs on file with the Illinois commerce commission of Aqua Illinois, Inc., or such
other public utility as is operating such a system. In addition, any owner connecting to a public water supply system may be subject to
recapture charges as provided for in any agreement entered into between the village and a developer providing for reimbursement of
a portion of the cost of such public water supply system.
2. Public Sewer Collection System: Certain areas of the village are provided sanitary sewer service via connection to a wastewater
reclamation and reuse system constructed by the developer of the Hawthorn Woods country club development. Owners connecting to
said system will also be subject to the rates, terms and conditions of service specified in the then effective tariffs of Aqua Illinois, Inc.,
or such other public utility as is operating said system, which are on file with the Illinois commerce commission. Any owner connecting
to said system may also be subject to: a) a charge for use of the excess capacity of said system and b) recapture charges as
provided for in any agreement entered into between the village and the developer providing for reimbursement of a portion of the cost
of the wastewater reclamation and reuse system. (Ord. 1687-16, 9-26-2016)
4-5-7: SEWER CHARGES FOR CONNECTION TO LAKE ZURICH SYSTEM:
Certain areas of the village are provided sanitary sewer service via connection to the sewer system of the village of Lake Zurich, pursuant
to an intergovernmental agreement with the village of Hawthorn Woods dated August 4, 2003, as may be amended from time to time. In
addition to the connection charges set forth in section 4-5-6 of this chapter, customers connecting to such system shall be subject to the
terms and provisions of said Lake Zurich agreement. Pursuant to the Lake Zurich agreement, the village of Hawthorn Woods is responsible
for billing for such service. In such case, the following additional charges shall apply:
A. Connection Charges: Prior to connection to the system, each customer shall pay the connection charges that apply to users of the Lake
Zurich sewer system located outside Lake Zurich's corporate limits, as such charges may be amended from time to time.
B. Basic Charge: Each customer shall pay the basic user fee charged to users located outside Lake Zurich's corporate limits, subject to
adjustment as set forth in subsection C of this section.
C. Automatic Adjustment Of Basic Charge: The basic charge established in subsection B of this section includes the charge assessed to
the village of Lake Zurich by the county of Lake for sewage treatment services provided by the county of Lake. The basic charge also
includes the charge assessed to the village by the village of Lake Zurich for providing sewer service to the village. The basic charge
established in subsection B of this section shall be adjusted automatically to reflect any increase in the charges by either the county of
Lake or the village of Lake Zurich.
D. Additional Charges: Prior to connection to the system, each customer shall pay an administrative reservation fee of one hundred twenty
dollars ($120.00) per population equivalent ("PE"). In addition, prior to connection to the system, each customer shall pay an advance
user fee in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) per PE or two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), whichever is greater. For
purposes of calculating the amount due under this subsection, a residential user shall be presumed to use 3.5 PE. A nonresidential user
shall be presumed to use such number of PE as the village engineer approves, upon review of the proposed use of the property.
E. Inspection Fee: An inspection fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) per hour shall be charged for the review and inspection of the sanitary
sewer facilities of each customer who desires to connect to the system. Such fee shall be paid and such review and inspection shall be
conducted and Lake Zurich's approval of said facilities shall be made prior to the connection. (Ord. 1168-06, 7-6-2006)
4-5-8: BILLS FOR SERVICES; DELINQUENCIES:
A. Rendition Of Bills; Payment: Bills for sewer service pursuant to section 4-5-7 of this chapter shall be sent to the owner or owners of
premises served. Service shall be furnished to the premises only subject to the condition that there is joint and several liability among
the owner of the premises and all occupants and users of the service. All bills for service shall be rendered monthly succeeding the
period for which the service is billed, unless otherwise determined by the village. All bills shall be payable at the village hall not later
than the close of business on the fifteenth day after the billing date. When the fifteenth day after the billing date is on a weekend or a
legal holiday, then such bills for service shall be payable no later than the next succeeding business day.
B. Delinquent Bills; Lien:
1. Lien Procedure: Charges for sewer service may be a lien on the premises to the extent permitted by statute. Whenever a bill for
sewer service remains unpaid thirty (30) days after it has been rendered, such charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to
be delinquent, and the village clerk may file with the recorder of deeds of Lake County a statement of lien claim. If a lien is filed, the
following procedure shall be followed: The statement of lien shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of
the unpaid bill, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges for sewer service subsequent to the
period covered by the bill. The village clerk shall mail a notice to the owner of the premises stating payment is delinquent and a lien
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 100/426
has been filed. Failure of the village clerk to record such lien or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice
shall not affect the validity of the lien or the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid sewer bills as provided in this subsection.
2. Property Sold For Nonpayment: Property subject to a lien for unpaid sewer charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and
the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting the costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory
liens. The village attorney shall be authorized to institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction
over such matters, against any property for which the sewer bill has remained unpaid thirty (30) days after it has been rendered.
3. Village Right; Collection Of Delinquent Service Charges: The village shall have the right to pursue any and all legal means of
collecting delinquent service charges, whether by collection service or other method, regardless of whether a lien for such charges
has been filed. (Ord. 1092-04, 12-20-2004)
4-5-9: PRIVATE SYSTEMS:
A. Wells: Where a public water supply system is not available to serve a premises, or a connection variation is granted, such premises shall
be connected to a private well, the installation, connection, maintenance and use of which shall comply with all applicable statutes,
codes, ordinances, rules and regulations of any governmental unit having jurisdiction over the premises.
Once a premises has been connected to a public water supply system, no domestic water service shall be provided to such premises
from a private well; provided, however, that such private well may be continued to be used for irrigation or other nonpotable purposes
only.
B. Private Sewerage Disposal Systems: Where a public sewer collection system is not available to serve a premises, or a connection
variation is granted, such premises shall be connected to a private sewerage disposal system, the installation, connection, maintenance
and use of which shall comply with all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations of any governmental unit having
jurisdiction over the premises, including, but not limited to, the county of Lake. (Ord. 1092-04, 12-20-2004)
4-5-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
No person, other than those authorized by the village, shall operate any curb stop, distribution valve, or fire hydrant. No person, other than
those authorized by the village, shall open any sanitary manhole, lamp hole or flow control device. (Ord. 1092-04, 12-20-2004)
4-5-11: PENALTY:
Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties contained in section 1-4-1 of this code.
(Ord. 1092-04, 12-20-2004)
Chapter 6
SOLID WASTE DISPOSITION AND RECYCLING
4-6-1: FINDINGS:
The mayor and board of trustees hereby find that it is in the public interest and in furtherance of the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the village to establish provisions for the disposition of refuse, landscape waste and recycling of recyclable material within the
village. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and terms shall be construed as herein defined:
BULK ITEMS: Items such as, but not limited to, discarded furniture, household appliances, and small amounts of construction debris and
materials capable of being handled by one person. Said bulk items shall not include white goods.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, aquatic weeds, tree limbs (4 inches or less in diameter), and other material
accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees, and as otherwise described in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/3.20.
LANDSCAPE WASTE TOTER: A wheeled plastic container with a tightfitting top, not to exceed ninety (90) gallons in size, requiring a
semiautomated lifting mechanism for collection.
LANDSCAPE WASTE UNIT: A landscape waste unit may be any of the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 101/426
A. Kraft paper bags not exceeding thirty three (33) gallons of capacity weighing up to sixty (60) pounds. The kraft paper bag shall be of
the type specifically intended for landscape waste, being specifically biodegradable and not chemically treated;
B. Residential refuse containers not exceeding thirty four (34) gallons of capacity weighing up to sixty (60) pounds; or
C. Landscape waste, including brush and other branches four inches (4") or less in diameter, not exceeding four feet (4') in length and
weighing up to sixty (60) pounds; said bundle to be securely tied only with biodegradable natural fiber string or twine. Securing with
plastic or wire is prohibited.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Newsprint, magazines, phone books, chipboard, corrugated cardboard, plastics (#3 through #7), aluminum
cans, glass food containers, polystyrene (PS), metal and bimetal cans, high density polyethylene (HDPE), polyethylene terepthalate (PET),
catalogs, old mail, envelopes, mixed paper, and such other materials as may be agreed upon in any contract as provided for in section 4-6-
6 of this chapter.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL PROGRAM AREA: All residences receiving single-family residential scavenger service.
RECYCLING CONTAINER: A wheeled plastic container with a tightfitting top, sixty four (64) gallons in size, requiring a semiautomated
lifting mechanism for collection, or such other containers as approved and provided by the village or approved by the village and provided
by the person or corporation having a contract with the village as provided for in section 4-6-6 of this chapter.
REFUSE: Waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; waste from the handling, storage and sale of
produce; combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, wood furniture, bedding;
noncombustible trash including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete,
glass, crockery, other mineral wastes; street rubbish including, but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, catch basin dirt, contents of litter
receptacles, but refuse does not mean earthen waste from building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes resulting from industrial
processes and manufacturing operations such as food processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings.
Notwithstanding anything contained hereinabove to the contrary, the term "refuse" shall not be deemed to include recyclable material or
landscape waste. Further, refuse shall not include any items declared by the landfills to be exempt materials, including, but not limited to,
hazardous or medical waste materials, tires, batteries, or excessive amounts of brick, concrete, asphalt, stone, rocks, dirt and/or sod.
REFUSE TOTER: A wheeled plastic container with a tightfitting top, not to exceed ninety (90) gallons in size, requiring a semiautomated
lifting mechanism for collection.
RESIDENTIAL REFUSE CONTAINER: A plastic or galvanized metal can of a type commonly sold as a garbage can of a capacity not less
than ten (10) gallons and not to exceed thirty four (34) gallons, and each such can shall have two (2) handles upon sides of can or bail by
which it may be lifted. No garbage can shall exceed sixty (60) pounds in weight when lifted.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: A building which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for residential occupancy by one
family.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL SCAVENGER SERVICE: The collection and disposal of refuse, landscape waste and recyclable material
from all single-family residences of not more than four (4) residential dwelling units.
WHITE GOODS: Any domestic and/or commercial large appliance which contains CFC or HCFC refrigerant gas, PCB containing
capacitors, mercury switches, or other hazardous components. Examples include, but are not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, air
conditioners, ranges (both electric and gas), humidifiers, dehumidifiers, water heaters, furnaces, and other similar large appliances. (Ord.
769-96, 7-16-1996; amd. Ord. 1052-03, 11-17-2003)
4-6-3: PROHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
A. To dump, deposit, place, dispose of or store any refuse, landscape waste or recyclable material in any place within the village limits,
except with the written permission of the mayor and board of trustees. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, an occupant of
property within the village may store such materials, generated on site, between regularly scheduled scavenger collections. (Ord. 769-
96, 7-16-1996; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
B. To dump, deposit or place any refuse, landscape waste or recyclable material upon real property owned by another without the consent
of the owner or person in possession of such real property, and otherwise in conformance with all applicable statutes of the state of
Illinois and ordinances of the village.
C. To engage in the collection or disposal of refuse, landscape waste or recyclable material (contained in a recycling container), except as
may be authorized by the village pursuant to a contract entered into as hereinbelow provided.
D. To mix landscape waste that is intended for collection or disposal at a landfill with any refuse.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 102/426
E. To place for collection and pickup any landscape waste unless it is packaged as a landscape waste unit.
F. To place landscape waste or refuse in a recycling container. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996)
4-6-4: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENTS:
Notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary, the following regulations shall apply to all persons receiving residential
scavenger service:
A. The owner or occupant of every single-family dwelling unit shall provide and maintain in good condition and repair not less than one
residential refuse container. The owner or agent of every multiple dwelling having not more than four (4) dwelling units shall provide and
maintain in good condition and repair not less than one refuse container per dwelling unit.
B. Refuse containers, refuse toters, landscape waste units, landscape waste toters and recycling containers are to be stored at the side or
rear of the residence, except from three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on the day prior to collection to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on the day of
collection, when said refuse containers, refuse toters, landscape waste units, landscape waste toters and recycling containers may be
placed at the curb.
C. The items which may be placed for collection and pickup shall be as follows:
1. An unlimited number of residential refuse containers.
2. An unlimited number of landscape waste units and/or landscape waste toters.
3. An unlimited quantity of recyclable material contained in one or more recycling container(s).
4. An unlimited quantity of bulk items.
D. Each customer shall be billed directly for residential scavenger service, at a rate which is determined from time to time by the contract
entered into between the village and the scavenger. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996)
E. All refuse/recycling container enclosures shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and otherwise in conformance with the
standards for such enclosures established by the board of trustees. The gate(s) on each enclosure shall be kept closed except when
depositing or removing material from containers within any such enclosure. (Ord. 915-00, 10-9-2000)
4-6-5: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS:
Notwithstanding any provisions in this section to the contrary, all persons who receive commercial scavenger service shall be subject to the
following additional regulations:
A. Commercial refuse containers must be located in the rear yard of a premises.
B. A special pickup shall be arranged for all bulk items and said bulk items shall remain within an enclosed building until said special
pickup.
C. No commercial refuse container shall be placed at the curb. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996)
D. All refuse/recycling container enclosures shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and otherwise in conformance with the
standards for such enclosures established by the board of trustees. The gate(s) on each enclosure shall be kept closed except when
depositing or removing material from containers within any such enclosure. (Ord. 915-00, 10-9-2000)
4-6-6: RECYCLABLE MATERIAL:
A. The village may, from time to time, enter into contracts with one or more persons or corporations providing for the collection of recyclable
material within the village, upon such terms as the village deems advisable. To the extent that any term or condition of any such contract
conflicts with any provision of any ordinance or resolution of the village, the terms or conditions set forth in such contract shall control.
B. Notwithstanding any provision contained in this code to the contrary, no person, whether licensed as a scavenger (residential or
commercial) or not, shall purchase and/or collect recyclable material within the recyclable material program area unless authorized by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 103/426
the village to do so, pursuant to a contract entered into pursuant to this section.
C. Any scavenger who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to license suspension or revocation proceedings. (Ord. 769-96,
7-16-1996)
4-6-7: LANDSCAPE WASTE:
A. The village may, from time to time, enter into contracts with one or more persons or corporations providing for the collection of landscape
waste within the village, upon such terms and conditions as the village deems advisable. To the extent that any term or condition of any
such contract conflicts with any provision of any ordinance or resolution of the village, the terms or conditions set forth in such contract
shall control.
B. Any scavenger who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to license suspension or revocation proceedings.
C. The landscape waste program is an optional, once per week, curbside pick-up program. It shall operate from the first full week of April
through the last full week of November of each year.
D. Each customer shall be billed directly for landscape waste pickup, at a rate which is determined from time to time by the contract entered
into between the village and the scavenger. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996)
4-6-8: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 769-96, 7-
16-1996)
ARTICLE A. SCAVENGERS
4-6A-1: LICENSES REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
A. Residential Scavenger Service:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the scavenger business or in the collection or disposal of animal, vegetable or other
refuse, recyclable material or landscape waste, without first having obtained a license therefor.
2. Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, no person, whether licensed as a scavenger or not, shall purchase
and/or collect recyclable materials within the recyclable material program area unless authorized by the village to do so, pursuant to a
contract entered into pursuant to section 4-6-6 of this chapter.
3. Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, no person, whether licensed as a scavenger or not, shall purchase
and/or collect landscape waste within the village to do so, pursuant to a contract entered into pursuant to section 4-6-7 of this chapter.
B. Commercial Scavenger Service: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of providing commercial scavenger
services within the village limits without first having obtained a license therefor.
C. Exemptions From License: A contractor, developer, builder, craftsman, installer, serviceman and the like need not be licensed or have a
permit by reason of any requirements set forth in this chapter in order to privately remove the debris caused by their normal operations;
however, such person must otherwise conform with the regulations contained in this code. In addition, the scavenger service need not
be licensed or have a permit by reason of any requirements set forth in this chapter in order to remove trees, logs, brush, limbs of trees
or junked cars. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996)
4-6A-2: LICENSE FEES:
The fees for residential and commercial scavenger service licenses shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). (Ord. 1315-10,
2-16-2010)
4-6A-3: BIDS REQUIRED FOR RESIDENTIAL SCAVENGER SERVICE:
All residential scavenger service licenses shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for bids in the manner
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 104/426
prescribed in subsection 1-9-3B of this code, unless waived by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees then holding office. Bid
specifications for the award of a residential scavenger service license shall set forth those standards and specifications hereinafter
imposed. In addition, the chief operating officer shall have the authority to impose such other specifications and standards as he shall deem
necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
4-6A-4: NUMBER OF LICENSES; TERMS:
A. Residential Scavenger Service: One license to engage in the business of providing residential scavenger services shall be issued and in
force at any one time. Each license awarded hereunder shall be an annual license, the term of which shall be as set forth in said
license.
B. Commercial Scavenger Service: There shall be no limit on the number of commercial scavenger licenses; provided however, that each
licensee shall at all times comply with the standards and specifications set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996)
4-6A-5: SCAVENGER SERVICE STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
The following standards and specifications shall apply to all persons holding a residential or commercial service license:
A. Bond And Insurance Requirements:
1. Bond: Prior to the issuance of any license, the licensee shall file with the village clerk a performance bond in the amount of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with sureties, in a form acceptable to the village.
2. Insurance: Prior to the issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the village with evidence that said licensee has currently in
force adequate workers' compensation insurance and a policy of general liability insurance with such limits and coverages as the
village may from time to time require. Each licensee shall indemnify and hold the village harmless from and against claims for
damages arising by reason of the performance or nonperformance of the licensee hereunder or by reason of any act of omission of
said licensee. The village clerk shall require the licensee to produce a certificate of insurance indicating the insurance required
hereunder shall be in force during the term of the license; said certificate to reflect that the village shall be an insured party
thereunder.
B. Vehicle Requirements: The licensee shall use modern loader trucks and keep all equipment used in performance of its work in a clean,
sanitary condition and not permit the same to remain standing anywhere in the village. All trucks used for residential refuse collection
shall be enclosed and of a leakproof packer type. Recyclable material shall be collected in a vehicle appropriate for this purpose.
Landscape materials shall be collected in a leakproof packer type.
C. Disposal Of Refuse, Recyclable Material And Landscape Waste:
1. All refuse collected by a licensee shall be disposed of by the licensee at his own expense outside the corporate limits of the village.
Recyclable material shall be disposed of at a proper processing facility or a materials vendor. Landscape waste shall be disposed of
at a site in conformance with state requirements. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to dispose of or store any refuse in any place
within the village limits.
2. All refuse, recyclable material and landscape waste collected by any licensee shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable
statutes of the state of Illinois (and, if applicable, the state of Wisconsin), and the ordinances of the village.
D. Holiday Pick Ups: When a scheduled pick up day falls on a holiday, the refuse, recyclable material or landscape waste shall be picked
up on the next calendar day, excluding Sundays.
E. Customer Service: The licensee shall provide an area office and telephone number for the receipt of service calls or complaints, and
shall have an employee available to receive such calls on working days from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M.
Complaints shall be given prompt and courteous attention. In case of missed scheduled collections, the licensee shall investigate and, if
the claim is valid, shall arrange for a pick up of the refuse, recyclable material or landscape waste in question within one business day
after the complaint is received. Any complaints received at the village hall will be immediately forwarded to the licensee who shall
arrange for a pick up of any missed service. All licensees shall maintain a log of every complaint received and such log shall be
available for inspection and copying by the village at any reasonable time.
F. Employees Under The Influence Of Liquor Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agent, servants or employees to be
performing scavenger services within the village while under the influence of intoxicating liquors. Said violation will subject a licensee to
license revocation. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996)
4-6A-5-1: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL SCAVENGER SERVICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 105/426
In addition to the standards and specification set forth in section 4-6A-5 of this article, any residential scavenger service licensee shall
comply with the following standards and specifications:
A. The items which may be placed for collection and pick up shall be limited as follows:
1. An unlimited number of residential refuse containers;
2. An unlimited number of landscape waste units and/or landscape waste toters;
3. An unlimited quantity of recyclable material contained in one or more recycling container(s);
4. An unlimited quantity of bulk items.
The licensee shall collect and pick up all refuse, landscape waste and recyclable material from each residence in accordance with the
provisions of this code and any contract between the village and the licensee. Such pick ups shall be from the front curb, unless
otherwise provided in any contract between the village and the licensee.
B. When any residential customer has solid waste materials other than that permitted in subsection A of this section, said customer shall
request that a special pick up be made by the licensee. The licensee shall provide pick up service on special request from any
residential customer. The licensee shall provide the customer with an estimate of the cost of the special pick up service, and the cost
shall be agreed to, in writing, prior to the pick up. When a special pick up occurs on a day other than the regularly scheduled pick up
day, the licensee shall remove refuse located or stored behind the building line. Picking up from the curb is not permitted on any day
other than the regularly scheduled pick up day.
C. Collection shall be made from each residence or location at least once each week, in accordance with the contract entered into between
the village and licensee.
D. The licensee shall collect discarded Christmas trees from each residence on an annual basis, as provided for in the contract entered into
between the village and the licensee.
E. Collection rates shall be as provided for in the contract entered into between the village and the licensee. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996)
4-6A-5-2: ADDITIONAL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL SCAVENGER SERVICE:
Any person issued a commercial scavenger service license shall, in addition to the standards and specifications set forth in section 4-6A-5
of this article, comply with the following additional standards and specifications:
A. The licensee shall collect and pick up all refuse from each premises served by said licensee. There shall be no curb pick up.
B. Collection shall be made from each premises at least once each week, according to a schedule to be agreed upon by the licensee and
the commercial customer.
C. Collection rates shall be as agreed upon by and between the licensee and the commercial customer. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996)
4-6A-6: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSES:
Residential and commercial scavenger service licenses may be revoked and/or suspended pursuant to the following procedures: (Ord.
769-96, 7-16-1996)
A. Suspension Of Business Operation: When the conduct or operation of the licensee shall constitute a nuisance in fact and a clear and
present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the chief operating officer shall be authorized to summarily order the
cessation of business, and the suspension of any license for a period not to exceed ten (10) days.
Within eight (8) days after he/she has so acted, the chief operating officer shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or
not the license should be revoked.
B. Revocation Of License: Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the chief operating
officer after notice and hearing as provided in subsection C of this section for any of the following causes: (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996;
amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 106/426
1. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the license;
2. Any violation by the licensee of ordinance provisions relating to the license, or the subject matter of the license;
3. Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
4. Failure of the licensee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the village;
5. Refusal to permit an inspection, or any interference with a duly authorized village officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspections.
Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other
applicable ordinances of the village.
C. Hearing: Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint
and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee at his last
known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996)
At the hearing, the village attorney shall present the complaint and shall represent the village. The licensee shall be permitted counsel
and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine witnesses. The chief operating officer shall preside and shall render the
decision. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
4-6A-7: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief operating officer in connection with the revocation of a license, shall have the right to
appeal to the board of trustees. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the chief operating officer, within ten (10) days after notice of a
denial of an application or revocation of a license, a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The
board of trustees shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the
licensee in the same manner as provided in section 4-6A-6 of this article. The decision of the board of trustees on such appeal shall be by
vote of majority of all the members then holding office and shall be final. (Ord. 769-96, 7-16-1996; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
Chapter 7
OPEN BURNING; LANDSCAPE WASTE
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and terms described hereinbelow shall have the meanings therein given, unless the context
otherwise clearly requires:
AGRICULTURAL WASTE: Any refuse, except garbage and dead animals, generated on a farm or ranch by crop and livestock production
practices, including, but not limited to, such items as bags, cartons, dry bedding, structural materials and landscape wastes.
AREA OF CONTROLLED BURNING: The area specified on an IEPA and village permit subject to a controlled burning.
CONTROLLED BURNING: The burning, pursuant to an IEPA permit, of unharvested ground cover or vegetation for the restoration or active
management of a prairie or savanna ecosystem.
DOMICILE WASTE: Any refuse generated on single-family domiciliary property as a result of domiciliary activities. The term includes, but is
not limited to, landscape waste, but excludes garbage and trade waste.
ECOSYSTEM: An integrated system of living species, their habitat, and the process that affects them.
FIRE CHIEF: The chief of the fire protection district or department serving the village of Hawthorn Woods.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The fire protection district or department serving the village of Hawthorn Woods.
GARBAGE: Refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooling, and consumption of food or food products.
IEPA: The Illinois environmental protection agency.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: Any and all accumulations of grass clippings, shrubbery and vine cuttings, leaves, trees, tree limbs, stumps, brush,
and other materials accumulated from or as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery, crop residues, vines, trees, and other natural
landscaping.
NATIVE PRAIRIE: A vegetative landscape state that features either preserved or restored grasses and other ecosystems, as they existed
prior to agricultural, residential or industrial development in this area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 107/426
NATURAL AREA: A vegetative landscape state that features either preserved or restored native grasses, native perennials, native trees
and/or other native ecosystems.
OPEN BURNING: The combustion of any matter in the open or in an open dump.
TRADE WASTE: Any refuse resulting from the prosecution of any trade, business, industry, commercial venture, utility or service activity,
and any governmental or institutional activity, whether or not for profit. The term includes landscape waste but excludes agricultural waste.
(Ord. 1409-12, 7-16-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
4-7-2: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED:
Open burning of a grass or wooded plot, landscape waste, domicile waste, herbage, shrubbery, leaves, grass, brush, trimmings from trees,
vines, or other bushes, wood, paper, garbage, refuse, waste or other combustible material on any property, public or private, from any
source whatsoever, within the village is unlawful and is hereby prohibited, except for recreational, agricultural and natural resource
exemptions as found in section 4-7-4 of this chapter. The village chief operating officer may, in his discretion, upon written request of the
owner of property upon which a wetland or prairie is located, authorize a controlled burning permit of such wetland or prairie in conjunction
with the maintenance thereof. Such burning shall be in accordance with generally recognized safety procedures for proper control and shall
also be subject to such terms and conditions as the state laws and fire department deems appropriate. A request for authorization for a
controlled burning of a wetland shall include a wetland assessment report from a qualified wetlands specialist detailing the conditions upon
the wetland which necessitate the controlled burning of the wetland. Notwithstanding the foregoing, controlled burnings of the wetland in
Community Park may occur twice a year, upon receipt of the wetland assessment report, without further formal action by the board of
trustees. (Ord. 1409-12, 7-16-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
4-7-3: DUMPING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or place anywhere within the village any landscape waste, with the following
exceptions:
A. Landscape waste which is properly packaged and being kept solely for pick up by one of the scavengers authorized to do business in
the village; or
B. Landscape waste in a compost pile maintained in accordance with section 4-7-5 of this chapter; provided, that such compost pile shall
not be located on the property of another or on public property. (Ord. 1409-12, 7-16-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
4-7-4: LOCAL BURNING RESTRICTIONS, GUIDELINES AND EXCEPTIONS:
A. Exceptions To Prohibition Of Open Burning: The following instances of open burning shall be permitted, but only under the terms,
limitations, and standards set forth in this subsection:
1. Agricultural waste exemption as allowed by law.
2. Training activities conducted by the fire protection district or department.
3. Areas of controlled burning, such as controlled environmental vegetation burning for the purpose of restoring or nurturing native
prairies, natural areas or natural resource ecosystems.
4. Outdoor fireplaces, open flame cooking devices, and gas or wood fire pits (portable or permanent) including those purchased through
retail providers in accordance with the following standards:
a. The burning of wood in outdoor fireplaces and chimneys shall be in a manufactured container or structure that holds fire at the
base of a chimney or hearth, is constructed of stone, brick, steel or other noncombustible materials, and is provided with a screen
or a spark arrestor above the fire. Smoke may not become a nuisance for adjacent property owners.
b. An open flame cooking device shall be a manufactured cooking device used for the preparation of food. All manufacturers' safety
recommendations must be followed. (Ord. 1409-12, 7-16-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
c. Each inground recreational outdoor fire pit shall be dug into the ground in a manner that will prevent the burn materials from falling
out of the pit. The above grade portion of the pit shall be constructed of stone, masonry, metal, or other similar noncombustible
materials. The bottom of the pit shall be below grade and shall be comprised of gravel, stone, dirt, or sand. The total open area of
the pit shall be no larger than forty eight inches (48") in diameter or twelve and a half (12.5) square feet. The pit shall be surrounded
by a noncombustible barrier that is at least six inches (6") above the coals of ash within the pit. A ring of sand, dirt, or other
noncombustible material approximately forty eight inches (48") wide shall be provided around the pit to provide separation for
combustibles. No plant material shall be allowed within that forty eight inch (48") ring. (Ord. 1454-13, 5-20-2013)
d. Burn materials for fire pits, barbecues, or cooking devices shall be comprised only of seasoned firewood, charcoal, natural gas, or
LPG gas. No burn materials shall extend outside of the fire pit, fireplace or open flame cooking device. No landscape waste
materials of any kind shall be burned.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 108/426
e. Every fire shall be located not less than twenty feet (20') from any structure including, but not limited to, houses, garages, power
lines, trellises, balconies, and rails; roads, property lines, trees, streams, ponds, lakes or marshes.
f. A fireplace or open flame cooking device may be placed on a combustible deck provided that it shall be placed on noncombustible
material not less than one inch (1") thick and having an eighteen inch (18") perimeter around the fireplace or device and located at
the furthest distance from any structure, with a minimum distance of ten feet (10') of such structure.
g. A means of fire extinguishment and water source must be present and easily accessible during any recreational or prairie burning.
h. Every recreational burning pit shall be attended continuously by an adult not less than eighteen (18) years of age.
i. All open burning shall be prohibited when wind speed exceeds twenty (20) miles per hour.
j. All open burning, including the use of any fireplace, open flame, cooking device, or fire pit, shall be prohibited at all times between
the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. every day.
B. Exception For Governmental Agencies: This section shall not apply to the village or to any other governmental agency properly
conducting a controlled fire or burn; provided, however, that the fire chief or IEPA may impose any condition or limitation on any such
controlled fire or burn within the village's corporate limits that the fire chief determines is necessary and appropriate to ensure the public
health and safety. (Ord. 1409-12, 7-16-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
4-7-5: COMPOSTING:
A. Landscape waste materials may be placed in a compost pile; provided, that such materials are placed in such a way as not to allow
them to be windblown.
B. The depositing of garbage, pet waste, meat scraps or other materials that may attract animals or vermin to the compost pile or which
may provide an obnoxious odor shall be prohibited. A compost pile shall not be placed in any required front yard as defined by the
zoning ordinance1, and shall be set back a minimum of three feet (3') from the side yard lot line, set back a minimum of five feet (5')
from any rear lot line, and shall be located not less than thirty feet (30') from any neighboring residential dwelling structure. In no event
shall a compost pile be located in any side or rear yard drainage or utility easement. Further, any such compost pile shall be located not
less than twenty five feet (25') from the normal water level mark of any lake, pond or stream. A compost pile shall be no more than five
feet (5') in height, and shall not exceed a maximum ground or base area of more than one hundred (100) square feet. (Ord. 1409-12, 7-
16-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
4-7-6: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1409-12, 7-16-2012,
eff. 1-1-2013)
Chapter 8
SMOKE FREE AIR REGULATIONS
4-8-1: FINDINGS:
Smoking creates the hazard of injury to the personal health of those in the environment of such smoke as well as the potential of damage
to property that may result from the incendiary nature of such activity. It has been determined that breathing ambient smoke is a health
hazard to both smokers and nonsmokers. Cigarette smoking also produces several substances that are considered hazardous to health
including carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide, nitrous oxide and formaldehyde. Secondhand smoke (68 percent of the total smoke
produced by a cigarette) affects the health of the bystander, interfering with respiratory tract defenses, often causing nonsmokers to have
allergic or irritative reactions, and is a known cause of lung cancer.
Because the hazards of smoking have a potentially harmful effect, material and direct, on the public health, safety, welfare, comfort, and
property of residents of the village and the public, it is necessary and desirable to establish regulations that prohibit smoking in all enclosed
public places, in all places of employment, near entrances to all such public places and places of employment, in and near open air public
dining areas and outdoor venues, and within certain unenclosed public places including school grounds and parks. (Ord. 1188-06, 10-23-
2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
4-8-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter may be cited as the HAWTHORN WOODS SMOKE FREE AIR ORDINANCE, the purpose of which is to protect the public
health, comfort and environment by prohibiting smoking in all enclosed public places and places of employment, within fifteen feet (15') of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 109/426
all public entrances to such places, in open air public dining areas and outdoor venues and within fifteen feet (15') of such areas, and within
certain unenclosed public places including school grounds and parks in order to ensure that nonsmokers may breathe air free from the
hazardous effects of secondhand smoke. (Ord. 1596-15, 9-21-2015)
4-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
BUSINESS: Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association or other business entity, whether formed for profit,
nonprofit, governmental or religious purposes. "Business" includes a "club" as defined in this section.
CLUB: A private not for profit association, corporation or other entity consisting of persons who are bona fide paying members and which
owns, leases or uses a building or portion thereof, the use of which is restricted primarily to members and their guests.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed or retained by a business, and shall include the owner or operator of a sole proprietorship or
other similar business entity.
EMPLOYER: Any business that employs one or more employees.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space in any structure or building that is enclosed on all sides by any combination of walls, windows, or doorways,
extending from floor to the ceiling. "Enclosed area" shall also include the interior of a vehicle of public conveyance.
OPEN AIR DINING AREA: A seating area open to the air that is accessory to a restaurant, hotel, cafeteria, club, or other public place
engaged in the business of purveying food and/or beverage service where members of the public, members or guests are invited to sit and
receive food and/or beverage service for a consideration.
OUTDOOR EVENT: A scheduled outdoor musical, sporting, dance, theatrical, dramatic, entertainment or performance event, or a
scheduled outdoor community fair, parade, event or market, that is organized, licensed or permitted by the owner of an outdoor venue and
to which the public is invited.
OUTDOOR VENUE: An outdoor stadium, athletic field, theater, amphitheater, plaza, street or other improved area that is used as a public
venue or forum to which members of the general public are invited to listen, view or otherwise participate in an outdoor event that is
organized, licensed or permitted by the owner (including any governmental entity) of the venue.
PARK: A park or recreation area that is open to and used by the general public, whether owned by a governmental entity or is under an
owners' association or condominium ownership.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: An area under the control of a public or private employer within the village that employees normally frequent
during the course of employment, and includes, without limitation, common work areas, private offices, auditoriums, classrooms,
conference and meeting rooms, cafeterias, elevators, employee lounges, staircases, hallways, restrooms, medical facilities, private clubs,
and the interior of a vehicle of public conveyance. "Place of employment" also includes the home office portion of a private dwelling, but
only if the home office is used by more than one employee or is frequented by business invitees.
"Place of employment" does not include a private dwelling unit, unless the dwelling is also used as a daycare facility for children or
adults.
"Place of employment" does not include that part of a private dwelling used as a home office by a single employee only who resides in
that dwelling.
PUBLIC ENTRANCE: The doorway or other entrance to a public place that is open to and intended for use by the general public for ingress
and egress to the public place.
"Public entrance" also means a doorway or other entrance for pedestrian ingress and egress to a place of employment: a) that is
open to and intended for use by the general public or business invitee's ingress and egress to the place of employment; or b) where
employees are required or permitted to enter or exit the place of employment.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area that is open to and used by the general public, or any area to which the public is invited or in which the public is
permitted, including, without limitation:
A. Vehicles of public conveyance;
B. Common or public areas (including, without limitation, lobbies, hallways, reception areas, public restrooms, elevators and staircases)
of apartment buildings, condominiums, dormitory buildings, nursing home care facilities, and other multiple-family residential
structures;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 110/426
C. Common or public areas (including, without limitation, lobbies, hallways, reception areas, public restrooms, elevators and staircases)
of any building or structure that is accessible to the public including, without limitation, office, commercial, and industrial buildings,
banks and financial institutions, educational institutions, healthcare facilities such as hospitals, clinics and doctor's offices, museums,
recreational use clubhouses, libraries, restaurants, bars, polling places, government and village owned buildings, food stores, liquor
stores, gasoline service stations, cafeterias, theaters, auditoriums, train and bus stations, hotels, motels, retail and service
establishments, and any other business;
D. Rooms, chambers, halls, or other locations within which meetings, hearings, or gatherings are held, to which the public is invited or in
which the public is permitted, including specifically, but without limitation, any enclosed area under the control of the village of
Hawthorn Woods or any other governmental entity;
E. Parks;
F. School grounds;
G. Outdoor venues;
H. Open air dining areas.
"Public place" shall not include a private dwelling unit, unless said dwelling is also used as a daycare facility for children or adults.
SCHOOL GROUNDS: All outdoor public or private school grounds.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted tobacco product in any
manner or in any form.
VILLAGE: The village of Hawthorn Woods. (Ord. 1188-06, 10-23-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
4-8-4: PROHIBITION IN ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES:
A. It shall be unlawful to smoke in any enclosed area of any public place.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, manager, operator or other person, as the case may be, in control of a public place to
knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in such public place. (Ord. 1188-06, 10-23-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
4-8-5: PROHIBITION IN CERTAIN UNENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES:
A. It shall be unlawful to smoke in the following unenclosed public places:
1. Outdoor venues when an outdoor event is taking place. It shall also be unlawful to smoke within fifteen feet (15') of an outdoor venue
when an outdoor event is taking place.
2. Parks.
3. School grounds.
4. Public or private sidewalks within fifteen feet (15') of a public entrance.
5. Public or private sidewalks within fifteen feet (15') of any open air dining area. (Ord. 1596-15, 9-21-2015)
4-8-6: PROHIBITION IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT:
A. It shall be unlawful to smoke in any enclosed area of any place of employment.
B. It shall be unlawful for any employer, including any manager, operator or person in control thereof, to knowingly permit smoking in any
enclosed area of the employer's place of employment. (Ord. 1188-06, 10-23-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
4-8-7: PROHIBITION IN OPEN AIR DINING AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 111/426
A. It shall be unlawful to smoke in any open air dining area.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, manager, operator or other person as the case may be, in control of an open air dining area to
knowingly permit smoking in an open air dining area.
C. It shall be unlawful to smoke within fifteen feet (15') of an open air dining area. (Ord. 1596-15, 9-21-2015)
4-8-8: PROHIBITION AT PUBLIC ENTRANCES:
A. It shall be unlawful to smoke within fifteen feet (15') of a public entrance.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to gather or congregate for the purpose of smoking within fifteen feet (15') of a public
entrance. (Ord. 1596-15, 9-21-2015)
4-8-9: DESIGNATION OF OTHER NO SMOKING AREAS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the owner, lessee, manager, operator or other person in control of a public place or a place
of employment to further prohibit smoking by designating outdoor areas not subject to the restrictions in this chapter as a place where
smoking is also prohibited, provided that the owner, lessee, manager, operator or other person shall cause signs to be posted at
appropriate locations advising persons that smoking is prohibited within the designated outdoor area. (Ord. 1188-06, 10-23-2006, eff. 1-1-
2007)
4-8-10: NO RETALIATION:
No person, business or employer shall discipline, discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee or customer
because that employee or customer reports a violation of this chapter or exercises any rights afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 1188-06, 10-
23-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
4-8-11: SIGNS:
A. Each owner, lessor, lessee, employer, manager, operator or other person in control of a public place or place of employment shall post
conspicuous "no smoking" signs in the area of any public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited. Such "no smoking"
signs shall have a white field with words "No Smoking" printed in red letters, four inches (4") high with a one-half inch (1/2") face, or shall
bear the international "no smoking" symbol, which consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in a circle with a bar
across it.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or obscure any sign posted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1188-
06, 10-23-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
4-8-12: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by:
1. A fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first violation.
2. A fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation.
3. A fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a third and subsequent violation(s).
B. Any person who owns, leases, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or a place of employment that knowingly permits
smoking in an area where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense punishable by:
1. A fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first violation.
2. A fine of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a second and subsequent violation(s).
In addition to the above criminal penalty, any such violation may result in the imposition of a fine, suspension or revocation of any
business or liquor license issued for the premises on which the violation occurred.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 112/426
C. Each day that any violation of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1188-06, 10-23-2006, eff. 1-1-2007)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE OFFICERS
5-1-1: COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT:
The police department shall consist of a chief of police, a deputy chief and such number of police officers as the mayor and board of
trustees shall, from time to time, deem appropriate. The chief of police shall be appointed, discharged and/or removed in the manner set
forth in section 2-11-8 of this code. The deputy chief shall be appointed, discharged and/or removed in the manner set forth in section 2-11-
9 of this code. Any police officer, other than the chief of police or deputy chief, may be dismissed, discharged or suspended in accordance
with division 2.1 of article 10 of the Illinois municipal code and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder by the board of police
commissioners. (Ord. 980-02, 4-15-2002; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
5-1-2: DUTIES:
The chief of police and each police officer shall perform such duties as shall be prescribed by the village board for the preservation of the
public peace and the observance and enforcement of the ordinances and laws of the village. (Ord. 462-90, 8-13-1990; amd. 1995 Code)
5-1-3: SALARIES:
The salary and compensation of the chief of police and of each police officer shall be fixed by the village board. (Ord. 462-90, 8-13-1990;
amd. 1995 Code)
5-1-4: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
State law provisions adopted1:
Part-time police: A municipality may appoint, discipline, and discharge part-time police officers. A municipality that employs part-time police
officers shall, by ordinance, establish hiring standards for part-time police officers and shall submit those standards to the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training Standards Board.
Part-time police officers shall be members of the regular police department, except for pension purposes. Part-time police officers shall not
be assigned under any circumstances to supervise or direct full-time police officers of a police department. Part-time police officers shall
not be used as permanent replacements for permanent full-time police officers.
Part-time police officers shall be trained under the Intergovernmental Law Enforcement Officer's In-Service Training Act in accordance with
the procedures for part-time police officers established by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board. A part-time police officer
hired after January 1, 1996 who has not yet received certification under Section 8.2 of the Illinois Police Training Act shall be directly
supervised.
(Ord. 1369-11, 7-18-2011)
Chapter 2
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
5-2-1: STATE LAW PROVISIONS ADOPTED:
A. Purpose: This chapter is designed to assure uniform application of state and municipal regulations concerning the ownership, use,
operation and regulation of certain statutory offenses.
B. State Law Provisions Adopted: The following enumerated sections of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, exclusive of any provisions thereof
relating to the penalties or the punishment to be imposed for violation of such sections, are adopted and by reference made a part of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 113/426
this chapter with the same force and effect as though set forth herein verbatim, and the term "this act", wherever used in any such
section, shall mean this chapter, when necessary to effectuate the meaning of the section: (1995 Code)
Chapter And
Section Number Subject
720 ILCS 130/2 Contributing to the delinquency of a minor
720 ILCS 5/11-9 Public indecency
720 ILCS 5/12-1 Assault
720 ILCS 5/12-2 Aggravated assault
720 ILCS 5/12-3 Battery
720 ILCS 5/12-5 Reckless conduct
720 ILCS 5/16-1 Theft
720 ILCS 5/16-2 Theft of lost or mislaid property
720 ILCS 5/16-5 Theft from coin operated machines
720 ILCS 5/21-1 Criminal damage to property
720 ILCS 5/21-2 Criminal trespass to vehicle
720 ILCS 5/21-3 Criminal trespass to land
720 ILCS 635/1 Possession of hypodermic syringe and needle
720 ILCS 5/24-1 Unlawful use of weapons
720 ILCS 5/24-2 UUW exemptions
720 ILCS 5/26-1 Disorderly conduct
720 ILCS 5/31-1 Resisting a police officer
720 ILCS 5/31-3 Obstructing service of process
720 ILCS 5/31-4 Obstructing justice
720 ILCS 5/31-6 Escape from custody
720 ILCS 5/31-7 Aiding an escape
720 ILCS 5/31-8 Refusing to aid an officer
720 ILCS 550/4 Possession of cannabis
720 ILCS 550/5 Manufacture and delivery of cannabis
720 ILCS 550/8 Production of controlled substance
720 ILCS 135/1-1 Harassment by telephone
720 ILCS 600 Possession of drug paraphernalia
(1995 Code; amd. Ord. 1693-16, 9-26-2016)
5-2-2: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS; HUNTING:
No person shall discharge any firearms or do any hunting in the village. This shall not apply to peace officers in the line of duty or any
person acting in self-defense. (1995 Code)
5-2-3: SALE AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
A. Definitions: The following terms shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
MINOR: A person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 114/426
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any item, product, or substance containing tobacco leaf, including, without limitation, cigarettes, cigars, snuff,
pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, smokeless tobacco, e-cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products. (Ord. 1694-16, 9-26-
2016)
B. Sale To Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away, offer to sell, offer to give away, or deliver any tobacco
product to a minor. It also shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow any minor to purchase any tobacco product within the
corporate limits of the village.
Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein shall be posted at or near every display of tobacco products and on
or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS
UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE
IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background; said letters to be at least one inch (1") high.
C. Sale By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any minor to sell, or for any person to engage, employ or permit any minor to sell, any
tobacco product within the corporate limits of the village.
D. Purchase By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase any tobacco product or to misrepresent his identity or age
or to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing any tobacco product within the corporate limits of the village.
E. Possession By Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any tobacco product within the corporate limits of the
village; provided, however, that the possession by a minor under the direct supervision of the parent or guardian of such person in the
privacy of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited.
F. Free Distribution Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing, promoting or
advertising tobacco products, in the course of such business, to distribute, give away, or deliver any tobacco product free of charge to
any person on any public right of way, park, playground or other village owned property, any school district, any park district, or any
public library.
G. Sales Prohibited In Certain Locations: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away, offer to sell, offer to give away, or deliver any
tobacco product within one hundred feet (100') of the property of any school, childcare facility or the property on which a building is
located and used for education or recreation purposes or programs involving minors.
H. Vending Machines; Locking Devices: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the
intention of selling, giving away or delivering any tobacco product by use of a vending machine unless such vending machine is
equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device controlled by such person so as to prevent its operation by a minor.
Any premises where access to minors is prohibited by law or premises where the public is generally not permitted and where vending
machines are strictly for the use of employees of the business located at such premises shall be exempt from the requirements of this
subsection.
I. Responsibility For Agent Or Employee: Every act constituting a violation of this section by an agent or employee of any person shall be
deemed and held to be the act of such person, and such person shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act had been done
by such person personally. (Ord. 738-95, 6-12-1995)
5-2-4: PENALTY:
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code. (1995 Code)
Chapter 3
MINORS
5-3-1: CURFEW:
A. Age and Hour Restrictions; Adult Responsible:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 115/426
1. It is hereby made unlawful for any person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be or remain upon or in any street, alley or public
places of the Village, at night, between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Friday or Saturday
nights, and between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Sunday through Thursday nights, unless
such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of such minor person, or is in the
performance of an errand or duty directed or imposed by such parent, guardian or other person having care or custody of such minor
person, whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or public places of the Village during the night during
the aforesaid hours; provided, that such business, occupation or employment in which such minor person may be so engaged during
the aforesaid night hours shall be such in which the minor person may, under the statutes of the State of Illinois1, be lawfully engaged
or employed. (Ord. 405-88, 5-10-88; 1995 Code)
2. Adult Responsibility: It is hereby made unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of any minor under
the age of seventeen (17) years to permit any such child, ward or other person under age, to violate the provisions of this Section,
and any person violating the provisions of this Section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided herein. (Ord. 366-
86, 4-8-86)
B. Parental Responsibility:
1. Definitions: As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms specified have the meanings ascribed to them:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a Circuit Court of the State, but does not include a
person appointed guardian or given custody, of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act2.
MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years, but not yet nineteen (19) years of age.
2. Failure to Exercise Parental Responsibility: The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or
legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility,
and said minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below with the knowledge and permission of the parent or
guardian, in violation of this Section, upon the occurrence of the events described in subsections B1, B2 and B3 below:
a. An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance,
law or statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to person or property, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions
from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful and
malicious acts causing injury to a person or property; and
b. Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a verbal or written notice thereof by certified mail or personal service from the
Police Department of the Village following said adjudication or nonjudicial sanction; and
c. If at any time within one year following receipt of the notice set forth in subsection B2 above, said minor is either adjudicated to be
in violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection B2 above, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from
another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection
B1 above. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
C. Penalty: Whoever violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in subsection 1-4-4E of this Code. (Ord.
366-86, 4-8-86; 1995 Code)
Footnote 1: S.H.A. 720 ILCS 555/1.
Footnote 2: S.H.A. 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
Chapter 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
5-4-1: COUNTY REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
A. Adoption Of Regulations: The Lake County board of health ordinance, article X, rabies control, as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this section as though fully incorporated herein. (Ord. 248-77, 11-11-1977; amd. 1995 Code)
B. Joint Agreement With County: The village enters into a joint agreement with the county of Lake as provided in agreement III, made a part
hereof by reference, and the mayor and clerk are hereby authorized to execute such agreement III on behalf of the village. (Ord. 248-
77, 11-11-1977; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
C. Penalties:
1. The same penalties as provided in the Lake County board of health ordinance aforesaid shall apply to any violations of this section,
said penalties being herein restated as follows.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 116/426
2. Any person violating or aiding in or abetting the violation of any provision of this section, or counterfeiting any certificate or tag, or
making any misrepresentation in regard to any matter prescribed by this section, or resisting, obstructing or impeding the health
department or an authorized officer in enforcing this section, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each
day a person fails to comply constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 248-77, 11-11-1977; amd. 1995 Code)
5-4-2: DOGS:
A. Owner Defined: For the purpose of this section "owner" means a person having a right of property in a dog, or who keeps or harbors a
dog, or who has in his care or acts as guardian for a dog, or who normally permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied
by him.
B. Female Dog In Heat: The owner of any female dog in heat shall keep the dog confined in a secure enclosure during such period.
C. Dangerous Dog: A "dangerous dog" is hereby defined to be a dog which shall cause annoyance or reasonable fear of bodily injury to
any person by attacking or threatening to attack such person. The owner of any dangerous dog shall keep said dog confined in a secure
enclosure or on a leash controlled by the owner or his agent at all times.
D. Dog On Leash: No owner of any dog shall permit such dog, except when on a leash controlled by the owner or his agents, to be upon
any public street, walk, parkway or public area within the village and no leash shall be longer than eight feet (8') in length1. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to dogs leading blind persons.
E. Prohibited Acts And Conditions:
1. Damage To Property: No owner of a dog shall, without the consent of the owner of the property concerned, permit such dog to enter
upon the premises of another or to injure, destroy or carry away any vegetable, plant, fruit, shrub, tree, flower or other thing which
may be on said premises within the village.
2. Barking Dog: No owner of a dog shall permit such dog, by prolonged or loud barking, to disturb the peace and welfare of any person.
3. Biting Dog: No owner of a dog shall permit such dog to bite, scratch or otherwise injure any person who is peaceably conducting
himself in any place where he may lawfully be. (Ord. 315-81, 5-12-1981; amd. 1995 Code)
4. Collar With Proof Of Rabies Inoculation: No person shall bring a dog into the Village unless the dog has been inoculated as provided
by 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8. All dogs must also have a durable collar with a current metallic tag signifying a rabies
inoculation securely attached thereto.
F. Penalty: The violation of any of the provisions of this section, except subsection E4 of this section, shall be punishable as provided in
subsection 1-4-4E of this Code; in addition thereto, and upon conviction for such a violation, such defendant shall be assessed all costs
and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Village in enforcing the provisions of this section against such defendant2. Any person
violating subsection E4 of this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. A separate
offense for violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation
occurs or continues. (Ord. 947-01, 6-18-2001)
5-4-3: DOG LICENSING:
A. License Required: No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog over the age of three (3) months within the Village unless such dog is
licensed every year as provided herein. All licenses shall be annual licenses and the license year shall commence on February 1 of
each year. (Ord. 1321-10, 5-17-2010)
B. Application: Application for such license shall be made by the owner on a form to be provided by the Village Clerk within ten (10) days
after acquiring any dog over three (3) months of age or within ten (10) days after a dog becomes three (3) months of age; provided that
any owner moving to the Village for the purpose of establishing residence or becoming a resident as a result of any annexation, and
otherwise required to obtain a license, shall have until ten (10) days after moving or annexation to obtain such a license. The application
form shall contain the following minimum information: the name, address, home and work telephone numbers of the owner, the name,
sex, breed and color of the dog and the date and number of the most recent rabies vaccination. (Ord. 947-01, 6-18-2001)
C. Reserved. (Ord. 1795-17, 12-13-2017)
D. Payment Of License Fee: A license fee shall be paid at the time of making application, in the amounts as set forth in subsection 11-1-1G
of this Code. (Ord. 1160-06, 4-17-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 117/426
E. Registry Of Dogs: The Village Clerk shall keep a complete registry, in a book or computerized list to be kept for that purpose, of all
licensed dogs, describing the name, sex, breed and color of each dog and the owner's name, address, home and work telephone
numbers and the number of the dog license tag.
F. License Tags:
1. Upon payment and acceptance of the license fee, the Village Clerk shall issue a metallic license tag, the shape to be changed each
year, with the year for which the dog license tag is paid, the words "Hawthorn Woods Dog Tag" and the number of the tag stamped
thereon. One metallic dog license tag shall be issued for each license; provided, however, a replacement dog license tag shall be
issued upon request by the owner, provided that the appropriate fee is paid.
2. Every dog kept within the Village shall wear a durable dog collar to which the Village dog license tag and the County rabies
inoculation tag shall be securely attached.
3. No person may use a license for any dog other than the dog for which the license was issued. It shall also be unlawful for any person
to remove from the neck of any dog the license tag issued pursuant to this section or alter such tag in any manner, except that the
Chief of Police may authorize such removal during the course of normal impoundment.
G. Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each
offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues. In addition
to any other penalties provided in this section, any dog without a current dog license tag and a rabies tag attached to its collar shall be
subject to impoundment. (Ord. 947-01, 6-18-2001)
5-4-4: OTHER ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to harbor, keep or raise any live cattle, swine (including potbellied pigs), sheep, goats, chickens or other livestock fowl
anywhere in the Village, unless authorized by the Corporate Authorities as identified in section 9-8A-4 of this Code. (Ord. 1641-16, 3-21-
2016)
Chapter 5
JUNKED VEHICLES
5-5-1: DEFINITION:
"Junked motor vehicle" or "disabled motor vehicle" shall mean any vehicle, including trailers, which is without currently valid license plates,
and/or in either wrecked, discarded, dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
5-5-2: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The parking or storing of junked or disabled motor vehicles and the storing or allowing to remain in the open of motor vehicle bodies, parts,
equipment, motors and materials, in violation of Sections 5-5-3 and 5-5-4 herein is declared to constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 366-86,
4-8-86)
5-5-3: PARKING AND STORING RESTRICTED:
Junked or disabled motor vehicles may not be parked, stored or left in the open on private property within the Village, unless it is necessary
for the operation of a business enterprise lawfully conducted thereon. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
5-5-4: STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS:
The storing, placing or allowing to remain in the open on private property within the Village of motor vehicle bodies, parts, equipment,
motors and materials for a period of more than forty eight (48) hours in any one calendar month is hereby prohibited, unless necessary for
the operation of a business enterprise lawfully conducted thereon. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
5-5-5: NOTICE TO ABATE:
A. The Village shall notify the person in control of any private property to relocate any junked or disabled vehicle parked or stored in
violation of Section 5-5-3 herein to a completely enclosed location on the property or otherwise to remove the same from the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 118/426
B. The Village shall also notify the person in control of any private property to relocate any motor vehicle bodies, parts, equipment, motors
and materials stored, placed or allowed to remain in the open, in violation of Section 5-5-4 herein, to a completely enclosed location on
the property, or otherwise to remove the same from the premises. Such notice shall be given by certified or registered mail addressed to
the residence or usual place of business of such person. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
5-5-6: ACTION ON NONCOMPLIANCE:
After the expiration of five (5) days from the receipt of the notice provided for in the preceding Section, if the person so notified has failed,
neglected or refused to comply with the directions of such notice, the Village shall cause the removal and disposal of such vehicles, bodies,
parts, equipments, motors and materials. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86; 1995 Code)
5-5-7: LIABILITY FOR EXPENSE OF DISPOSAL:
In the event the Village is required to remove and dispose of the vehicles, bodies, parts, etc., the person in control of the premises shall be
liable to the Village for the expense incurred by the Village. A statement shall be rendered to the person liable for the cost thereof, and if not
paid, suit may be instituted. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-86)
5-5-8: PENALTY:
A. Whoever violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 366-86, 4-8-
86; 1995 Code)
Chapter 6
SOCIAL HOSTING AND UNDERAGE DRINKING
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings stated in this section:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including
dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and which
contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed,
or combined with other substances.
CONVEYANCE: Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container operated for the transportation of persons or property.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other
activity.
HOST: To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or permit an event or gathering.
ILLICIT DRUGS: Any drug, substance, or compound prohibited by law, including drugs prescribed by a physician that are in the possession
of or used by someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
A. As a natural, adoptive parent, or stepparent;
B. As a legal guardian; or
C. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking
lots.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 119/426
REASONABLE STEPS: Controlling access to alcoholic beverages at the event or gathering; controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages
present at the event or gathering; verifying the age of persons attending the event or gathering by inspecting drivers' licenses or other
government issued identification cards to ensure that minors do not consume alcoholic beverages while at the event or gathering; and
supervising the activities of minors at the event or gathering, and/or calling for police assistance in the event people under twenty one (21)
are in possession of alcohol at the event or gathering.
RELIGIOUS CEREMONY: The possession, consumption and dispensation of alcohol or an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of
conducting any bona fide rite or religious ceremony.
RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a
hall or meeting room, property, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent
basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or
without permission or compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual less than twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 1286-09, 8-17-2009)
5-6-2: OFFENSES:
A. 1. It is unlawful for any person to host, permit, allow, or fail to take reasonable steps to prevent an event or gathering at any residence or
premises, or on any other property whether private or public, or in any conveyance, over which that person has control or a reasonable
opportunity for control where illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages are present when that person knows or reasonably should know that an
underage person will or does consume or possess any illicit drugs or alcoholic beverage. The fact that a person has taken all
reasonable steps may be considered as an affirmative defense as to whether such person "reasonably should know" that an underage
person will or does consume or possess any illicit drugs or alcoholic beverages.
2. It also is unlawful for any person to fail to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption of illicit drugs or alcoholic
beverages by an underage person at any such event or gathering. A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be
present at the event or gathering to be in violation of this subsection A.
B. 1. A person is responsible for violating subsection A of this section if that person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, conspires
with, or solicits another person to commit a violation of subsection A of this section.
2. A person is responsible for violating subsection A of this section if that person knows or should have known about the committing of a
prohibited act and failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the prohibited act.
C. 1. A person who hosts an event or gathering shall not be in violation of this chapter if he or she undertakes one of the following steps
before any other person makes a complaint about the event or gathering:
a. Seeks assistance from the Hawthorn Woods police department or other law enforcement agency to remove any person who
refuses to abide by the host's performance of the duties imposed by this chapter, or
b. Terminates the event or gathering because the host has been unable to prevent underage persons from consuming illicit drugs or
alcoholic beverages despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so.
2. This chapter does not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic beverages that occurs at a religious ceremony or that is
exclusively between an underage person and his or her parent, as permitted by Illinois state law. (Ord. 1286-09, 8-17-2009)
5-6-3: FINES; PENALTIES:
Any person who violates or assists in the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense and
shall be subject to a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such violation. Each day on which, or during which,
a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
A. The first violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
B. A second violation of this chapter by the same person within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
C. A third or subsequent violation of this chapter by the same person within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of no
less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 1286-09, 8-17-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 120/426
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
VEHICLE LICENSES1
6-1-1: DEFINITION:
Whenever the term "motor vehicle" is used in this chapter, it shall be construed to include automobiles, motorcycles, motor driven cycles,
trucks and all other vehicles as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-146. (Ord. 511-92, 3-16-1992)
The term "motor vehicle" shall also include privately owned golf carts as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-123.9. (Ord. 1317-10,
4-19-2010)
6-1-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS:
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle who resides within the corporate limits of the village or who owns or operates a motor vehicle
having its situs or base within the corporate limits of the village shall, each year, apply for a vehicle license and pay a license fee as
hereinafter provided and affix the vehicle license to the lower right hand (passenger's side) of the windshield. The foregoing requirements
shall not apply in the following cases:
A. No vehicle license shall be required of the owner or operator of a motor vehicle registered under the laws of any state other than the
state of Illinois or any municipality located therein. (Ord. 814-98, 1-12-1998)
B. No vehicle license shall be required of the owner or operator of a motor vehicle who resides within the corporate limits of the village if the
motor vehicle has its situs or base in another city, village, incorporated town or other municipal corporation regardless of whether or not
the motor vehicle is displaying a plate or tax or license number issued by such city, village, incorporated town or municipal corporation.
(Ord. 818-98, 2-21-1998)
C. No vehicle license shall be required of the owner or operator of any commercial motor vehicle, as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/18b-101(2) that is registered under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-402.1. (Ord. 814-98, 1-12-1998)
6-1-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person required to have a Hawthorn Woods vehicle license for a motor vehicle shall file an application with the office of the village
clerk. Said application shall be made upon a form provided for that purpose and shall include the name and address of the registered
owner of the vehicle, name and address of the applicant if different from owner, description of the motor vehicle (including make, color,
model, etc.) for which application for license is made. The application shall not be considered complete until accompanied by payment in
full of the proper fee as set forth in subsection 11-1-1E of this code. (Ord. 511-92, 3-16-1992; amd. 1995 Code)
6-1-4: TIME LIMIT FOR LICENSING:
A. Any person who becomes the owner of a new motor vehicle, replaces a motor vehicle or becomes a new resident shall have thirty (30)
days to properly license their motor vehicles with the village without penalty. (Ord. 511-92, 3-16-1992)
B. Every Hawthorn Woods resident person shall renew his vehicle license prior to February 1 of each year. (Ord. 1321-10, 5-17-2010)
C. If a person fails to license said vehicle within this time limit, they shall still be required to license said vehicle and shall pay fifty percent
(50%) additional of the applicable motor vehicle license fee during the month of February, and two (2) times the original applicable motor
vehicle license fee set forth in subsection 11-1-1E of this code thereafter. (Ord. 1411-12, 7-16-2012, eff. 1-1-2013)
6-1-5: FEES:
A. Vehicle Licenses: See subsection 11-1-1E of this Code. (Ord. 511-92, 3-16-1992; amd. 1995 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 121/426
B. Half Year License: Any person who becomes the owner of any vehicle on or after July 1 of any license year, or any person who becomes
a new resident of the Village on or after July 1 of any license year, may obtain his motor vehicle license at a license fee of one-half (1/2)
of the amount specified in subsection A of this section for the annual license fee. (Ord. 1780-17, 7-24-2017)
C. Senior Citizens: Any person over the age of sixty five (65) years as of February 1 of the applicable license year shall, upon showing
proof of age, be entitled to a license for up to one motor vehicle registered in his name, at the reduced rate set forth in subsection 11-1-
1E of this Code. Any additional licenses shall be at the full amount of the applicable fee, as set forth in subsection 11-1-1E of this Code.
(Ord. 1321-10, 5-17-2010)
6-1-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
The license year for motor vehicles shall be from February 1 of each calendar year through January 31 of the following calendar year. (Ord.
1321-10, 5-17-2010)
6-1-7: LICENSE STICKERS:
A vehicle license shall be issued to each person as provided herein. A replacement sticker may be issued upon the payment of the fee set
forth in subsection 11-1-1E of this Code and upon the submission of a recognizable portion of the original sticker. (Ord. 895-00, 3-18-2000)
6-1-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code for each offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each and every day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1277-
09, 2-23-2009)
Chapter 2
TRAFFIC CODE; MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
6-2-1: ADOPTION OF THE ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE:
In lieu of using any section or in addition to any section of this title, the officer issuing a citation may issue it by using any of the sections of
the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, as the same may be amended from time to time, which are incorporated and
adopted by reference as a part of this chapter, three (3) copies of said code having been on file in the office of the village clerk and
available for public use, inspection and examination for at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date hereof as provided in 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-3-2. All citations issued for these violations shall be in the name of the village and shall refer to the numbered
sections in the Illinois vehicle code but shall also be referred to as an ordinance violation in the traffic ticket or complaint. (Ord. 1475-13, 11-
18-2013)
6-2-2: VEHICLE WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
LIMITED CONTINUOUS USE MOVEMENTS: Movements generally to one site over a period of three (3) months made by oversized
vehicles which do not exceed the weight limits set forth in subsection B of this section. Limited continuous use permits may be issued
for up to ten (10) trips, generally to the same site during the time period allowed.
MULTIPLE MOVEMENTS: Those movements by a single permittee involving trips in close proximity to each other in distance and in
time. The village's police department may, in its sole discretion, consider such multiple movements under a single permit. Such a
multiple move permit, when granted by the police department, may not exceed a thirty (30) day period of time. The precise routes and
times must be identified prior to obtaining a permit.
ONE-WAY OR SINGLE TRIP MOVEMENT: One move from the point of origin to the point of destination. Stops between the point of
origin and the point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are effective for five (5) consecutive days from the date of
issuance unless otherwise directed by the Hawthorn Woods police department.
ROUND TRIP MOVEMENT: A trip from point of origin to the point of destination and back to point of origin over the same route. Round
trip permits are effective for ten (10) consecutive days from the date of issuance.
B. Permits Required:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 122/426
1. A permit issued by the village shall be required for the movement of any vehicle on a roadway or bridge owned and maintained by the
village which exceed the following limits:
a. Maximum gross weight of more than six (6) tons.
b. Maximum length of more than fifty five feet (55').
c. Maximum width of more than eight feet (8').
d. Maximum height of more than thirteen feet six inches (13'6").
This shall apply to any single vehicle or series of vehicles pulled by a single tractor. With respect to those roadways and bridges
under construction, road closures with or without signage do not exempt overweight and/or oversized movements from permit
requirements when any traffic is allowed through construction zone(s) and when the movement is made by applicant(s) not
performing construction on the roadway closed. In an emergency declared by resolution of the village, the requirements to obtain
permits may be waived.
2. The following are exempt from permits:
a. Fire department vehicles;
b. Vehicles operating under an emergency declaration;
c. Village owned vehicles;
d. Vehicles engaged in emergency utility repair;
e. Equipment used for snow and ice removal, owned or operated by any governmental body;
f. Refuse trucks (state nondesignated highway weight limits apply); and
g. Utility vehicles.
3. Permits shall be issued only in the name of a person, firm, business, or corporation that owns and operates the transporting vehicle
or that operates the vehicle under a bona fide lease agreement.
4. Permits for vehicles that are both overweight and oversized are valid only one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise until one-half (1/2) hour
after sunset, on any day for which the permit is valid.
5. Permits are nontransferable and apply only to the permittee.
6. The village may issue revisions to permits:
a. To correct an error attributed to the village;
b. To correct an error attributed to the applicant, discovered before the move; or
c. To adjust weights, dimension or routes as issued on the permit, before the move is made.
Any revisions made at the request of the permittee for purposes of changing weights, dimensions, routes or load description shall
be made before any move is made at a cost of twenty dollars ($20.00) per permit.
7. The permit, when issued, constitutes an agreement between the permittee and the village that the move described in the application
will take place only as described. The permittee has the responsibility to report to the village's police department any inaccuracies or
errors on the part of either the village or the permittee before starting any move. Undertaking the move is prima facie evidence of
acceptance of the permit as issued and its terms.
8. The routing prescribed in the permit constitutes the sole extent of the authority granted by the permit for the use of village roads, and
any vehicle and/or load found to be off route will be considered off route and without a permit. Permits shall be in the driver's
possession at all times unless otherwise directed in writing by the village's police department and presented upon demand to any and
all police officers for the purpose of inspection.
9. If required, arrangement shall be made by the permittee to have the proper utilities notified, property moved, bridges or highways
analyses performed and completed in advance of any permit movement. Any associated cost shall be the responsibility of the
permittee.
10. All movements under the permit shall be made in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
11. Permits are void if altered by the permittee. The permits issued under this subsection constitute the grant of a privilege by the village
and may be denied or suspended for such reasons as the village may deem related to its governmental interests including, but not
limited to:
a. A permittee's knowingly providing incorrect information in an application for a permit;
b. A permittee, its agents, or employees acting on a permit which has been altered for purposes of deception;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 123/426
c. Noncompliance by permittee, its agents or employees with federal, state, or local ordinances pertaining to the transport of goods or
operation of a vehicle engaged in the transport of goods; or
d. Moving on village streets without a valid permit as required under this subsection.
C. Applications For Permit:
1. Permits may be granted only pursuant to a completed application. Permits for proposed moves may be issued only if the village's
police department is satisfied that:
a. The village roadways and bridges will not be damaged; and
b. The safety of the traveling public will be adequately protected.
2. Applications for a permit to move an oversized and/or overweight vehicle and/or load, must be made to the village's police
department. The following information shall be included on the permit:
a. Company name;
b. Address of company;
c. Fax and telephone number of applicant;
d. Name of person making application;
e. Description of hauling vehicle;
f. Description of load to be moved;
g. Overall dimensions of vehicle and axle weight information;
h. Village roadways to be traveled;
i. Any special conditions;
j. Permit type with fee due to the village;
k. Date permit issued and expiration date;
l. Time permit issued and by whom; and
m. Category of permit.
3. Requests for permit moves shall be made no less than twenty four (24) hours prior to the move.
D. Police Escorts: Police escorts shall be required for certain vehicles and loads as determined by the village's police department. The total
number of officers necessary to provide for a safe move shall be determined by the village's police department. Fees for escorts shall be
in addition to any permit fees.
Fees for the escort shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) per hour per officer assigned with a minimum of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00), irrespective of the time or number of officers actually used.
E. Bonds, Indemnification And Insurance:
1. The permittee shall assume total liability for any and all damages to streets, bridges, village owned appurtenances and private or
public property while engaged in a move. The measure of liability shall be the actual cost for all repairs or replacement of property
damaged by the permittee.
2. The permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the village from any costs, judgments or settlements, including attorney fees, arising
from physical injuries, including loss of life, or damage to or loss of property related to acts or omissions by permittee, its officers,
agents, or employees pursuant to the permit.
3. Upon application for a permit(s) for loads over seventy three thousand two hundred eighty (73,280) pounds, each applicant shall
provide evidence of a valid comprehensive general liability insurance policy for protection against personal injury or property damage
in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. Such coverage shall be placed with a responsible company
acceptable to the village, licensed to do business in the state of Illinois, and with a minimum insurance rating of A:VII as found in the
current edition of "A.M. Best's Key Rating Guide". Each policy shall bear an endorsement precluding the cancellation or reduction of
said policies without providing the village at least thirty (30) days' prior notice thereof in writing. All required insurance shall be
maintained by the contractor in full force and effect during the life of the move.
F. Suspension And Reinstatement:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 124/426
1. Suspension of a current permit, as authorized by subsection B11 of this section, shall be for the time determined appropriate by the
village's police department. Reinstatement may be made upon conditions determined by the police department and payment of all
outstanding fees.
2. In addition to any other fees and costs pursuant to subsection F1 of this section, there shall be a reinstatement fee of fifty dollars
($50.00).
3. The chief of police or his or her designee shall administer and enforce this section and shall have the authority to grant, deny,
suspend or reinstate permits. Any applicant or permittee denied a permit or who has had a permit suspended, upon request, shall
have the right to appeal the action to the chief of police or his or her designee.
G. Permit Fee Schedules:
1. Collection Of Fees: The village, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, shall collect a fee as set forth in subsection G3 of this
section for the issuance of a permit to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicle(s) and/or loads.
2. Limited Continuous Use Permits: Limited continuous use permits are not available for overweight vehicles. Limited continuous use
permits are available only for oversized vehicles and for a period of not more than three (3) months from the date of issue.
3. Fee Schedule: The fee schedule for single vehicles shall be as follows:
Category Axles Weight Single Trip Round Trip
1A 2 24,000 lbs. gross
16,000 lbs. on 1 axle
$25.00 $35.00
2A 2 36,000 lbs. gross
20,000 lbs. on 1 axle
30.00 45.00
3A 3 or more 50,000 lbs. gross
18,000 lbs. on 1 axle
36,000 lbs. on a tandem
35.00 55.00
4A 3 or more 68,000 lbs. gross
21,000 lbs. on 1 axle
48,000 lbs. on a tandem
40.00 65.00
5A 4 or more 72,000 lbs. gross
34,000 lbs. on 2 axles
40,000 lbs. on a tandem
45.00 75.00
The fee schedule for combination vehicles shall be as follows:
Category Axles Weight Single Trip Round Trip
1B 5 72,000 lbs. gross
18,000 lbs. on 1 axle
32,000 lbs. on a tandem
$35.00 $55.00
2B 5 or more 73,280 lbs. gross
18,000 lbs. on 1 axle
32,000 lbs. on a tandem
40.00 65.00
The fee schedule for oversized vehicles shall be as follows:
Category Sizes Escort
Single
Trip
Round
Trip
Limited
Continuous
1C 10' wide
14'6" high
70' long
No $ 25.00 $ 35.00 $100.00/10 trips
2C 12' wide
14'6" high
85' long
No 30.00 35.00 $150.00/10 trips
3C 14' wide
15' high
100' long
Yes 40.00 65.00 n/a
4C 18' wide Yes 60.00 105.00 n/a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 125/426
16'6" high
120' long
5C Greater than 18' wide
Greater than 16' high
Greater than 120' long
Yes 110.00 205.00 n/a
Any axle or gross weight greater than the maximum weights set forth above are subject to special assessment and investigation to
determine appropriate fees for the above table.
The number of police escort vehicles shall be determined by the police department for dimension categories 3C through 5C and shall be
based on the route and safety considerations.
H. Bonds And Bond Forfeiture: All persons charged with a violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-100 et seq., or 5/3-401(d), shall
post a cash bond in an amount equal to the amount of the minimum fine established by the Illinois vehicle code, plus costs in the
amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for administrative costs. The defendant may, in lieu of cash bail, deposit a money order issued by
a money transfer service company which has been approved by the finance department of the village. The money order shall be made
payable to the village.
If a person who submits a bond or money order is found guilty of or pleads guilty to the offense or fails to appear for a hearing before the
administrative adjudication hearing officer, the hearing officer may order the forfeiture of all or part of the bond or money order to the
village.
I. Authority Of Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer: Any violations of the Illinois vehicle code relating to overweight trucks,
specifically violations of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-100 et seq., and 5/3-401(d), may be decided by the administrative
adjudication hearing officer as set forth in title 1 of this code.
J. Fines And Penalties:
1. In addition to any other remedies, any permittee, its officers, agents or employees, found guilty of a violation of this section, shall be
subject to a minimum two hundred dollar ($200.00) and maximum two thousand five hundred dollar ($2,500.00) fine for each vehicle
and day during which a move was made.
2. Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111 or 5/3-401(d), the owner or
driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted
for such violation. Any person, firm or corporation who is convicted for a violation of section 15-111, including, but not limited to, a
maximum axle or gross limit specified on a regulatory sign posted in accordance with paragraph (g) or (h) of section 15-111, shall be
fined according to the following schedule except for weights five thousand one (5,001) or more pounds overweight:
Pounds Overweight Fine
Administrative
Fee Total
Up to and including 2,000 $ 50.00 $25.00 $ 75.00
From 2,001 through 2,500 135.00 25.00 160.00
From 2,501 through 3,000 165.00 25.00 190.00
From 3,001 through 3,500 260.00 25.00 285.00
From 3,501 through 4,000 300.00 25.00 325.00
From 4,001 through 4,500 425.00 25.00 450.00
From 4,501 through 5,000 475.00 25.00 500.00
5,001 or more See below See below See below
For vehicles that are five thousand one (5,001) or more pounds overweight, the fine shall be computed by assessing seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for the first five thousand (5,000) pounds overweight and seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each additional increment of five
hundred (500) pounds overweight or fraction thereof. Also, an administrative fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) is added to the fine amount.
3. If a second division vehicle (as defined in the Illinois vehicle code) and load are operated within the village and the required
registration fees and taxes for the gross weight of the vehicle and load have not been paid or the vehicle and load exceed the
registered gross weight for which the required fees and taxes have been paid by two thousand one (2,001) pounds or more, the
operator or owner shall be fined as stated in subsection J2 of this section. For any unregistered vehicle or vehicle displaying expired
registration, no fine shall exceed the actual cost of what the appropriate registration for that vehicle and load should have been as
established in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-815(a), as amended from time to time, plus an administrative fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 1288-09, 8-17-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 126/426
6-2-3: TURNING RESTRICTIONS, SPECIFIC AREAS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1370-11, 7-19-2011)
6-2-4: STOP INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED:
A. Generally: Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop
intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle which
has entered the intersection from another roadway or which is approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate
hazard during the time when the driver is moving across or within the intersection, but said driver having so yielded may proceed at
such time as a safe interval occurs. (Ord. 578-93, 11-8-1993; amd. Ord. 775-96, 11-11-1996)
B. Certain Intersections Designated: The following intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
94 Midlothian Road (Aquatic Center exit), eastbound at Midlothian Road.
Aberdeen Road (north end), eastbound at Darlington Drive.
Aberdeen Road (south end), eastbound at Darlington Drive.
Acorn Drive, northbound at Old McHenry Road.
Acorn Drive, southbound at Robin Crest Road.
Andrew Lane, eastbound at Deerfield Drive.
Andrew Lane, eastbound at Hawthorn Hills Drive.
Andrew Lane, northbound at Cardinal Drive.
Andrew Lane, northbound at Hawthorn Hills Drive.
Andrew Lane, southbound at Hawthorn Hills Drive.
Anne Court, northbound at Deer Point Drive.
Bedford Court, westbound at South Chestnut Court.
Bent Tree Court, eastbound at Foxhunt Trail.
Bethpage Circle, northbound at River Highlands Drive.
Birch Lakes Drive, eastbound at Fairfield Road.
Birch Lakes Drive, eastbound at High Point Drive.
Birch Lakes Drive, westbound at Deer Point Drive.
Birch Lakes Drive, westbound at High Point Drive.
Bittersweet Trail, northbound at Schwerman Road.
Bixtone Path, southbound at Old McHenry Road.
Blackhawk Road, northbound at Indian Creek Road.
Blackhawk Road, southbound at Sequoia Road.
Bradbury Lane, southbound at Hawthorn Hills Drive.
Brentwood Drive, eastbound at Hawthorn Hills Drive.
Brentwood Drive, northbound at Hawthorn Hills Drive.
Briar Creek Drive, northbound at Dorel Drive.
Briar Creek Drive, southbound at Schwerman Road.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 127/426
Bridle Path, northbound at Milton Road.
Bridle Path, southeastbound at North Trail.
Brierwoods Lane, eastbound at Bruce Circle North.
Brierwoods Lane, southbound at Miller Road.
Brighton Court, westbound at Mark Drive.
Bruce Circle North, eastbound at Acorn Drive.
Bruce Circle North, eastbound at Bruce Circle South.
Bruce Circle North, westbound at Bruce Circle South.
Bruce Circle South, eastbound at Acorn Drive.
Bruce Circle South, northbound at Bruce Circle North.
Cambridge Drive, eastbound at Carlisle Road.
Cambridge Drive, northbound at Gilmer Road.
Canterbury Lane, westbound at Mark Drive.
Cardinal Drive, eastbound at Gilmer Road.
Cardinal Drive, northbound at Falcon Drive.
Cardinal Drive, northbound at Schwerman Road.
Cardinal Drive, southbound at Falcon Drive.
Carlisle Road, eastbound at Darlington Drive.
Carlisle Road, northbound (east fork) at Carlisle Road.
Carlisle Road, northbound (east fork) at Falkirk Road.
Carlisle Road, southbound (east and west forks) at Falkirk Road.
Carlisle Road, southbound at Glen Road.
Carlisle Road, southbound at North Highview Circle.
Cattail Court, southbound at Foxtail Road.
Championship Parkway, eastbound at Gilmer Road.
Championship Parkway, southbound at Tournament Drive North.
Chancellor Court, northbound at Copperfield Drive.
Chantilly Lane, northbound at Wedgewood Drive.
Charleston Court, northbound at Hawthorn Grove Circle.
Circle Drive, southbound at Old McHenry Road.
Cobblewood Lane, northbound at North Trail.
Community Park exit, eastbound at Park View Lane.
Copperfield Drive, southbound at Old McHenry Road.
Copperfield Drive, westbound at Chantilly Lane.
Costekin Court, southbound at Illinois Route 176.
Country Club entrance, eastbound at Tournament Drive North.
Croydon Road, northbound at Glen Road.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 128/426
Croydon Road, southbound at Stonehaven Drive.
Crystal Downs Drive, westbound at Tournament Drive South.
Darlington Drive, northbound at choker point north of John Drive.
Darlington Drive, northbound at choker point north of Trent Road.
Darlington Drive, northbound at Falkirk Road.
Darlington Drive, northbound at Gilmer Road.
Darlington Drive, northbound at Glen Road.
Darlington Drive, southbound at choker point north of John Drive.
Darlington Drive, southbound at choker point north of Trent Road.
Darlington Drive, southbound at Falkirk Road.
Darlington Drive, southbound at Glen Road.
Darlington Drive, southbound at Old McHenry Road.
Dartmouth Lane, eastbound at Cambridge Drive.
Deer Point Drive, eastbound at choker point west of Overlook Drive.
Deer Point Drive, northbound at Birch Lakes Drive.
Deer Point Drive, northbound at Governors Way.
Deer Point Drive, southbound at Birch Lakes Drive.
Deer Point Drive, southbound at Old Lake Road.
Deer Point Drive, westbound at choker point west of Overlook Drive.
Deerfield Drive, westbound at Forest View Drive.
Doral Court, southbound at Doral Drive.
Dorchester Court, southbound at Highland Drive.
Dorset Court, northbound at North Trail.
Durango Court, westbound at Deer Point Drive.
Eagle Ridge Drive, northbound at Championship Parkway.
Eagle Ridge Drive, southbound at Tournament Drive North.
East Peter Lane, westbound at Cardinal Drive.
Echo Court, westbound at Acorn Drive.
Echo Lake Road, northbound at Miller Road.
Echo Lake Road, northbound at Old McHenry Road.
Echo Lake Road, southbound at Miller Road.
Edward Lane, westbound at Mark Drive.
Elm Street, eastbound at Darlington Drive.
Elm Street, northbound at Lagoon Drive.
Elmwood Drive, southbound at Miller Road.
Empress Drive, westbound at Quentin Road.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 129/426
Equestrian Way, northbound at North Trail.
Equestrian Way, southbound at Old McHenry Road.
Essex Court, westbound at Mark Drive.
Executive Drive, southbound at Landover Parkway.
Falkirk Road, eastbound at Darlington Drive.
Falkirk Road, westbound at Lagoon Drive.
Flint Creek Drive, northbound at Abbey Glenn Road.
Flint Creek Drive, southbound at East Stonebridge Drive.
Forest View Drive, northbound at Deerfield Drive.
Forest View Drive, southbound at Kruckenberg Road.
Foxhunt Trail, northbound at Pheasant Run.
Foxhunt Trail, southbound at Old McHenry Road.
Foxtail Road, westbound at Squire Road.
Furlong Drive, southbound at North Trail.
Gentry Drive, northbound at Bagpipe Court.
Gentry Drive, southbound at Copperfield Drive.
Gino Lane, eastbound at St. John Drive.
Gino Lane, westbound at Hawthorn Grove Drive.
Glen Club Court, eastbound at Open Parkway North.
Glen Road, eastbound at Darlington Drive.
Glen Road, eastbound at Lynn Drive.
Glen Road, eastbound at Orchard Lane.
Glen Road, westbound at Lynn Drive.
Glen Road, westbound at Orchard Lane.
Glen Road, westbound at Squire Road.
Governors Way, westbound at Gentry Drive.
Greenfield Court, southbound at Deerfield Drive.
Hampton Lane, westbound at Mark Drive.
Harborside Way, northbound at Tournament Drive North.
Harrington Court, eastbound at Hawthorn Grove Drive.
Harvard Lane, southbound at Cambridge Drive.
Harvard Lane, westbound at Cambridge Drive.
Hawthorn Drive, southbound at Old McHenry Road.
Hawthorn Grove Circle, eastbound at Hawthorn Grove Drive.
Hawthorn Grove Drive, northbound at Gilmer Road.
Hawthorn Hills Drive, eastbound at Midlothian Road.
Hawthorn Hills Drive, westbound at Beverly Lane.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 130/426
Hawthorn Ridge Drive, eastbound at Hawthorn Ridge Drive (north/south).
Hawthorn Ridge Drive, northbound at Open Parkway North.
Heather Lane, eastbound at Quentin Road.
Heritage Park Drive, eastbound at Kruckenberg Road.
Heritage Park Drive, westbound at Fairfield Road.
Heron Court, westbound at Darlington Drive.
Hickory Road, eastbound at Elm Street.
Hickory Road, southbound at Hawthorn Drive.
High Point Drive, southbound at Birch Lake Drive.
Highland Drive, eastbound at Quentin Road.
Highland Drive, westbound at Chestnut Court.
Hillcrest Drive, eastbound at Old Barn Road (west end).
Holmes Avenue, westbound at Fairfield Road.
Hubbard Lane, eastbound at N. Abbey Glenn Drive.
Indian Creek Road, westbound at Gilmer Road.
Ivy Lane, southbound at Rosewood Drive.
James Court, southbound at Darlington Drive.
James Drive, eastbound at John Drive.
James Drive, eastbound at Mark Drive.
James Drive, northwestbound at Darlington Drive.
James Drive, westbound at John Drive.
Jamie Lane, eastbound at Mark Drive.
Jamie Lane, westbound at Trent Road.
Jane Court, northbound at Juel Drive.
Jessica Court, eastbound at Joshua Drive.
John Drive, westbound at Darlington Drive.
Joshua Drive, northbound at Regan Lane.
Joshua Drive, southbound at Jessica Court.
Juel Circle, northeastbound at Elm Street.
Juel Drive, eastbound at Darlington Drive.
Juel Drive, southbound at Elm Street.
Kathy Lane, eastbound at David Lane.
Kathy Lane, westbound at David Lane.
Kensington Court, eastbound at Hawthorn Grove Drive.
Kruckenberg Road, northbound at Heritage Park Drive.
Kruckenberg Road, southbound at Heritage Park Drive.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 131/426
Kruger Road, eastbound at Midlothian Road.
Kruger Road, westbound at Fairfield Road.
Lagoon Drive, eastbound at Falkirk Road.
Lagoon Drive, northbound at Orchard Lane.
Lagoon Drive, southbound at Falkirk Road.
Lagoon Drive, southbound at Old McHenry Road.
Lagoon Drive, westbound at Orchard Lane.
Lakeview Road, northbound at Old Barn Road (east end).
Lakeview Road, southbound at Old Barn Road (east end).
Lakeview Road, westbound at Old Barn Road (west end).
Lancelot Lane, southbound at Glen Road.
Lancelot Lane, westbound at Squire Road.
Landover Parkway, eastbound at Midlothian Road.
Lannon Circle, northbound at West Stonebridge Drive.
Lisa Lane, westbound at Mark Drive.
Lydia Court, southbound at Acorn Drive.
Lynn Drive, northbound at Glen Road.
Lynn Drive, northbound at Lagoon Drive.
Lynn Drive, northbound at Rosewood Drive.
Lynn Drive, southbound at Glen Road.
Lynn Drive, southbound at Lagoon Drive.
Magnolia Parkway, eastbound at St. John Drive.
Margaret Boulevard, eastbound at Peggy Drive.
Margaret Boulevard, northbound at Illinois Route 176.
Mark Drive, westbound at Darlington Drive.
Mary Lane, eastbound at St. John Drive.
Meadowlark Drive, northbound at Schwerman Road.
Melrose Place, southbound at Pacific Drive.
Mooregate Trail, eastbound at Equestrian Way.
Mooregate Trail, eastbound at Thornfield Lane.
Mooregate Trail, westbound at Thornfield Lane.
Mulberry Drive, southbound at Old McHenry Road.
Mulberry Drive, westbound at Copperfield Drive.
N. Alder Court, northbound at Ensell Road.
Newbury Court, westbound at Mark Drive.
Newhaven Drive, westbound at Cobblewood Road.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 132/426
Norbert Drive, eastbound at John Drive.
Norbert Drive, westbound at Darlington Drive.
North Trail, eastbound at Redwood Lane.
North Trail, northbound at Bridle Path.
North Trail, northbound at choker point south of Westwind Court.
North Trail, northbound at Westwind Court.
North Trail, southbound at Bridle Path.
North Trail, southbound at choker point south of Westwind Court.
North Trail, southbound at Westwind Court.
North Trail, westbound at Redwood Lane.
Oakland Hills Court, westbound at Crystal Downs Drive.
Old Barn Road (east end), eastbound at Lakeview Road.
Old Barn Road (east end), westbound at Lakeview Road.
Old Barn Road (west end), southbound at Lakeview Road.
Old Lake Drive, westbound at Mulberry Drive.
Olivers Way, northbound at Lochanora Drive.
Olivers Way, southbound at Governors Way.
Olympia Fields Lane, northbound at Tournament Drive North.
Oneida Lane, northbound at Washitay Avenue.
Oneida Lane, westbound at Seneca West Avenue.
Open Parkway North, eastbound at Hawthorn Ridge Drive.
Open Parkway North, westbound at Red Tail Drive.
Open Parkway South, eastbound at Tournament Drive South.
Open Parkway South, northbound at Tournament Drive South.
Orchard Lane, northbound at Glen Road.
Orchard Lane, southbound at Glen Road.
Orchard Lane, southbound at Lagoon Drive.
Owens Road, southbound at Schwerman Road.
Pacific Drive, eastbound at Beverly Lane.
Paddock Court, southbound at North Trail.
Palisades Drive, eastbound at Beverly Lane.
Park Place Circle, westbound at Park View Lane.
Peggy Drive, northbound at Margaret Boulevard.
Pheasant Run, eastbound at Thornfield Lane.
Pheasant Run, southbound at Thornfield Lane.
Pine Grove Boulevard, northbound at Illinois Route 176.
Prairie Landing Court, eastbound at Olympia Fields Court.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 133/426
Princeton Lane, eastbound at Cambridge Drive.
Quail Hollow Court, northbound at Lakeview Road.
Quail Hollow Court, southbound at Lakeview Road.
Red Tail Drive, eastbound at Tournament Drive South.
Redwood Lane, northbound at North Trail.
Redwood Lane, northbound at Old McHenry Road.
Redwood Lane, southbound at Old McHenry Road.
Regan Lane, eastbound at Gilmer Road.
Reserve Court, eastbound at Joshua Drive.
River Highlands Drive, eastbound at Tournament Drive North.
Robert Court, westbound at Mark Drive.
Robin Crest Road, northbound at Bruce Circle South.
Rose Lane, westbound at Governors Way.
Rosewood Drive, eastbound at Orchard Lane.
Rutgers Court, northbound at Indian Creek Road.
Saddle Ridge Court, westbound at Equestrian Way.
Scarlet Oak Drive, eastbound at Golf Crest Drive.
Scarlet Oak Drive, westbound at Owens Road.
Seneca East Avenue, southbound at Indian Creek Road.
Seneca West Avenue, northbound at Indian Creek Road.
Seneca West Avenue, southbound at Indian Creek Road.
Sequoia Road, southbound at Gilmer Road.
Sherman Court, southbound at Hawthorn Hills Drive.
Shore Acres Drive, southbound at Championship Parkway.
Sierra Place, northbound at Hawthorn Hills Drive.
Somerset Hills Court, westbound at Tournament Drive South.
South Highview Circle, eastbound at Carlisle.
Spring Creek Court, westbound at Forest View Drive.
St. John Drive, northbound at Gilmer Road.
St. John Drive, southbound at Gilmer Road.
Steeplechase Drive, northbound at North Trail.
Steeplechase Drive, southbound at North Trail.
Stone Creek Drive, westbound at Echo Lake Road.
Stonehaven Drive, eastbound at Darlington Drive.
Stonehaven Drive, westbound at Carlisle Road.
Stoney Ridge Court, eastbound at Equestrian Way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 134/426
Sunset Court, southeastbound at Old Barn Road.
Tanglewood Court, southbound at Tanglewood Lane.
Tanglewood Lane, eastbound at Brierwoods Lane.
Thornfield Lane, northbound at Mooregate Trail.
Thornfield Lane, southbound at Mooregate Trail.
Tournament Drive North, eastbound at Harborside Way.
Tournament Drive North, southbound at Schwerman Road.
Tournament Drive South, northbound at Open Parkway South.
Tournament Drive South, northbound at Schwerman Road.
Tournament Drive South, southbound at Open Parkway South.
Tournament Drive South, westbound at Harborside Way.
Trent Road (north end), westbound at Darlington Drive.
Trent Road (south end), westbound at Darlington Drive.
Twin Eagles Court, southbound at Championship Parkway.
University Circle (east end), southbound at Carlisle Road.
University Circle (west end), southbound at Carlisle Road.
Valerie Court, northbound at Peggy Drive.
Vera Court, eastbound at Margaret Boulevard.
Victoria Lane, northbound at Lagoon Drive.
Victoria Lane, southbound at Hawthorn Drive.
Vine Street, northbound at Palisades Drive.
Vine Street, southbound at Pacific Drive.
Walnut Drive, northbound at Lagoon Drive.
Walnut Drive, southbound at Hickory Road.
Wayne Lane, southeastbound at Bruce Circle North.
Wedgewood Drive, northbound at Copperfield Drive.
Wedgewood Drive, westbound at Copperfield Drive.
Wellesley Court, eastbound at North Chestnut Court.
West Peter Lane, eastbound at Cardinal Drive.
West Wind Court, eastbound at North Trail.
Wild Way, eastbound at Mark Drive.
Winding Branch Road, eastbound at Pheasant Run.
Winding Branch Road, westbound at Milton Road.
Winged Foot Drive, eastbound at Tournament Drive South.
Wooded Lane, northbound at Milton Road.
Wooded Lane, southbound at Winding Branch Road. (Ord. 1260-08, 9-15-2008; amd. Ord. 1510-14, 11-17-2014; Ord. 1640-16, 3-21-
2016; Ord. 1696-16, 10-24-2016; Ord. 1722-17, 1-23-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 135/426
6-2-5: YIELD INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED:
A. Generally: Except when directed by a police officer, every driver of a vehicle approaching a yield intersection indicated by a yield sign
shall yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of the intersection to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another
roadway or is approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when the driver is moving
across or within the intersection, but said driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs. (Ord. 574-93, 10-
11-1993; amd. 1995 Code)
B. Certain Intersections Designated: The following intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections:
Arthur Court, northbound, at Glen Road.
Lynn Drive, southbound, at Hickory Road. (Ord. 574-93, 10-11-1993; amd. 1995 Code; Ord. 775-96, 11-11-1996)
6-2-6: PENALTY:
A. Violation: Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each and every day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1277-09,
2-23-2009)
B. Arrests: Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title shall be released upon proper bail being furnished as required by
law.
C. Prima Facie Proof: The fact that an automobile which is illegally operated or parked is registered in the name of a person shall be
considered prima facie proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such violation. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-1986;
amd. 1995 Code)
6-2-7: TRAFFIC ON SCHWERMAN ROAD:
No vehicle or combination of vehicles with more than two (2) axles shall be operated on Schwerman Road. Government owned vehicles
and delivery trucks (other than delivery trucks hauling construction equipment or materials to a work site located on property that was
annexed to the village at any time subsequent to May 1, 2003) and moving vans, while loading or unloading, are exempt from this section.
(Ord. 1050-03, 11-17-2003)
Chapter 3
PARKING REGULATIONS
6-3-1: PROHIBITED PARKING AREAS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic in compliance with direction of a police officer or official traffic sign or signal:
A. In any intersection.
B. In a crosswalk.
C. Upon or under any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or approach thereto.
D. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within twenty feet (20') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety
zone.
E. Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal.
F. Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection.
G. At any curb within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 136/426
H. At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
I. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing.
J. Within twenty feet (20') of a driveway entrance to any fire department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
such station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance.
K. At any place on the public streets at such time or in such a manner as will impair the plowing of snow from the streets.
L. Sidewalks.
M. In any parkway, except on a paved surface or any driveway apron constructed of concrete, asphalt and/or gravel.
N. On any street, along the pavement edge adjacent to the side of such street upon which the buildings bear even numbered street
addresses, except as follows:
1. Carlisle Road, from South Highview Circle to North Highview Circle;
2. North Highview Circle, along the portion thereof lying north of the centerline of North Highview Circle;
3. Lynn Drive, from Lagoon Drive to Glen Road, whereon it shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park along the pavement edge adjacent to
the side of such street upon which the buildings bear the street addresses 16, 17, 20, 21, 24, 29, 32, 35, 38 and 42 Lynn Drive;
4. Thornfield Lane, from the southerly edge of the pavement of Pheasant Run at its northerly intersection with Thornfield Lane to a point
six hundred eighty five feet (685') south of said southerly edge of pavement of Pheasant Run;
5. Lagoon Drive from Old McHenry Road to Orchard Lane, whereon it shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park along the pavement edge
adjacent to the side of Lagoon Drive upon which the buildings bear odd numbered street addresses.
6. Hubbard Lane, from Old McHenry Road to the intersection with Cranbrook Lane and Flint Creek Court.
O. On any street, between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day.
P. On Thornfield Lane, along the west pavement edge, from three hundred forty feet (340') north of the northerly edge of pavement of
Pheasant Run at its southerly intersection with Thornfield Lane, to two hundred fifty feet (250') south of the southerly edge of pavement
of Pheasant Run at its southerly intersection with Thornfield Lane.
Q. On any street, or any other place, as determined by the Chief of Police and designated by signs giving notice thereof, where the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic due to
events in the area of a temporary nature, including, but not limited to, parades, special events and road construction or maintenance.
R. On Copperfield Drive, along the northwesterly pavement edge, from the west property line of Lot 62 in Copperfield Subdivision
(approximately 330 feet west of the west edge of pavement of Gentry Drive at its intersection with Copperfield Drive), to a point twenty
feet (20') south of the south property line, extended, of Lot 55 in Copperfield Subdivision (approximately 600 feet north of the north edge
of pavement of Wedgewood Drive at its intersection with Copperfield Drive).
S. On Equestrian Lane, from the southerly pavement edge of North Trail to the southerly terminus of Equestrian Lane, between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. of any Saturday or Sunday.
T. On Squire Road, from its southerly terminus to a point one hundred forty feet (140') north of its southerly terminus.
U. Krueger Road, from Midlothian Road to Fairfield Road.
V. On Hubbard Lane, along the east pavement edge, from Old McHenry Road to the intersection with Cranbrook Lane and Flint Creek
Court. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-1986; amd. Ord. 524-92, 6-8-1992; Ord. 539-92, 9-21-1992; Ord. 742-95, 11-13-1995; Ord. 759-96, 4-8-1996;
Ord. 764-96, 7-10-1996; Ord. 794-97, 6-9-1997; Ord. 797-97, 7-14-1997; Ord. 870-99, 8-9-1999; Ord. 1521-15, 2-23-2015; Ord. 1764-
17, 6-26-2017)
6-3-2: SNOW REMOVAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 137/426
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or leave any vehicle parked or occupying any portion of any public street at such time
or in such manner as will impede or impair the plowing or removal of snow from such public street. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in subsection 1-4-4E of this Code for each such
conviction, each day. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-1986; amd. 1995 Code)
6-3-3: PARKING AT CURB:
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or
park any vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the
regularly established curb line, except that upon those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the
angle to the curb indicated by such marks. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-1986)
6-3-4: VEHICLES FOR SALE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street, public right-of-way or other public property or any private property in the Village, for
the purpose of displaying it for sale (except by special use granted in the B Retail Business/Commercial District). For purposes of this
section, the term "vehicle" shall have the definition set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-217, except that said term shall also
include boats, boat trailers, rafts, snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers, personal watercraft trailers, personal watercraft, nonmotorized
apparatus containing two (2) or more wheels and motorcycle trailers. (Ord. 1051-03, 11-17-2003; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
Notwithstanding the above prohibition, parking an automobile, sport utility vehicle, motorcycle, boat or boat trailer for the purpose of
displaying it for sale shall be permitted only in the driveway of the property where the owner of such automobile, sport utility vehicle,
motorcycle, boat or boat trailer resides and only so long as such automobile, sport utility vehicle, motorcycle, boat or boat trailer is parked
no closer than thirty five feet (35') to any street pavement line. No such automobile, sport utility vehicle, motorcycle, boat or boat trailer shall
be parked anywhere else on such property, including, but not limited to, the front, side or rear yard or other buildable area of the property.
(Ord. 1051-03, 11-17-2003)
The parking and display of any vehicle for sale shall only be permitted once in any twelve (12) month period and the length of time a vehicle
is displayed for sale may not exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1340-10, 7-19-2010)
6-3-5: LOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or
unloading of passengers, in any place designated by the village board as a loading zone and marked as such, or in any of the following
designated places:
A. At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time.
B. At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb line before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. except on a Sunday.
C. Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the theater is open. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-1986)
6-3-6: ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except for the purpose of loading and unloading merchandise and then in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available not less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic,
and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting
property. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-1986)
6-3-7: CAB AND BUS STANDS:
No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a
bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-1986)
6-3-8: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any private property without the consent of the owner of the property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 138/426
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any private property to park, or allow to be parked, any vehicle in any area of said private property
other than the paved driveway area; provided, however, that in the event of a special occasion or gathering, automobiles or sport utility
vehicles may be parked in areas outside the paved driveway area for a period of not more than six (6) hours and not more frequently
than once per calendar year.
C. Except as otherwise permitted by this code, no person shall park outdoors, store outdoors, occupy, or cause, permit or suffer the outdoor
parking, outdoor storage or occupation of, any camping trailer, commercial vehicle, commuter vehicle, commuter van, farm tractor,
house trailer, motor home, mini-motor home, van camper, pole trailer, recreational vehicle, road tractor, semitrailer, special mobile
equipment, trailer, travel trailer, truck, truck camper, truckster, truck tractor or nonmotorized apparatus containing two (2) or more
wheels, on any land in a residential area within the village. For purposes of this subsection, the definitions set forth in 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., shall apply, except that the term "recreational vehicle" shall also include boats, boat trailers, rafts,
snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers, personal watercraft trailers, personal watercraft and motorcycle trailers. (Ord. 1051-03, 11-17-2003)
6-3-9: INOPERATIVE VEHICLES:
No vehicle which is in an inoperative condition may be left on any portion of a public street for longer than seventy two (72) hours. (Ord.
365-86, 4-8-1986)
6-3-10: PARKING VIOLATION CITATIONS AND SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS:
A. Fine Imposed: Any person charged with a violation of this chapter may, in lieu of prosecution for a violation thereof, make payment in
accordance with section 1-4-4 of this code. For the purpose of determining penalties for parking violations, each hour that a car remains
illegally parked constitutes a separate violation, except for section 6-3-2 of this chapter or unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 1134-05, 7-
25-2005)
B. Parking Ticket Form: The village board may, from time to time, designate by ordinance a form parking ticket to be used by the village
police. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-1986)
C. Exceptions: This section shall not apply to:
1. Persons parking so as to obstruct the entrance or exit of any place where police or fire department apparatus or other emergency
equipment is kept or housed, or so as to block an emergency entrance in a hospital;
2. Persons parking so as to entirely obstruct traffic in any street or alley;
3. Persons parking in such a way as to reduce traffic on an arterial street to one-way traffic only;
4. Persons who refuse to move an illegally parked vehicle at the request of any member of the police department. (Ord. 1051-03, 11-17-
2003)
6-3-11: IMPROPERLY PARKED VEHICLES; ABATEMENT:
A. Towing Cars Away:
1. Authorization: The police department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to remove and tow away
or have removed and towed away by commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle illegally parked in any place where such
parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of
any emergency vehicle.
2. Nuisance Declared: A vehicle parked or occupying any portion of any public street in violation hereof is hereby declared to be a
nuisance which shall be abated by any police officer by issuing a traffic citation for such violation and placing it upon such vehicle and
causing such vehicle to be removed and towed or conveyed to a vehicle pound designated by the chief of police.
B. Redemption Of Impounded Vehicles: The owner or authorized operator of such impounded vehicle may have the vehicle removed from
impoundment by paying all costs and expenses that have been incurred for the towing and storage of such vehicle, plus all towage and
storage charges which have theretofore accrued against such vehicle during the time of his ownership thereof. The payment of such
costs, expenses and charges shall be in addition to the penalty that may be imposed upon conviction of a violation of this chapter as
provided hereafter.
C. Sale Of Impounded Vehicles; Notice To Owner: Any vehicle impounded under authority of this chapter may, after thirty (30) days from
the date of impoundment, be sold by the department of police either at a private or public sale to the highest bidder. The owner of such
vehicle on the date of impoundment, as may be shown by the records of the office of the secretary of state of Illinois or of the office of
the secretary of state of that state in which such vehicle was last licensed, shall be given at least ten (10) days' notice in writing of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 139/426
proposed sale; the notice of proposed sale may be delivered in person or sent by United States mail, postage prepaid in full, to such
owner at the address as shown in such secretary of state's office. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-1986)
6-3-12: POSTING OF SIGNS:
Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where parking is limited or prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. (Ord. 365-86,
4-8-1986)
Chapter 4
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
6-4-1: ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED; REMOVAL BY VILLAGE:
The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in the Village is unlawful and subject to penalties
as set forth herein. The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on private or public property, other than a
highway, in view of the general public anywhere in the Village, is unlawful. Upon the authorization and order of the Chief of Police, upon the
complaint of the owner of said property, or after a waiting period of seven (7) days has expired, a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part
thereof so abandoned on private property may be removed by the Village. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-86; 1995 Code)
6-4-2: NOTIFY POLICE OF ABANDONED VEHICLE; TOWING AWAY:
A. Notification Required; Towing Authorized: When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle comes into the
temporary possession or custody of a person in this State, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the Village
Police Department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the Village. Upon receipt of such notification, the Chief of Police
shall authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other
vehicle. The towing service shall safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed
by the owner or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as provided in this Chapter.
B. Time for Removal:
1. When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned for ten (10) hours or more on a highway in the Village, its removal by a towing
service may be authorized by order of the Chief of Police.
2. When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard
because of its position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance is impeding traffic, its immediate removal from the
highway by a towing service may be authorized by order of the Chief of Police.
C. Owner Responsible for Towing Charges: When the removal of a vehicle from either public or private property is authorized by order of
the Chief of Police, the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing costs.
D. Record of Towed Vehicle: When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is towed away pursuant to proper authorization, the Police Department
shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name and series name, body
style, vehicle identification number and license plate year and number and State issuing such license displayed on the vehicle. The
record shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer
authorizing the tow. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-86)
6-4-3: VEHICLE OWNERSHIP INFORMATION:
A. When the identity of the registered owner or other legally entitled person is not known, the Police Department shall cause the motor
vehicle registration records of the State of Illinois to be searched, by a directed communication to the Secretary of State, for the purpose
of obtaining the required ownership information.
B. The Police Department shall cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the Illinois State Police to be searched, by a directed communication
to the Illinois State Police, for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. If such search produces negative results, the Illinois State
Police shall be requested to search the files of the National Crime Information Center (NCIC). The information determined from these
record searches will be used by the Police Department to send a notification, by certified mail, to the owner or legally entitled person,
advising where the vehicle is held, requesting that disposition be made, and setting forth public sale information.
C. When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be identified from
the registration files of the State of Illinois, or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the Police Department shall notify
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 140/426
the Illinois State Police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle
and shall request the Illinois State Police to immediately forward its information to the Village Police Department. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-86)
6-4-4: RECLAMATION OF VEHICLE:
Any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally
entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the Police Department proof of ownership or proof of the right to
possession of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this Chapter until all towing and storage charges
have been paid. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-86)
6-4-5: SALE OF ABANDONED VEHICLE:
A. Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle seven (7) years of age or newer remains unclaimed by
the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given as
provided herein, the Police Department shall cause it to be sold at public sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the
sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been
impounded. At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the Police Department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be
sent by certified mail to the registered owner or other person known by the Police Department or towing service to be legally entitled to
the possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and shall state what steps must
be taken by any legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle. If the certified notice specified herein is returned by the postal authorities
to the Police Department due to the addressee having moved or being unknown at the address obtained from the registration records of
the State, the sending of a second certified notice is not required.
B. When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle of
seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this Chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided
herein or disposed of in the manner authorized by this Chapter without notice to the registered owner or other person legally entitled to
the possession of the vehicle.
C. When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as specified by this Chapter, it shall be kept in custody
for a minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining ownership and for contacting the registered owner by mail, public service
or in person for a determination of disposition, and for the purpose of an examination of the Illinois State Police stolen motor vehicle files
for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period, if no disposition information has been received from the
registered owner, the Chief of Police shall authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.
D. When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the Police Department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally
entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this Chapter, a report of the transaction
will be maintained by the Police Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.
E. When the Chief of Police authorizes a vehicle to be towed away and disposed of as set forth in this Chapter, the proceeds of the public
sale or disposition, after the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges, shall be deposited in the Village Treasury.
F. No police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by
the registered owner, former registered owner, or his legal representative, or any other person legally entitled to the possession of a
motor vehicle or other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this Chapter. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-
86)
6-4-6: ANTIQUE VEHICLES:
A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique vehicle is not excluded from the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 404-88, 5-10-88)
6-4-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable hereunder as such. (Ord. 365-86, 4-8-86; 1995 Code)
Chapter 5
SNOWMOBILES
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 141/426
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning:
OPERATE: To ride in or on, other than as a passenger, use or control the operation of a snowmobile in any manner, whether or not the
snowmobile is under way.
OPERATOR: Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile.
SNOWMOBILE: A self-propelled device designed for travel on snow or ice or natural terrain steered by skis or runners, and supported in
part by skis, belts or cleats.
To the extent that words or phrases used in this Chapter are defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes Act 40, said definitions or phrases are hereby incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 589-94, 1-10-94)
6-5-2: ADOPTION OF STATE ACT:
The Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes Act 40, as the same is amended from time to time, is hereby
incorporated and adopted by reference as a part of this Chapter, three (3) copies of said Act having been on file in the office of the Village
Clerk and available for public use, inspection and examination for at least thirty (30) days prior to the passage of this Chapter. All citations
or complaints issued for violations shall be in the name of the Village and shall refer to the numbered sections of the Act, but shall also be
referred to as a Chapter violation in any citation or complaint. (Ord. 589-94, 1-10-94)
6-5-3: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful:
1. To operate any snowmobile within the Village between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.,
Monday through Friday, and between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., Saturday and Sunday.
2. To operate any snowmobile on any Village highway or street (including the roadway and any adjacent right-of-way) at any time.
3. To operate any snowmobile within one hundred feet (100') of any area cleared or designated for skating purposes, sledding or
tobogganing purposes, or other winter activities.
4. To operate any snowmobile on any public property, including but not limited to Village owned property, including park property, and
school property, without the written consent of the owner thereof.
5. To tow any person or object behind a snowmobile except that stiff bar towing of a snowmobile trailer shall be permitted.
6. To operate any snowmobile unless such snowmobile is equipped with an adequate muffler or noise suppression device in constant
operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise. No such muffler or noise suppression device shall be
equipped with a cutout, bypass or similar device.
B. It shall be unlawful to operate any snowmobile in any organized or sanctioned race within the corporate limits of the Village without the
express written approval of the corporate authorities of the Village. (Ord. 589-94, 1-10-94)
6-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this
Code. Any person who shall be convicted a second time during a calendar year of any violation of this Chapter shall be prohibited from
operating any snowmobile within the Village for the remainder of such calendar year. (Ord. 589-94, 1-10-94)
Chapter 6
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
6-6-1: GENERAL LIMITATIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street not under the jurisdiction of the Illinois department of transportation, the Illinois
state toll highway authority or the county of Lake, or in an urban district within the village at a speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 142/426
hour, or in an alley at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any highway outside an urban district at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such street. (Ord.
784-97, 3-10-1997)
Provided, that if the mayor and village board by ordinance, set other limits as provided by statute1 after an engineering or traffic survey,
then such limits shall govern the rate of speed on the streets indicated in such ordinance. Appropriate signs shall be posted showing such
speed limits. (Ord. 784-97, 3-10-1997; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill
crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic by
reason of weather or highway conditions; and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle
on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any street or highway within the village under the jurisdiction of the Illinois department of
transportation, the Illinois state toll highway authority or the county of Lake, at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such street. (Ord.
784-97, 3-10-1997)
6-6-2: SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS, GENERAL:
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by state law, as modified by
section 6-6-1 of this chapter, upon the following streets is less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such
streets and it is hereby declared that the maximum speed limit shall be as herein set forth on those streets designated when signs are
erected giving notice thereof:
Name Of Street Maximum Speed Limit
Echo Lake 30 mph
Indian Creek Road 30 mph
Krueger Road 35 mph
Miller Road 35 mph
Milton Road 30 mph
Owens Road 35 mph
Schwerman Road 35 mph
(Ord. 784-97, 3-10-1997)
6-6-3: SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS, SCHOOLS:
On a school day when school children are present and so close thereto that a potential hazard exists because of the close proximity of the
motorized traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour while passing a school zone or
while traveling upon any public thoroughfare where children pass going to and from school.
For the purpose of this section, a school day shall begin at seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and shall conclude at four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are posted upon streets and highways wherein the school zone is located.
Such signs shall give proper due warning that a school zone is being approached and shall indicate the school zone and the maximum
speed limit in effect during school days when school children are present. Nothing shall prohibit the use of electronic speed detecting
devices within five hundred feet (500') of signs within a special school speed zone indicating such zone, as defined in this section, nor shall
evidence obtained thereby be inadmissible in any prosecution for speeding, provided the use of such device shall apply only to the
enforcement of the speed limit in such special school speed zone. (Ord. 784-97, 3-10-1997)
6-6-4: SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS, CONSTRUCTION ZONES:
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a construction or maintenance zone at a speed in excess of the posted speed limits when
workers are present and so close to the moving traffic that a potential hazard exists because of the motorized traffic.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of electronic speed detecting devices within five hundred feet (500') of signs within a
construction or maintenance zone indicating such zone, as defined in this section, nor shall evidence obtained thereby be inadmissible in
any prosecution for speeding provided the use of such device shall apply only to the enforcement of the speed limit in such construction or
maintenance zone.
For the purpose of this section, a construction or maintenance zone is an area in which the village has determined that the preexisting
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 143/426
established speed limit through a highway construction or maintenance project is greater than is reasonable or safe with respect to the
conditions expected to exist in the construction or maintenance zone and has posted a lower speed limit with a highway construction or
maintenance zone special speed limit sign.
Highway construction or maintenance zone special speed limit signs shall be of a design approved by the Illinois department of
transportation. The signs shall give proper due warning that a construction or maintenance zone is being approached and shall indicate the
maximum speed limit in effect. The signs shall also state the amount of the minimum fine for a violation when workers are present. (Ord.
784-97, 3-10-1997)
Footnote 1: 625 ILCS 5/11-604.
Chapter 7
VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings stated in this section:
DAY: Any day in which the office of the village clerk of the village of Hawthorn Woods is open to the public for a minimum of seven (7)
hours.
MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles
and motor scooters.
OWNER OF RECORD OR OWNER: The record titleholder(s) of the vehicle. (Ord. 1287-09, 8-17-2009)
6-7-2: VIOLATIONS AUTHORIZING SEIZURE:
A motor vehicle, operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner of record, which is used in connection with the following
violations, may be subject to seizure and impoundment by the village if the violation prevents the driver from lawfully operating the vehicle,
or if a police officer determines that seizure and impoundment of the vehicle is reasonably necessary as a community caretaking function
so that the vehicle does not jeopardize public safety and the efficient movement of vehicular traffic. The owner shall be liable to the village
for an administrative fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), in addition to all towing and storage fees, as
hereinafter provided:
A.
625 ILCS
5/11-
501(a)
Driving under the influence, as provided in section 11-501(a) of the Illinois vehicle code.
B.
625 ILCS
5/6-303
625 ILCS
5/11-
501(a)
625 ILCS
5/11-
501.1
Driving with a suspended or revoked license, as provided in section 6-303 of the Illinois vehicle code, as a result of a
conviction pursuant to section 11-501(a) of the Illinois vehicle code or suspension under section 11-501.1 of the
Illinois vehicle code.
C.
625 ILCS
5/11-204
Fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer, as provided in section 11-204 of the Illinois vehicle code.
D.
625 ILCS
5/11-506
Street racing or aggravated street racing as provided in section 11-506 of the Illinois vehicle code.
E.
625 ILCS
5/11-503
Reckless driving as provided in section 11-503 of the Illinois vehicle code.
F.
625 ILCS
5/11-401
Leaving the scene of a motor vehicle accident involving death or personal injuries as provided in section 11-401 of
the Illinois vehicle code.
G.
625 ILCS
5/6-101
No valid driver's license (unlicensed) excluding expired drivers' licenses (or a similar local ordinance).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 144/426
(Ord. 1287-09, 8-17-2009; amd. Ord. 1318-10, 4-19-2010)
6-7-3: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. This chapter shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing state or federal laws or village ordinances pertaining to vehicle seizure
and impoundment.
B. All fines and charges contained in this chapter shall be in addition to any fines or penalties assessed by a court for criminal charges.
C. This chapter shall not apply if the vehicle was reported stolen to the appropriate police authorities within twenty four (24) hours of
discovery of such theft.
D. The amount of fees imposed for towing and storage of a vehicle impounded under this chapter shall be subject to the approval of the
chief of police.
E. Prior to vehicle seizure, if in the judgment of the police officer then present, if a person authorized by the owner or operator of the vehicle
is present and able to provide for the lawful immediate removal of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be released to that person and prompt
removal of the vehicle effected, and no administrative fines or other charges shall be imposed.
F. Except to the extent otherwise provided for in this chapter, the administrative hearing provided for in this chapter shall be in accordance
with the procedures set forth in title 1, chapter 11 of this code. In the event of a conflict, the procedures contained in title 1, chapter 11 of
this code shall control. (Ord. 1287-09, 8-17-2009)
6-7-4: NOTICE:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the
police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the village except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Before or at the time the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall make reasonable attempts to notify any person identifying himself as the
owner or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, of the fact of the seizure and
impoundment of the vehicle and of the owner's right to request a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing to be conducted pursuant to this
chapter. Said vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of such hearing(s), unless the owner posts with the village a cash bond in
the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and pays all towing and storage charges. (Ord. 1287-09, 8-17-2009)
6-7-5: PRELIMINARY HEARING:
If the owner of a vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter desires to preliminarily appeal the seizure, said owner must make a request for a
preliminary hearing within one day of the seizure. All requests shall be in writing and filed with the police chief, or her designee, who shall
conduct such preliminary hearing within one day after receipt of the request. This hearing is informal and shall be conducted in the police
department offices. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply
at the preliminary hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs. If after the preliminary hearing, the police chief, or her designee, determines there is probable cause
to believe that the vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, she shall order the continued impoundment of
the vehicle, as provided in this chapter, unless the owner posts with the village a cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
and pays all towing and storage charges. If the police chief, or her designee, determines that there is no such probable cause, the vehicle
shall be returned without fine or additional fees. (Ord. 1287-09, 8-17-2009)
6-7-6: PLEA AND HEARING:
The owner shall be notified of the hearing as provided in title 1, chapter 11 of this code and the hearing conducted as provided for therein.
All interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible if it is a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. In such hearing any sworn or
affirmed report, citation or ticket that: a) is prepared in the performance of a law enforcement officer's duties and b) sufficiently describes
the circumstances leading to the impoundment shall be admissible evidence of the vehicle owner's liability, unless rebutted by clear and
convincing evidence. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in
connection with a violation set forth in this chapter, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner civilly liable to the city for an
administrative fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and requiring the vehicle's continued impoundment until the
owner pays the administrative fine to the village plus towing and storage charges, all as applicable. The owner shall further be responsible
for reasonable hearing costs as assessed by the hearing officer. If the owner fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a
default order in favor of the village. If the hearing officer finds no such violation occurred, the hearing officer shall order the immediate return
of the owner's vehicle or cash bond without any additional fees. (Ord. 1287-09, 8-17-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 145/426
6-7-7: ADMINISTRATIVE FINE:
If an administrative fine is imposed pursuant to this chapter, such fine shall constitute a debt due and owing the village. If a cash bond has
been posted pursuant to this chapter, the bond shall be applied to the fine and all charges. If a vehicle is impounded when such a fine is
imposed, the village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment against the vehicle as provided for by law.
Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, a vehicle shall remain impounded until the administrative fine and all applicable towing and
storage charges are paid to the village, in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to
possess the vehicle, or the vehicle is sold, or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law. If said
administrative fine and all applicable towing and storage charges are not paid to the village within thirty (30) days from and after the
expiration of the time in which the owner could seek judicial review of the hearing officer's determination, or within thirty (30) days after an
action seeking judicial review has been resolved in favor of the village, whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and
shall be disposed of in the manner provided for by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under the Illinois vehicle code. For the
purposes of this chapter, the hearing officer's determination, including, but not limited to, a finding of default, shall constitute a final
administrative decision subject to judicial review. (Ord. 1287-09, 8-17-2009)
6-7-8: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lienholder, or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a
vehicle impounded under this chapter until the administrative fine and all applicable fees applicable under this chapter have been paid.
However, whenever a person with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of
the vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she agrees in writing to refund the village the amount of the net proceeds of any
foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay all lienholders of record, not to exceed the administrative fine, plus the applicable fees.
(Ord. 1287-09, 8-17-2009)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
7-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created the department of public works, an administrative department of the village. (Ord. 1222-07, 6-4-2007)
7-1-2: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The position of director of public works is hereby created, reporting directly to the chief operating officer and mayor and responsible for the
administration and direction of the public works department. The director of public works coordinates all functions of the public works
department and formulates and prescribes work methods and procedures to be followed by all personnel of the department. The director of
public works serves at the pleasure of the mayor. (Ord. 1222-07, 6-4-2007; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
7-1-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the director of public works to:
A. Subject to the provisions of ordinances of the village, take special charge and superintendence of all public streets, alleys, lanes,
highways, walks, crosswalks, bridges, tunnels, viaducts and other public improvements in the village and all public buildings in the
village belonging to the village, the erection of all public buildings of the village, and any street lighting system of the village.
B. Be in charge of all public sewers and drains in any of the streets, alleys, avenues, or public places in the village, to see that they are kept
in good order and condition and clear and free from obstructions, and he shall cause to be made such repairs thereof and of the
receiving basins, culverts and openings connected therewith, as may from time to time become necessary.
C. Supervise the operation of any village owned potable water system throughout the village including repair of water lines, pumping
equipment, and storage facilities.
D. Inspect the operations of the municipal garage to determine the quality of automotive and equipment maintenance and repair work.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 146/426
E. Prepare operating and capital budget requirements for matters under his jurisdiction.
F. Prescribe the mode of piercing or opening any of the public sewers or drains or between sewers and drains and the form, size and
material of the connection therewith, except as otherwise provided, and shall have authority to issue a permit granting permission to
make lateral connections with such sewers and drains and between sewers and drains.
G. Subject to the provisions of the ordinances of the village, direct the manner of using the public streets, alleys, lanes, highways and other
public places of the village where improvements are being installed or repairs are made, including the erection of electric light,
telephone, streetlight, traffic light, cable television and other poles or posts, signs, canopies and other overhead structures; for the laying
down of gas, water, steam and other pipes, electric light and telephone conduits and sewers authorized by law or the ordinances of the
village and to determine the location thereof when no other or superior authority of the state shall have such supervision. It shall also be
his duty to see that during the progress of such construction, alteration, placement or installation, the location thereof shall be in a safe
condition so as to prevent an accident by erecting barriers and notices where required. (Ord. 1222-07, 6-4-2007)
H. Make, prepare and submit all necessary plans, maps, plats, profiles, specifications, ordinances and estimates for any public work or
improvement which may be proposed or ordered by the mayor and board of trustees or the chief operating officer. (Ord. 1222-07, 6-4-
2007; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
I. Make all estimates for payment on contracts as the work under his supervision progresses and as may be required under the ordinances,
specifications and contracts.
J. Carefully preserve in his office all engineering field notes, maps, plans, profiles, papers, books, writings and records made by him or
coming to or being in his office and to arrange and index the same in such a manner that a ready reference may be had thereto.
K. Furnish all necessary lines and grades of streets and alleys, or portions thereof, to persons desiring to use the same for the purpose of
properly locating and constructing any sidewalk, curbing or building, but upon the terms and payment of fees established by ordinance.
L. Make any and all surveys of public property in and for the village that may be ordered by the mayor and board of trustees and enter into
the plat books of the village all plats and changes of plats approved by the mayor and board of trustees.
M. Provide for the plan review and inspection services of all public improvements proposed to be installed within the village limits in
accordance and subject to the provisions of the ordinances of the village.
N. Review and participate in civil engineering project work; confer on requirements and established project schedules; review field survey
work; participate in final engineering design work, estimates, computations and verifications of data; review and recommend with
respect to contract documents.
O. Determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic
accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions to plan the operation of traffic on
the streets of this village, including parking areas, and to cooperate with other village officials in the development of ways and means to
improve traffic conditions and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this village. (Ord. 1222-07, 6-4-
2007)
Chapter 2
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
7-2-1: CULVERTS AND HIGHWAY RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
7-2-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This section 7-2-1 shall be known as the CULVERTS AND HIGHWAY RIGHTS-OF-WAY CONTROL ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE.
(Ord. 305-80, 8-12-1980)
7-2-1-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
In accordance with the statutory authority as set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-30-2 and 5/11-30-8, the following rules and
regulations regarding flood hazards1 and the grading and drainage of lots shall apply:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 147/426
A. Destruction Of Trees, Planting Prohibited: Where any hedges or trees have been planted along the margin of a highway in the culvert or
right-of-way, the Village may contract with the owner for their destruction and they shall be destroyed. The planting of such hedges or
trees hereafter on the margin of highways is declared to be a public nuisance and in violation of this section.
B. Removal Of Debris From Watercourses: The Village authorities shall from time to time inspect the bridges and culverts on the public
highways and streets under their respective jurisdiction which span streams and watercourses and shall remove driftwood and other
materials accumulated within the right-of-way at such structures which obstruct the free flow of either low or high water.
C. Excavations:
1. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to excavate or remove or cause the excavation or removal of the lateral support
adjacent to the established right-of-way of any public highway located within the corporate limits of the Village.
2. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to deposit spoil or cause the spoil from any excavation to be deposited in such a
manner that the toe of such spoil will be nearer than twenty feet (20') to any established right-of-way of any public highway located
within the corporate limits of the Village, unless such deposit is authorized, in writing, by the Village.
3. Where any such violation occurs along any public highway within the corporate limits of the Village, the Corporate Authorities shall be
authorized to take the necessary steps as required by law to enter upon the property where such violation occurs and backfill or
cause to be removed the unlawful spoil banks, whichever case it may be, or both, in such a manner as will conform with the foregoing
provisions of this subsection, and costs of such work, together with court costs, may be recovered from such violators in any court of
record in the county where such violation occurred.
4. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the construction and maintenance of grade separation crossings of any public utility, private
corporation or individuals, or in any way conflict with any other laws governing such grade separations; nor shall the provisions of this
subsection in any way apply to pipeline construction or maintenance where such work is done to the satisfaction of the Corporate
Authorities, nor to the excavation of earth necessary for the construction of foundations or basement walls.
D. Injury To Or Obstructing Rights-Of-Way: It shall be a violation of this section for any person to injure or obstruct a public highway right-ofway
by placing or leaving any object or obstruction thereon; or encroaching upon the same with any fence; or by plowing or digging any
ditch or other opening thereon; or by turning a current of water so as to saturate, wash or damage the same; or by plowing in or across
or on the slopes of the side gutters or ditches; or by placing any material in such ditches; or in any way interfering with the free flow of
water therein; or leaving the cuttings of any hedge thereon. The placing of culverts or the change of drainage flow within the public
highway right-of-way shall be unlawful without first obtaining written approval and a permit from the Village.
E. Deposits on Rights-of-Way: It shall be a violation of this Section for any person to deposit in or on the public highway right-of-way any
weeds, trash, garbage, broken bottles, glass or boards containing projecting nails.
F. Dumping Sewage and Wastes: It shall be a violation of this Section for any person or institution, private or public, to discharge or empty
any type of sewage, including the effluent from septic tanks or other sewage treatment devices, or any other domestic, commercial or
industrial waste, or any putrescible liquids, or cause the same to be discharged or emptied in any manner into open ditches along any
public street or highway right-of-way, or into any drain or drainage structure within the Village.
G. Advertisements: It shall be a violation of this Section for any person to place or cause to be placed any sign or billboard or any
advertising of any kind or description upon or within any public highway or street right-of-way within the corporate limits of the Village,
except as may be required by chapter 605, Roads and Bridges or chapter 625, the Illinois Vehicle Code of the Illinois Compiled Statutes
or of any other ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 305-80, 8-12-80; 1995 Code)
7-2-1-3: PERMIT FEE:
A permit fee as set forth in subsection 11-1-1H7 of this Code shall be due and payable upon application for and issuance of a permit to do
work as specified in the above rules and regulations. A separate permit and fee is not required when work is done pursuant to an existing
building permit. (Ord. 305-80, 8-12-80; 1995 Code)
7-2-1-4: VIOLATION, PENALTY:
Failure to first obtain a permit as required herein or the failure to do any other act required herein shall constitute a violation of this Section
7-2-1 and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code for each such offense. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist after notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 305-80, 8-12-80; 1995 Code)
7-2-2: OBSTRUCTING PARKWAYS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 148/426
A. Prohibiting Obstacles in the Right-of-Way:
1. Prohibition: The placement of obstacles such as: rocks (except as otherwise permitted pursuant to subsection A3c of this Section,
boulders, concrete, railroad ties (except as otherwise permitted pursuant to subsection A3c of this Section), trees, shrubs,
landscaping materials and other similar items that inhibit snowplowing, vehicular traffic movement and the flow of water, that prohibit
maintenance of the right-of-way or obstruct vision are prohibited in the Village right-of-way.
2. Right-of-Way: The right-of-way area is defined for the following type of streets:
Arterial 100 feet minimum
Collector 80 feet minimum
Major 66 feet minimum
Minor 66 feet minimum
Cul de Sac 66 feet minimum
Business 66 feet minimum
3. Exceptions: The following exceptions will apply:
a. Placement of Mailboxes: The placement of mailboxes in accordance with post office regulations and traffic and street name signs,
and
b. Construction of Head Wall: The use of materials in subsection A1 above for the construction of a head wall for a driveway culvert;
provided, that said head wall is four feet (4') from the edge of the roadway pavement, and no greater than one foot (1') above the
driveway pavement.
c. Improvement of Ditch Line:
(1) The ditch line may be improved so as to provide for a stone lined ditch; provided, however, that such improvement shall be in
accordance with and subject to the standards, specifications and conditions set forth in the village "Stone Lined Ditch
Construction" standards revised through November 11, 1993.
(2)(A) The applicant shall file a building permit application, a plan review fee, and improvement plans with the village prior to
commencement of work. Said plans shall be drawn to scale and shall include plan and profile of improvements, type and size of
stone, grades, slopes and typical section(s) showing existing and proposed ditch line. The village engineer shall review said
plans and shall issue a building permit if said plans conform with the standards of this subsection A3c.
(B) There will be no building permit fee charged in the first year after the adoption of this subsection.
(C) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall file a refundable bond with the village so as to permit work within
the village right of way. Said bond will be refunded to the applicant upon completion of the final inspection of the project by the
village engineer.
(D) Two (2) inspections by the village engineer will be required as a part of the ditch line improvement. The first inspection will
occur after the excavation of the ditch line but prior to the placement of any stone. The second inspection will occur after the
project is completed and all right of way restoration is completed.
(E) The amount of all fees and bonds shall be as provided for by ordinance of the village. All inspection fees shall be paid prior to
the refund of any bond held by the village. (Ord. 592-94, 2-14-1994)
(F) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, at the time of filing an application for ditch line construction under this section, the
applicant shall be obliged to and shall submit an executed draw down deposit agreement in the form approved by the village to
cover fees and costs attributable to the applicant. A sample of said agreement is set forth in section 11-1-2 of this code. (Ord.
1167-06, 5-15-2006; amd. Ord. 1352-10, 11-15-2010)
4. Enforcement: Obstacles as stated in subsection A1 of this section placed in the right of way prior to the effective date hereof shall be
permitted in the right of way so long as they do not create a public safety problem or hazard. The village engineer is hereby charged
with the duty to determine the hazard or endangerment of such obstacles. If the village engineer determines that an obstacle(s) in the
right of way creates an endangerment or hazard to public safety, the village engineer shall notify the property owner by certified mail
(return receipt requested) that said obstacle shall be removed within thirty (30) days from the date of the letter. If the property owner
fails to remove said obstacle, the village engineer or designated employee of the village has the authority to remove said obstacle.
(Ord. 417-88, 12-13-1988; amd. Ord. 592-94, 2-14-1994; 1995 Code)
B. Parking, Depositing And Storing Property: No person shall park, deposit, leave or store any motor vehicle or tangible personal property
of any type or description at any time between the sidewalk line and curb line at any place within the village.
C. Penalty: Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 149/426
day that a violation is permitted to exist after notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 417-88, 12-13-1988; amd.
1995 Code)
7-2-3: HOUSE NUMBERING:
A. Numbers Required: The village clerk shall assign, and keep a map showing, the proper street number for every lot and building within
the village. The street number for every lot and building within the village shall correspond to the street from which the lot takes access
to and from the village street system. For all new construction and in the event of dual street access, the street the building faces will
determine the assigned address. The village clerk shall assign a street number for each lot prior to the issuance of any building permit
with respect to said lot. (Ord. 613-94, 9-12-1994)
B. Specifications For Number: It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of each building located within the village to have placed
thereon the street number of such building in arabic numerals at least four inches (4") high. Said street number shall be placed in a
location and manner so as to be visible from the street to persons approaching the property from either direction. The street number for
buildings on corner lots shall be placed so as to be visible from the street from which the lot takes access to and from the village street
system. In the event that such street number cannot be placed upon such building so as to be visible from the street as required
hereinabove, the street number shall be placed so as to be visible from the street to persons approaching the property from either
direction, upon the mailbox serving the building or, if such mailbox is not located upon the same zoning lot as such building, upon a
marker forty two inches (42") in height, located twelve inches (12") from the street pavement. It shall be the further duty of the owners
and occupants of every nonresidential building located within the village to have placed upon the rear of such building the street number
of such building in Arabic numerals at least four inches (4") high.
C. Penalty: Any person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 570-93, 8-16-1993)
7-2-4: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEES:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section and section 7-2-5 of this chapter. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois cable and video competition law of
2007, public act 95-0009 (the "act") unless the context clearly requires otherwise. In the event that a term is not defined by this section
or the act, said term shall have its common and ordinary meaning.
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind
contributions received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable or video service(s) within the
holder's cable or video service(s) area within the village.
1. Included: Gross revenues shall include the following:
a. Recurring charges for cable or video service.
b. Event based charges for cable or video service(s), including, but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
c. Rental of set top boxes and other cable or video service(s) equipment.
d. Service charges related to the provision of cable or video service(s), including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and
repair charges.
e. Administrative charges related to the provision of cable or video service(s), including, but not limited to, service order and
service termination charges.
f. Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments.
g. A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or
for promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable or
video service(s) within the village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the village divided by the total
number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation arrangement.
h. Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable or video
service(s) with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any
products or services on the holder's network, such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection 1i of this
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 150/426
definition.
i. In the case of a cable or video service(s) that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or
applications, the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in
the gross revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records
that are kept in the regular course of business.
j. The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b).
2. Not Included: Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
a. Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt, subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
b. Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state
issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to cable or video service(s).
c. Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or functionally integrated with cable or video service(s), any
revenues received from services not classified as cable or video service(s), including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages,
white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to noncable or
nonvideo service(s) in accordance with the holder's books and records, and records kept in the regular course of business and
any applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
d. The sale of cable or video services for resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the
fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
e. Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity,
including sales and use taxes.
f. Security deposits collected from subscribers. Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors for
merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the cable or video service(s).
3. Revenue Of An Affiliate: Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the
treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the payment of the fee permitted
by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be paid by the cable or video service(s).
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant
to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid pursuant to this section and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the
holder to the village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or
entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid pursuant to this section and 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to the
village for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection or use of such video
programming services, and which is provided through wire line facilities located at least in part in the public right of way without regard
to delivery technology, including internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by a
commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and via,
service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the public internet.
B. Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed:
1. Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable or video service(s) in the village.
2. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
3. Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village in writing, at least ten (10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins
to offer cable or video service(s) to village residents.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 151/426
4. Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall
commence on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this section by the
holder. The ordinance adopting this section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder's application
notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
5. Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the
calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining
the basis for the calculation of the fee.
6. Exemption: The fee imposed herein does not apply to existing cable or video service(s) providers that have an existing franchise
agreement with the village in which a fee is paid.
7. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from
the fees that operator owes pursuant to subsection B2 of this section.
C. PEG Access Support Fee Imposed:
1. PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable or video service(s) in the village in
addition to the fee imposed pursuant to subsection B2 of this section.
2. Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross
revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its designee for PEG
access support in the village.
3. Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG
access. The holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth in subsection B of this section.
4. Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of
the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement
explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
5. Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would
have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by
an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes pursuant
hereto.
D. Applicable Principles: All determinations and calculations under this section shall be made pursuant to generally accepted accounting
principles.
E. No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder: Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is
or may later be imposed by the Village, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect
to cable or video service(s). A State issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
Village's Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A
State issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or
E911 fees, taxes or charges.
F. Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider:
1. Audit Requirement: The Village will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on other cable or video service(s) providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the Village imposes on other cable or
video service(s) providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute any amounts determined to be
payable under the requirements of the Village. If all local franchises between the Village and cable operator terminate, the audit
requirements shall be those adopted by the Village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
2. Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the Village's submission of an
invoice for the sum.
G. Late Fees/Payments: All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by the Village pursuant to
the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 1239-07, 11-26-2007)
7-2-5: CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
A. Purpose And Scope:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 152/426
1. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the
Village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities
of the Village rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.
2. Intent: In enacting this section, the Village intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in particular, the
use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility facilities,
including, without limitation:
a. Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; and
b. Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
and
c. Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property; and
d. Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees, from the installation of utility facilities; and
e. Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces; and
f. Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed; and
g. Preserve open space; and
h. Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the rights-of-way; and
i. Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
3. Facilities Subject To This Section: This section applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the public
rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this section may continue
to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in
any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
4. Franchises, Licenses Or Similar Agreements: The Village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within
the Village rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the Village enter into
such an agreement. In such an agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this section.
5. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses Or Similar Agreements:
a. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a
franchise, license or similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during
the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
b. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this section and the
provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions
of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal
or extension thereof.
6. Small Cell Facilities: Because of the potential adverse impacts of the installation of small cells in numerous locations throughout the
Village, this section includes standards and regulations intended to prevent adverse impacts while equitably allocating and regulating
the location, installation, and maintenance of small cells. The standards and regulations are based on the following factors among
other relevant considerations: a) the infrastructure, coverage, and capacity needs of wireless carriers seeking to install small cells; b)
the number and types of existing wireless carrier infrastructure facilities located within and abutting the Village; c) the priority of sites
assigned in this section for installation of small cells; and d) the potential adverse impacts of small cells on the Village.
7. Conflicts With Other Sections: This section supersedes all sections or parts of sections adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
8. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements
of this section, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this section to the extent not preempted by Federal or State laws or
regulations.
9. Sound Engineering Judgment: The Village shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this section and may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this section when the Village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed
to limit the ability of the Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Definitions: As used in this section and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois Administrative
Code section 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 153/426
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this section.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area
may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear runout area. The desired width is dependent upon
the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide, as
amended from time to time.
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The Municipal Code of the Village of Hawthorn Woods.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification
or abandonment in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The Village Director of Public Works or designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: For the purposes of this section, any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse
effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other
cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and
compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way
or immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The Director of Engineering or designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FCC: Federal Communications Commission.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable,
communications and video cables and wires, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances
thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within rights-of-way under this section, except those owned by the
Village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter
station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of
access on highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location or other characteristics,
is determined by the Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or
property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or
petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any Federal or State law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 154/426
highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails,
protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
ICC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
JULIE: The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators Utility Notification Program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
PWS FACILITIES: PWS antennas, PWS towers, associated accessory structures and appurtenant electrical and mechanical
equipment.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the center line of a right-of-way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to subsections D and E of this section.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES (PWS): Commercial mobile services, common carrier wireless exchange access services, and
unlicensed wireless services.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to,
gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30)
days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, State or Federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes,
including utility easements in which the Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the Village. Right-of-way shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in the
previous sentence and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are
situated in the right-of-way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services
rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to subsection J of this section.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for
emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SMALL CELL: A low-powered wireless base station, including an antenna, transceiver equipment, and cabinets, that functions like a cell
in a wireless mobile network but provides significantly smaller coverage area than a traditional macro cell. The term "small cell" includes
microcells, DAS installations, PWS facilities, and all similar facilities.
SMALL CELL FACILITY: A small cell and its support structure and appurtenances.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 155/426
SMALL CELL SITE: A location approved by the Village where a small cell facility has been or may be installed.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and
experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services,
specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or
among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications as defined in the Illinois Telecommunications
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/1 et seq. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates
the end to end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services
through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following) as now or hereafter
amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village through an open video
system as defined in the rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this subsection.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
VILLAGE: The Village of Hawthorn Woods.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated
material.
C. Annual Registration Required: Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the
Director of Public Works, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and facsimile numbers, the name of one
or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-ofway
and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in subsection H of this section, in
the form of a certificate of insurance. A telecommunications provider that has registered under this section, shall be deemed to have
satisfied the registration requirement herein.
D. Permit Required; Applications And Fees:
1. Permit Required: No person shall "construct", as defined in this section, any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within any Village right-of-way which: a) changes the location of the facility; b) adds a new facility; c) disrupts the "right-of-way", as
defined in this section; or d) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under,
across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Director of Public Works and obtaining a permit from the
Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this section. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.
2. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this section shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be
filed in such number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application
materials that are reasonably believed to contain proprietary or confidential information as proprietary or confidential by clearly
marking each page of such materials accordingly.
3. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
a. The utility's name and address and telephone and facsimile numbers;
b. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, facsimile numbers, email address, and its interest in the
work;
c. The names, addresses and telephone and facsimile numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising
the applicant with respect to the application;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 156/426
d. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put.
The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special
emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
e. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village:
(1) A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
"Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize
disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
(2) An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall
include notification to the Village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this subsection unless the Village finds that additional
information or assurances are needed;
f. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans,
and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;
g. Evidence of insurance as required in subsection H of this section;
h. Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in subsection J of this section;
i. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this section; and
j. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the Village.
4. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection D3 of this
section, the permit application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit
application:
a. In the case of new electric power, communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any "certificate of public convenience and necessity" has been issued by the ICC that
the applicant is required by law, or has elected, to obtain;
b. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class and operating pressures;
c. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water
Supplies, and the Village have been satisfied;
d. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control, and the Village have been satisfied; or
e. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure,
and the design standard to be followed.
f. In the case of a small cell, include the following:
(1) A written statement of the wireless carrier or its contractor or consultant of the need and purpose for the small cell or cells as
proposed.
(2) A description, maps, and data of the wireless carrier's existing wireless facilities within the Village and within one-half (1/2) mile
of the Village.
(3) A statement of the coverage or capacity gaps or deficiencies within the wireless carrier's system, and how the installation of the
small cells as proposed would address those coverage or capacity gaps or deficiencies.
(4) The location and photographs of each proposed small cell site and its immediate surroundings, depicting the poles or structures
on which each proposed small cell facility would be mounted.
(5) Specifications and drawings for each proposed small cell facility as it is proposed to be installed.
(6) A statement of the total number of small cells the wireless carrier will seek within the Village and a map or drawing depicting the
locations within the Village of the anticipated small cell sites.
(7) A schedule for the installation of the small cell facilities, if approved.
(8) A data, site, and plan fee, as provided for in subsection 11-1-1H1d of this Code, for each small cell.
(9) Written permission from the utility provider whose equipment the facility will be installed on.
(10) Guarantee security in accordance with section 10-2-6 of this Code, upon permit issuance.
5. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized
by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the Village
within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 157/426
6. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by this section, a franchise, a license, or a similar agreement, all applications for permits
pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by a fee as provided for in subsection 11-1-1H1d of this Code plus reimbursement, per
applicable Draw Down Deposit Agreement, for all Village staff and technical consultant costs incurred by the Village in reviewing said
application.
E. Action On Permit Applications:
1. Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by
the Director of Public Works, or designee within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements
of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Director of Public Works shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the Director of Public Works, or designee is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this section and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the Director of Public Works shall issue
a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
2. Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
a. Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify
the Village that it intends to commence work governed by this section for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services.
Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the
facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than twenty five (25) days prior to the commencement of work
requiring excavation. The Director of Public Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be
placed, used and constructed.
b. In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within
either: 1) ten (10) days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving
excavation for new construction or 2) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of
work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit
under this section.
c. Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a permit is required for work pursuant to subsection D of this section
the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection
A of this section.
3. Additional Village Review Of Applications And Standards For Small Cells: For a small cell, the Director of Public Works, or designee
will review the application information required in this section. Standards for small cell reviews include:
a. The Director of Public Works, or designee will not: 1) unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent
services, 2) prohibit or create the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services by a wireless carrier, or 3) regulate
the placement, installation, and modification of small cell facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions to the extent such facilities comply with the FCC's regulations concerning such emissions.
b. The Village may reasonably limit the number of small cell sites available within the Village at the particular time of the application
and in the particular locations listed in the application, based on the current inventory and locations of available sites and current
total demand for small cell sites by wireless carriers.
c. Based on various factors including among others public safety, existing Village facilities, utilities, existing telecommunications
infrastructure, fair and equitable allocation of infrastructure, and adverse impact of Village residents, the following priority of
locations applies to small cell sites. A small cell must be located at the highest priority location, and no small cell may be installed at
a lower priority location unless no higher priority location is available or technically feasible within the vicinity of the proposed small
cell site or the Village grants an exception under subsection E3e of this section. The following priority of locations applies to small
cell sites, in descending order:
(1) Utility poles owned or maintained by ComEd or other public utilities.
(2) Privately-owned utility poles, but only in locations approved by the Village.
(3) Village-owned utility poles (whether existing or to be installed) in the following order of priority: a) within an arterial street right-ofway;
b) within a parking lot or on other property related to a governmental or institutional use; and c) within a collector street rightof-
way.
(4) Village-owned utility poles not included in subsection E3c(3) of this section.
(5) Utility poles, regardless how owned or by whom, located in a rear yard (or abutting easement).
d. Small cell sites are prohibited at the following locations unless the Director of Public Works grants an exception under subsection
E3e of this section:
(1) All R-1, R-2, and R-3 Residence Districts.
(2) The following newly installed poles: a) a newly-installed utility pole in a public right-of-way not owned by ComEd, another public
utility, or the Village, unless the pole has been approved by the Village or b) a newly-installed pole on private property, except if
the Village has approved the pole for placement of a small cell.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 158/426
e. The Village may grant an exception to the priority of small cell sites or to the prohibited locations for a particular small cell, but only
if the wireless carrier demonstrates a specific, significant need for that small cell in a particular location, which need cannot be
satisfied reasonably without granting an exception.
f. The Director of Public Works, or designee must review a properly completed permit application within a reasonable time consistent
with applicable State and Federal laws and regulations. A denial of an application for a permit must be made in writing, stating the
reason or reasons for the denial. If the Director of Public Works, or designee is satisfied that the application conforms to the
requirements of this section and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, then the Director of Public Works, or
designee must approve the application and issue the permit as soon as practicable.
g. If an application for a permit is denied, then the applicant may appeal the denial to the Village's Chief Operating Officer. The appeal
must be in writing and include a copy of the application and a statement of the reasons why the permit should be granted in
accordance with this section. The appeal may include a request for a meeting with the Village's Chief Operating Officer. On receipt
of a written request for a meeting, the Village's Chief Operating Officer will set a date for the meeting that is not more than ten (10)
business days after receipt of the request or such later time requested by the appellant. At the meeting, the Village's Chief
Operating Officer will hear from all interested persons, including the appellant, the Director of Public Works, and other Village staff
or consultants as appropriate. The Village's Chief Operating Officer will issue a written decision on the appeal within five (5)
business days after completion of the meeting. The decision of the Village's Chief Operating Officer will be final. (Ord. 1771-17, 6-
26-2017)
h. Each small cell facility will be reviewed annually beginning in the first calendar year after the small cell facility was installed. On or
before October 31 each year, each owner or operator of a small cell must submit a statement and accompanying data and
documents stating the location of the small cell facility and its current operational status. The review information must include: 1)
any change or update to information required by subsection D4f of this section; and 2) a review analysis fee provided for in
subsection 11-1-1H5 of this Code for each small cell included in the review. If the Director of Public Works, or designee determines
a small cell has failed its review as a result of incomplete information, a law or Code violation, inconsistency with the plans,
specifications, drawing, or other information related to the small cell, failure to pay the review fee, or other material matter, then the
Director of Public Works will notify the owner or operator of the failure, stating the reason or reasons for the failure and ordering that
action be taken to cure the failure. The Director of Public Works and Engineering may set a timetable for the cure that is reasonable
for achieving the cure, but not less than five (5) days or more than forty five (45) days. An owner or operator that filed the review
information may appeal a determination of failure in the same manner as provided for the denial of a permit in subsection E3g of
this section. An appeal will stay the time period set by the Director of Public Works for curing the failure. If a determination of failure
is upheld on appeal, then the owner or operator must cure the failure within the time period set by the Director of Public Works. The
failure to cure within that time period may result in an order requiring the small cell to be removed no later than sixty (60) days after
notice of the Village requiring removal. The Village has the right, but not the obligation, to remove a small cell for which a failure has
not been cured as required herein and to charge the applicant with the costs incurred by the Village in connection with removal. The
costs incurred by the Village will be assessed in accordance with the rate identified in section 11-1-2, item IV of this Code. (Ord.
1771-17, 6-26-2017; amd. Ord. 1796-17, 12-13-2017)
F. Effect Of Permit:
1. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this section on Village rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the
permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
2. Duration: No permit issued under this section shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually
begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
3. Pre-Construction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this section prior to attendance by
the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting.
The pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with such Village representatives in
attendance as the Village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of
other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public
during construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners.
4. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the Village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
G. Revised Permit Drawings: In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations
identified in the plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of
drawings or plans to the Village within twenty five (25) days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation
from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this section, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with
subsection U of this section. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the
right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.
H. Insurance:
1. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying rightof-
way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 159/426
utility as named insured and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in subsections H1a and H1b of this section:
a. Commercial general liability insurance (including umbrella), including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground
hazard (commonly referred to as X, C, and U coverages) and products completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
(1) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
(2) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
(3) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
b. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for
personal injury and property damage for each accident;
c. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
d. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
2. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella
policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following form basis such that
when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes
effective to cover such loss.
3. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the Village within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
4. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following
endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30)
days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the
Chief Operating Officer of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
5. Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection H1 of
this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the
naming of additional insureds under subsection H1 of this section, or the requirements of subsections H2, H3 and H4 of this section.
A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection H1 of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a private
self-insurer under the Workers Compensation Act.
6. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the Village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance
policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
I. Indemnification And Hold Harmless: By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility agrees to defend, indemnify and
hold the Village and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against
any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit
or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions,
failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of
facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are
authorized, allowed or prohibited by this section or by a franchise, license or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's
indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out
of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this section by the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. Nothing herein shall be construed to waive any immunities that the Village may assert in response to any claims.
J. Security:
1. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund
shall be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the
work authorized under the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
a. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this section;
b. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this section; and
c. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of
any action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this section including, without limitation, any damage to public property or
restoration work the permittee is required by this section to perform that the Village must perform itself or have completed as a
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 160/426
consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee
pursuant to this section or any other applicable law.
2. Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in accordance with section 8-2-4 of this Code. Any surety bond or
letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection J2 shall, at a minimum:
a. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the Village and the permittee;
b. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
c. Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State at which it can be drawn.
3. Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-ofway
to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Director of Public
Works, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails
to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple
locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or
phases, the Director of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security
which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any
single phase.
4. Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise
withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not
reimbursed the Village for such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
a. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
b. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
c. Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by
reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
d. Fails to comply with any provision of this section that the Village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in
the Security Fund.
5. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the
Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in subsection J3 of this section.
6. Interest: The Village will not pay interest on the amounts held in the Security Fund.
7. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, or upon change in ownership, the
permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time
after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of
this section or other applicable law, or upon completion of work authorized under the permit. In the event of any revocation of the
permit, the Security Fund shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or
damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall
be refunded to the permittee.
8. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village,
whether reserved by this section or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said
Security Fund shall affect any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village shall not be entitled to a
double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
K. Permit Suspension And Revocation:
1. Village Right To Revoke Permit: The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this section for one or more of the
following reasons:
a. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
b. Noncompliance with this section;
c. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
d. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
2. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The Village shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant
to this section stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this
section.
3. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or
suspension from the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 161/426
a. Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
b. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the Village within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
c. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the public rights-of-way and restore
the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Village providing written proof of such removal to the Village within ten (10) days after
receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection K3.
4. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order
immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection K1 of this section.
5. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection K3 of this section,
the Village or its designee may, at the option of the Village: a) correct the deficiencies; b) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice
to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or c) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to
cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village
for all costs of removal.
L. Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status:
1. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the Village no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in
the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and
privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including
this section, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way.
2. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to
have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by,
the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village's right-of-way.
3. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon
transfer.
M. General Construction Standards:
1. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and,
where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
a. Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
b. Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
c. Highway Design Manual;
d. Highway Standards Manual;
e. Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
f. Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code section 545);
g. Flagger's Handbook; and
h. Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
2. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this section, the Director of Public Works, or designee shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment,
which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the Director of Public Works, or designee shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.
3. Small Cells: The following regulations apply to small cells:
a. No part of a small cell facility installed on a pole may be higher than seven feet (7') above the top of that pole or lower than ten feet
(10') above grade level measured from the bottom of the pole. The Director of Public Works may vary these height limitations on
good cause shown, as determined by the Director of Public Works.
b. No small cell antenna may exceed six (6) cubic feet in volume, and no cabinet or other component of a small cell facility may
exceed four feet (4') in any dimension. The components of a small cell facility must be the smallest feasible size available in the
then-current market.
c. No new small cell facility may be located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of an existing small cell facility except for good cause
shown, as determined by the Director of Public Works, or designee. If good cause is determined, then the new small cell facility
must be located as far as reasonably possible from the existing small cell facility.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 162/426
d. A small cell facility must be uniform in color, which color must be consistent with or reasonably blend into the utility pole or other
structure on which it is installed and the surrounding environs as determined by the Director of Public Works.
e. No new guy wires or similar support structures, mechanisms, and techniques may be installed as part of any small cell facility.
f. Except as provided in the following sentence of this subsection, no small cell facility may bear any mark, graphic, print, or text of
any kind, including without limitation any placard, sign, sticker, banner, or label. A small cell facility may bear warning or notification
signs required by Federal law or regulations and one small alphanumeric identification marking at a location on the small cell facility
that, to the extent reasonably feasible, is not visible from grade level.
g. If the Director of Public Works determines that a small cell facility's location and appearance will have an adverse impact on the
Village and its residents, then the Director of Public Works may require that the small cell facility be concealed in a manner
approved by the Director of Public Works.
h. If a small cell is not operated or operational for a continuous period of twelve (12) months or longer, then the owner must notify the
Village in writing and, regardless of whether the owner notifies the Village, the small cell will be automatically deemed abandoned.
The owner of a small cell deemed abandoned under this subsection M3h must remove the small cell facility in its entirety from the
Village no later than sixty (60) days after the date the Village provides written notice of abandonment to the owner or its
representative at the last known address of the owner or representative. If the owner of the abandoned small cell does not remove
the small cell facility in accordance with the preceding sentence, then the Village will have the right to remove and dispose of the
small cell facility and charge the owner with the costs incurred by the Village for such removal and disposal.
i. In the event of a bona fide emergency affecting public health and safety, the Director of Public Works will undertake to notify the
operator of the affected small cell facilities and direct the operator to relocate or remove such facilities. If the operator fails to
relocate or remove within the time provided by the Director of Public Works, then the Director of Public Works may temporarily
relocate or remove small cell facilities located on privately-owned poles and privately-owned poles used as small cell sites that are
located within a public right-of-way if the Director of Public Works and Engineering determines that removal is reasonably
necessary to respond to the emergency or protect the public health and safety. The Director of Public Works must provide written
notice of removal or relocation to owners of affected small cell facilities and privately-owned poles as soon as reasonably
practicable in the circumstances. The Village will not be responsible or liable for restoring or for paying any costs or damages
incurred by owners of small cell facilities and privately owned poles relocated or removed pursuant to this subsection.
j. No small cell may be installed on a Village owned pole or other property until the wireless carrier has signed a lease, in a form
provided and approved by the Village, governing the installation and maintenance of that small cell on that pole or other property.
k. If an approved small cell is installed on a new utility pole on Village property or right-of-way, then at the direction of the Village the
owner must: 1) file with the Village a bill of sale and any other documents requested by the Village to transfer ownership of that
utility pole to the Village, and 2) lease the utility pole from the Village in accordance with subsection M3j of this section.
N. Traffic Control:
1. Minimum Requirements: The Village's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual On Uniform
Traffic Control Devices and this Code.
2. Warning Signs, Protective Devices And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective
devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable Federal, State, and local requirements for protection of the public and
the utility's workers when performing any work on the public rights-of-way.
3. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
4. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to
any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the Village, school district, resident, business or institution of the
approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
subsection T of this section, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
5. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the Village.
O. Location Of Facilities:
1. General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless
of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
a. No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall be placed in any location if the Director of Public Works determines
that the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the Village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere
with the operation or maintenance of any of the Village's utility facilities.
b. Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the
right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience
of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way.
c. No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-ofway.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 163/426
d. No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
e. Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power
pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the particular application.
f. Exclusive Conduit: No permittee shall insert any wire, cable, conduit or pipe through an existing conduit that traverses under the
roadway or right-of-way such as a storm sewer. All utilities' facilities must be in its own exclusive conduit unless prior permission of
the other utility or the Public Works Director is obtained.
2. Parallel Facilities Located Within Rights-Of-Way:
a. Overhead Parallel Facilities: No new overhead facility may be located or installed within the right-of-way. However, an overhead
parallel facility replacement may be located within the right-of-way if:
(1) Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
(2) Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') behind
the face of the curb, where available;
(3) Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4')
outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
(4) No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
(5) Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-ofway
line.
b. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
(1) The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') from and parallel to the rightof-
way line;
(2) A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with
sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
(3) In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than five feet (5') from the right-of-way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located
within one foot (1') of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
3. Facilities Crossing Highways:
a. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village
highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement
or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
b. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage
facilities.
c. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90) angle to the center line as
practicable.
d. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
(1) It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication
Lines" (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305);
(2) Poles are located within one foot (1') of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
(3) Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
e. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
(1) The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
(2) Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation. (Ord. 1771-17, 6-26-2017)
f. Reserved. (Ord. 1796-17, 12-13-2017)
g. Markers: The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a
power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency
phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations (49 CFR 192.707 (1989)).
4. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The Village may require that facilities be located within particular rights-ofway
that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 164/426
5. Freestanding Facilities:
a. The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.
b. The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.
6. Appearance Standards:
a. The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
b. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
c. The Village may require the installation of landscape screening of facilities which shall be determined during the permit review
process.
7. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
a. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground,
underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted.
b. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or
roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations:
(1) The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and
property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
(2) The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
(3) The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
(4) The proposed method of attachment;
(5) The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
(6) The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
(7) The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
(8) The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved. (Ord. 1771-17, 6-26-2017)
8. Utility Pole Application And Supplemental Standards: The application to install a new utility pole within Village right-of-way must, in
addition to any other permit requirements in this section for any new utility pole, include documented evidence that:
a. Such proposed pole is necessary to provide the utility service because it is not physically feasible to provide the utility service
through existing utility poles or other facilities or from Village owned buildings or structures; and
b. The technology providing the utility service through such pole cannot be provided through underground facilities; and
c. The utility service associated with such proposed pole cannot be feasibly provided with a utility pole of a lower height than the
proposed pole; and
d. Location on an existing structure has been shown to be not feasible.
In addition, the proposed pole shall satisfy each of the following standards:
a. The pole location shall be situated at least a minimum distance of one hundred feet (100') from any residential structure; and
b. Such pole shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height and shall be of steel construction; and
c. The pole shall be designed to withstand a wind force of one hundred (100) mph without the use of supporting guy wires; and
d. The pole shall be a color that blends with the surroundings; and
e. Any wiring on the pole must be covered with an appropriate cover or cable shield in a matching color; and
f. Such pole must be necessary to provide the utility because it is not physically feasible to provide the utility service through existing
utility poles or other facilities or from Village owned buildings or structures; and
g. The technology providing the utility service through such pole cannot be provided through underground facilities; and
h. The utility service associated with such proposed pole cannot be feasibly provided with a utility pole of a lower height than the
proposed pole; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 165/426
i. Power must be provided via small solar cells or underground cable. No overhead power connections.
9. Personal Wireless Services Antennae And Related Equipment On Utility Poles: Personal wireless services antennae and related
equipment shall be permitted to be attached to utility poles within public rights-of-way, subject to the following regulations:
a. Unavailability Of Village Sites: No personal wireless services antenna shall be permitted on any utility pole unless the applicant is
able to demonstrate that no such Village owned building or structure is available, on commercially reasonable terms, and sufficient
for the location of an antenna necessary for the provision of personal wireless services.
b. Attachment To Utility Poles; Limitations: No such personal wireless services antenna or antenna support structure shall be attached
to a utility pole unless all of the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) Size: The personal wireless services antenna and related equipment shall not exceed four (4) square feet in antenna surface
area or four feet (4') in any dimension; and
(2) Height: The personal wireless services antenna and related equipment shall not extend more than seven feet (7') above the
height of the utility pole to which it is attached; and
(3) Mounting: The personal wireless services antenna and related equipment shall be designed to withstand a wind force of one
hundred (100) miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires; and
(4) Color: The personal wireless services antenna and related equipment shall be a color that blends with the color of the pole on
which it is mounted. Any wiring on the pole must be covered with an appropriate cover or cable shield in the same color of the
pole; and
(5) Grounding: The personal wireless services antenna and related equipment structure shall be bonded to a grounding rod; and
(6) Other Standards: The personal wireless services antenna and related equipment shall satisfy such other design and
construction standards as are required in the Building Code and other ordinances, codes or regulations to ensure safe
construction and maintenance of the personal wireless services antenna and its support structure.
c. Separation And Setback Requirements: Personal wireless services antennae and related equipment attached to a utility pole shall
be located no closer than one hundred feet (100') to any residential building, and no closer than five hundred feet (500') from any
other personal wireless services antenna. The petitioner must identify all the personal wireless service antennae within five hundred
feet (500') of the proposed unit.
d. Guy Wires Restricted: No guy or other support wires shall be used in connection with such personal wireless services antenna or
its related equipment.
e. Abandonment And Removal: When one or more personal wireless services antennae or related equipment are not operated for the
provision of personal wireless services for a continuous period of twelve (12) months or more, such personal wireless services
antenna, antenna support structure, or related equipment may be deemed to be abandoned by the Village. The owner of such
personal wireless services antenna or related equipment shall remove such items within ninety (90) days following the mailing of
written notice that removal is required. Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the
Village to such owner at the last known address of such owner. (Ord. 1771-17, 6-26-2017; amd. Ord. 1796-17, 12-13-2017)
P. Construction Methods And Materials:
1. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
a. Boring Or Jacking:
(1) Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified
by the Director of Public Works, or designee from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more
than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be
designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be
imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
(2) Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
(3) Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger
and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one
inch (1").
(4) Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either
jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.
(5) Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved shall be bored
under or around the root system.
b. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 166/426
(1) Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing.
Only one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the
Director of Public Works, or applicable jurisdiction.
(2) Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by
chapter 6 of the "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated material shall be
deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of
the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off road location.
(3) Preserved Tree Drip Line: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved.
c. Backfilling:
(1) Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and length
using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction". When
excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
(2) For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and
restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the Director of Public Works, the
utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly
compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined
by the Director of Public Works.
d. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is
closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection P1d is permitted under subsection U of this section, the
following requirements shall apply:
(1) Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as practicable with crushed stone, or crushed gravel material of
CA-6 gradation, as designated by the Director of Public Works.
(2) Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture
shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon
notification by the Village.
(3) All saw cuts shall be full depth.
(4) For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in
the last three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work
considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE
locate.
e. Encasement:
(1) Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be
continuous either by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the Village.
(2) The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall
be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
(3) In the case of water line or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village
approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction
and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
(4) In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
(5) In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if: a) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and b) cathodic protection of the pipe is
provided.
(6) If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.
f. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches
Communication cable or video service lines 18 to 24 inches (as determined by Village)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 167/426
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
2. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
a. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
(1) Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code 305 entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric
Power and Communications Lines", and the National Electrical Safety Code.
(2) Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint
use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum
visibility.
(3) Underground Facilities:
(A) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize
damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(B) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be
eliminated only if: 1) the crossing is installed by the use of moles, whip augers, or other approved methods which compress the
earth to make the opening for cable installation or 2) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to
roadway construction.
(C) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.
(4) Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year,
also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the
Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days after
placement.
b. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:
(1) The use of moles, whip augers, or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
(2) Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
(3) Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
(4) Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
c. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a
Village approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of
Transportation, part 192 - Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR 192),
IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
d. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI
Standard Code for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).
e. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.
f. Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all
directions. The vegetation free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar
material approved by the Director of Public Works. With the approval of the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the
appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a
neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
3. Materials:
a. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards
of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the
requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the
appropriate industry.
b. Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: All pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms or other materials shall be distributed along the rightof-
way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 168/426
damage to the right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from the
Village.
c. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in
the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
4. Operational Restrictions:
a. Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations
would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or
restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.
b. These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
c. Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction are those set forth in this Code and related documents.
5. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence
and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The
Village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation
or when requested by the Village or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48)
hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act2.
Q. Vegetation Control:
1. Electric Utilities - Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation
control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or
other agreement with the Village as permitted by law.
2. Other Utilities - Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and
that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing same, shall not be considered a
normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit
required under this section.
a. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming
permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
b. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will require compensation for trees extensively
damaged and for trees removed without authorization. This Code will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or
radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
3. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The Village may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen
trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other
means.
4. Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, or designee, that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. If
approved, contractor conducting the spraying shall provide appropriate certification to the Village.
R. Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities:
1. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the Village has determined that
such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way.
2. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls or
maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or
any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the
following circumstances:
a. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
b. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
c. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this section; or
d. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
3. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The Village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within
the rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 169/426
or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the Municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a
facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
4. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of the Village, the utility shall notify the
Village within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the Village may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the
facility if the Director of Public Works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare.
In the event that the Village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
Village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another
utility or person.
S. Cleanup And Restoration: The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain and other property within ten (10)
days after any portion of the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility, all to
the satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made
using materials and methods approved by the Director of Public Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of
backfilling, regrading, reseeding, re-sodding or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent
to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the
Director of Public Works for good cause shown.
T. Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance:
1. General: Facilities and any associated screening or landscaping on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within rights-of-way
are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense.
2. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
a. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all
necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or
flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the
shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such
an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available.
b. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Director of Public Works, or designee of the emergency, informing
him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary
repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified
immediately.
c. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.
3. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the Village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within
forty eight (48) hours after an emergency repair.
U. Variances:
1. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this section must do so in writing to the
Director of Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this section from which a
variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
2. Authority To Grant Variances: The Village shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this section identified in
the variance request on an individual basis.
3. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The Director of Public Works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance
has demonstrated that:
a. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision;
and
b. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
4. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require
the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this
section but which carry out the purposes of this section.
5. Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by
the Director of Public Works under the provisions of this section shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board or such other board
or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within thirty (30) days
after the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal
at the Village Board's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The Village
Board shall timely decide the appeal.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 170/426
V. Penalties: Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to fine in accordance with the penalty provisions of section 1-4-1 of this Code. There may be times when the Village will incur
delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this section.
Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the
permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the Village.
Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
W. Enforcement: Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the Village may have for
enforcement of this section. (Ord. 1771-17, 6-26-2017)
7-2-6: TELECOMMUNICATIONS MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications within the Village, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money
or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense
whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for private line
service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the Village, charges for the channel mileage between each
channel point within the Village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within the Village. However,
"gross charges" shall not include:
1. Any amounts added to purchaser's bill because of a charge made under: a) the fee imposed by this Section, b) additional
charges added to a purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, c) amounts collected under section 8-11-
17 of the Illinois Municipal Code, d) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax, e) 911 surcharges, or f) the tax
imposed by section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
2. Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the Village;
3. Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing
of data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators,
computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of computers
under a time-sharing agreement;
4. Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein
such charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
5. Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and
during the period of time specified by the Village;
6. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation
and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the
parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services;
7. Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable Federal income tax standards;
if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion during the
reporting period in which the payment is made);
8. Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices; or
9. Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to the Village.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any Municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes,
including utility easements wherein the Village has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities
consistent with telecommunications facilities. "Public right-of-way" shall not include any real or personal Village property that is not
specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include Village buildings and other structures or improvements,
regardless of whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term): Any retailer having or maintaining within the
State of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other
place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether
such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 171/426
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services
rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which telecommunications services are originated or at
which telecommunications services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications,
paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the customer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide-area
telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services,
specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or
among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall
not include value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunication service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer
who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into,
end-to-end telecommunication service shall not be included in the gross charges as sales for resale. "Telecommunications" shall not
include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC section
521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable
to the Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550
and following) as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: 1. Any telecommunications retailer; and
2. Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way
that is used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER (OR RETAILER OR CARRIER): Includes every person engaged in the business of making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this section. The village may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the
collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction of the
village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such
retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same
requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within the state.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal wireless services as defined in section
704(C) of the telecommunications act of 1996 (public law no. 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended,
including all commercial mobile radio services, and paging services.
B. Registration Of Telecommunications Providers:
1. Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this section shall register with the village within thirty (30) days after the effective
date of this section or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the village, provided,
however, that any telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection D of this section, shall be deemed to have
registered in accordance with this section.
2. Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the village pursuant to this section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by subsection D of this section, as the case may be, to the village within thirty
(30) days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in the
registration form or most recent return on file with the village.
C. Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee:
1. A village telecommunications municipal infrastructure maintenance fee (hereinafter referred to as the infrastructure maintenance fee)
is hereby imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent (1%) of all gross charges charged by the
telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the village for telecommunications originating or received in the village.
2. Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee imposed under this section, the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public rights of way within the village by
telecommunications retailers. Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this section does not, however, serve
as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
3. The infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in subsection
D of this section.
D. Collection, Enforcement, And Administration Of Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fees:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 172/426
1. A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the
infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address. (Ord. 811-97, 10-13-1997)
2. Unless otherwise approved by the chief operating officer, the infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which a bill is issued to
the customer; provided, however, that the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%) of the
infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
3. Remittance of the infrastructure maintenance fee to the village shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the
chief operating officer, which shall contain such information as the chief operating officer may reasonably require. (Ord. 811-97, 10-
13-1997; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
4. Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to this section and any such infrastructure maintenance fee
collected by such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications retailer to the village.
5. If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has been paid and was not due under the provisions of this section,
whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance
fee due, or to become due, under this section, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous payment; provided,
however, the village may request, and telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no
claim for such credit may be made more than six (6) months after the date of the erroneous payment.
6. The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this
section to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the village for the infrastructure maintenance
fee. Any underpayment of the amount of the infrastructure maintenance fee due to the village by the telecommunications retailer shall
be paid to the village plus five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred
by the village in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed the total amount of the underpayment determined in said audit. Said
sum shall be paid to the village within twenty one (21) days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same. (Ord. 811-97, 10-13-
1997)
7. The chief operating officer, or his designee, may promulgate such further or additional regulations concerning the administration and
enforcement of this section, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time and shall notify all
telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant to subsection B of this section of such regulations. (Ord. 811-97, 10-13-
1997; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
E. Compliance With Other Laws: Nothing in this section shall excuse any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law,
including, but not limited to:
1. Generally applicable taxes; and
2. Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to
freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as provided; and
3. Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over,
under, or within, use or repair of the public rights of way; and
4. Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning uses or structures not located on, over, or within the public rights
of way.
F. Existing Franchises And Licenses: Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications retailers and the village
entered into before the effective date of this section regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according to and for their
stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the extent waived.
G. Penalties: Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of
this section shall be subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of section 1-4-1 of this code.
H. Enforcement: Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for
enforcement of this section.
I. Severability: If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
J. Waiver: The village hereby waives all fees, charges and other compensation that may accrue, after the effective date of this waiver, to
the village by a telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing village franchise, license, or similar agreement with the
telecommunications retailer during the time the village imposes the telecommunications municipal infrastructure maintenance fee. This
waiver shall only be effective during the time the telecommunications municipal infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
section is subject to being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by the telecommunications retailer from the
customer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 173/426
K. Notice Of Waiver: The Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to send a notice of the waiver provided at subsection J of this
section, by certified mail, return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer with whom the Village has a franchise, license or
similar agreement.
L. Effective Date And Applicability: The imposition of the telecommunications Municipal infrastructure maintenance fee and the waiver
provided at subsection J of this section shall be effective on the first day of the first month which is not less than ninety (90) days after
the Village Clerk sends the notice provided at subsection K of this section. Said telecommunications Municipal infrastructure
maintenance fee shall apply to gross charges billed on or after said effective date. (Ord. 811-97, 10-13-1997)
7-2-7: OBSTRUCTION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY BY SNOW REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Plow or otherwise remove accumulated snow or ice from a private parking lot and deposit same on a Village street, sidewalk or right-ofway
in such a manner as to decrease the drivable width on any such street and/or cause to do so in a manner which would significantly
hamper Village snow removal efforts or create unsafe accumulations of snow on the public right-of-way.
B. Plow snow from a private driveway and deposit same on a Village street in such a manner so as to decrease the drivable width of any
such street and/or cause to do so in a manner which would significantly hamper Village snow removal efforts or create unsafe
accumulations of snow on the public right-of-way.
C. Plow or otherwise remove snow from a private parking lot or driveway in such a way as to block the vision of motorists at any
intersection, prevent parking at a curb, cover fire hydrants, block any public sidewalks or block drainage including ditchlines.
D. Obstruct, harass, prevent or otherwise interfere with any employee or contractor of the Village engaged in snow and ice removal service
or to obstruct, cause damage to, or otherwise interfere with any Village owned or contract vehicle used in conjunction with snow and ice
removal services.
E. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist after notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense. In addition hereto shall be responsible and
make full payment for any damage to Village property. Citations for violations of this section may be issued to the owner of the property
involved and also to any industry, management association, or firm that acts as an agent for any such owner. (Ord. 1515-15, 1-20-2015)
7-2-8: STANDARDS FOR RIGHT-OF-WAY TREE PLANTING PROGRAM:
A. Standards For Right-Of-Way Tree Planting Program:
1. At the sole discretion of the Village, the Village will provide a program to residents in the spring and fall, whereby residents can
participate in the Right-of-Way Tree Planting Program.
2. Tree plantings in right-of-way are allowable only in neighborhoods with underground drainage within the right-of-way (storm sewer).
3. Tree plantings are not allowed in right-of-way with ditch drainage systems and/or driveway culverts.
4. Trees are not permissible in areas where they can be an obstruction to drainage.
5. No tree can be planted within the Village right-of-way by residents or a contractor hired by residents unless done pursuant to the
requirements of this section.
B. Process To Participate In Right-Of-Way Tree Planting Program:
1. Plantings must be approved by Village and meet the Village's approved Right-of-Way Planting List referenced below, which may be
modified from time to time:
RIGHT-OF-WAY PLANTING LIST
Scientific Name Common Name Size
Acer miyabei "Morton" State Street Maple 2.5"
Acer x freemanii Maple, Freeman's 2.5"
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 174/426
Acer x freemanii "Autumn Blaze" Autumn Blaze Maple 2.5"
Acer x freemanii "Marmo" Marmo Maple 2.5"
Amelanchier x grandiflora Serviceberry, apple 2.5"
Celtis occidentalis "Chicagoland" Chicagoland Hackberry 2.5"
Crataegus crus-galli Hawthorn, cockspur (thornless) 2.5"
Eucommia ulmoides Rubber-tree, hardy 2.5"
Gingko biloba "Magyar" Magyar Gingko 2.5"
Gingko biloba (male only) Gingko 2.5"
Gleditsia Honeylocust thornless 2.5"
Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis "Skyline" Skyline Honeylocust 2.5"
Gymnocladus dioicus Kentucky Coffeetree 2.5"
Ostrya virginiana Ironwood 2.5"
Platanus x acerifolia Planetree, London 2.5"
Platanus x acerifolia "Morton Circle" Planetree London Exclamation 2.5"
Pyrus calleryana "Chanticleer" Chanticleer Pear 2.5"
Quercus bicolor Swamp white oak 2.5"
Quercus imbricaria1 Shingle Oak1 2.5"
Quercus macrocarpa1 Bur Oak 2.5"
Tilia americana "Redmond" Redmond American Linden 2.5"
Tilia cordata "Greenspire" Greenspire Littleleaf Linden 2.5"
Ulmus americana "Princeton" Elm, Princeton 2.5"
Ulmus carpinifolia "Morton" Accolade Elm 2.5"
Ulmus davidiana Elm, Prospector 2.5"
Ulmus "Frontier" Elm, Frontier 2.5"
Ulmus "Morton Glossy" Elm, Triumph 2.5"
Ulmus "Morton Red Tip" Elm, Danada Charm 2.5"
Ulmus "Morton Stalwart" Elm, Commendation 2.5"
Ulmus "NewHorizon" Elm, New Horizon 2.5"
Ulmus parvifolia Elm, Lacebark 2.5"
Ulmus "Patriot" Elm, Patriot 2.5"
Ulmus "Regal" Elm, Regal 2.5"
Note:
1. These trees produce acorns.
2. Applicant must submit an application for the Right-of-Way Tree Planting Program to the Village.
3. Applicant must submit site sketch denoting proposed location of tree(s). Sketch must include all other items in the area (fire hydrants,
street lights, driveway aprons, sidewalks, etc.).
4. There will be no fee for this program, aside for the cost of the tree(s) to be planted which shall be paid by the applicant prior to the
planting of the tree.
5. Upon receiving approval, the Village will add tree(s) to list to be planted each spring and fall by a contractor selected by the Village.
C. Required Spacing And Location Of Tree(s):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 175/426
1. Trees shall be spaced approximately fifty feet (50') apart, unless otherwise approved.
2. Trees cannot be placed in locations where they impair visibility at driveways and street intersections or block street signage.
3. Trees shall not be placed over underground Village utilities or watermain or sanitary sewer.
4. Trees shall be placed equidistant between the curb and sidewalk, or as approved.
5. Trees shall have a minimum caliper of 2.5 inches to three inches (3").
6. Trees can only be planted in Village right-of-way and cannot be planted along private roads or on private property as part of this
program.
7. The Village has the ultimate decision on where trees will be planted.
D. After The Trees Are Planted:
1. The Village is not responsible for watering the new tree(s).
2. The trees shall not be re-planted to a different location in ROW or on private property.
3. The Village will be responsible for trimming trees for sight-line safety and removing trees, if they die or become a hazard, in the sole
discretion of the Village.
4. The Village is not responsible to replace the tree(s). (Ord. 1790-17, 9-25-2017)
Chapter 3
PUBLIC PARKS
7-3-1: PARK REGULATIONS:
The following regulations govern the use of all public parks located within the village:
A. Animals:
1. Animals shall not be brought into public parks, except for dogs and cats.
2. All dogs and cats must be held by a suitable line, chain or strap which shall be no longer than eight feet (8') in length1.
3. No one shall lead or allow a dog or cat to be upon any portion of a public park where dogs or cats have been prohibited by direction
of the corporate authorities as indicated by sign or notice. (Ord. 314-81, 4-14-1981)
B. Drunkenness; Alcoholic Liquors: No intoxicated person shall enter, be or remain in any public park. In addition, no person shall bring
within, sell, give away, trade or consume any alcoholic liquors in any public park, except at village sponsored events. (Ord. 1072-04, 5-
17-2004)
C. Littering2: No person shall throw or leave any paper, glass, container, debris, package or other litter in or about any public park, except in
receptacles where provided.
D. Motorized Vehicles: No person shall bring or use any motorized vehicle upon any portion of any public park except where expressly
authorized by the corporate authorities.
E. Open Fires3: No person shall start or maintain any campfire or open fire in a public park, except where such fire is contained in a
portable cooking unit and no debris or ash from such portable cooking unit shall be deposited in a public park.
F. Park Hours: No person may be in or upon any public park, except during the period from sunrise to eight thirty o'clock (8:30) P.M.,
Memorial Day through (and inclusive of) Labor Day, and sunrise to sunset at all other times. (Ord. 314-81, 4-14-1981)
7-3-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance hereof shall, upon conviction, be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code and the costs of prosecution. (Ord. 314-81, 4-14-1981; amd. 1995 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 176/426
7-3-3: RESERVATION OF PARK OR PORTION THEREOF; PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. No person, group or organization shall have exclusive use of any park or portion thereof without having first obtained a park permit
therefor. No person, group or organization shall violate any rule or regulation established by the board of trustees pursuant to
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 940-01, 5-21-2001)
B. The board of trustees shall establish from time to time, either by resolution or ordinance, rules and regulations governing the use and/or
reservation of any park or portion thereof, including the issuance of permits therefor. (Ord. 1609-15, 11-23-2015)
C. Permit fees, deposits and other charges applicable to the reservation of any park or portion thereof shall be as established from time to
time, either by a resolution or ordinance adopted by the board of trustees. Any fee imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition
to and not in lieu of any other fee imposed by this code. (Ord. 940-01, 5-21-2001)
7-3-4: COMMUNITY PARK:
A. Permit Procedure:
1. Written application for rental must be made on the permit request forms provided by the village. Application forms can be picked up at
the village hall, or mailed to you. Applications must be completed and paid in full thirty (30) days before the date can be reserved and
a permit granted.
2. Community Park permit fees are due upon application request.
3. Any cancellation must be received in writing at least five (5) days prior to the reserved date. Failure to comply with this requirement
will result in loss of the permit amount.
B. Permit Terms And Conditions:
1. Application must be signed by the applicant. The permit must be signed by the authorizing village official and is valid only on the
dates and times shown. Application must be submitted thirty (30) days prior to event.
2. The applicant, their organization and members are bound by policy of the permit, its terms and conditions, regulations and ordinances
pertaining to the use of the village of Hawthorn Woods property.
3. The applicant submitting a request, listed as the authorized representative, must be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
4. Any permit may be revoked for misrepresentation in the application or violation of terms and conditions of this application concerning
policy, ordinances, rules, regulations, and laws of the village of Hawthorn Woods. (Ord. 941-01, 5-21-2001)
5. Adequate adult supervision, as determined by the chief operating officer, must be provided at all times. (Ord. 941-01, 5-21-2001;
amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
6. The posting of advertisements of any products or services for sale is not permitted without village approval.
7. All fields and picnic areas shall be left clean of debris after usage.
8. The applicant, their organizations and members must agree to release the liability of injury to the village of Hawthorn Woods caused
through said use.
9. The village of Hawthorn Woods will not assume responsibility for lost or stolen or damaged property. (Ord. 941-01, 5-21-2001)
10. All permits shall be issued only with the specific approval of the chief operating officer. (Ord. 941-01, 5-21-2001; amd. Ord. 1290-09,
8-17-2009)
11. Use of sound amplification equipment systems is prohibited, except when specifically authorized on the permit.
12. When publicizing meetings or events, the location description shall read the site (i.e., village of Hawthorn Woods Community Park).
13. No motorized vehicles are allowed on the grass around the picnic area or on any bike path without village authorization. Please
unload any supplies on the nearest paved area. All cars are to be parked in the designated parking areas only.
14. In the event that a league game is scheduled on a field, the league has precedence.
15. The following regulations govern the use of all public parks located within the village:
a. Animals:
(1) Animals shall not be brought into the park, except for dogs and cats.
(2) All dogs and cats must be held by a suitable line, chain or strap which shall be no longer than eight feet (8') in length.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 177/426
(3) No one shall lead or allow a dog or cat to be upon any portion of a public park where dogs or cats have been prohibited by
direction of the corporate authorities as indicated by sign or notice.
(4) Pet owners are required to clean up after their pets. (Ord. 941-01, 5-21-2001)
b. Alcoholic Liquors: Alcoholic liquors are prohibited in Community Park at all times, except at village sponsored events. (Ord. 1072-
04, 5-17-2004)
c. Drunkenness: No intoxicated person shall enter, be or remain in any public park.
d. Littering: No person shall throw or leave any paper, glass, container, debris, package or other litter in or about any public park,
except in receptacles where provided.
e. Open Fires: No person shall start or maintain any campfire or open fire in a public park, except where such fire is contained in a
portable cooking unit and no debris or ash from such portable cooking unit shall be deposited in the appropriate containers which
have been provided by the village. Ground fires are not allowed. Violation of this will result in loss of fees.
f. Park Hours: No person may be in or upon any public park, except during the period from sunrise to eight thirty o'clock (8:30) P.M.,
Memorial Day through (and inclusive of) Labor Day, and sunrise to sunset at all other times.
C. Police Response: Any incident resulting in a nonemergency response, the permit holder shall be liable for the expense of that police
response.
D. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section, or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance hereof shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following penalty and the cost of prosecution:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this agreement, where no other penalty is set forth, shall be punished by a fine of
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any offense.
E. Permit Application:
Drop off or Mail to:
Village of Hawthorn Woods
2 LAGOON DRIVE
HAWTHORN WOODS, ILLINOIS 60047
Date of Application
COMMUNITY PARK GAZEBO AREA PERMIT APPLICATION
APPLICATION MUST BE COMPLETED IN FULL AND THE PERMIT
AGREEMENT MUST BE SIGNED, DATED, AND PAID BEFORE A PERMIT
IS GRANTED BY THE VILLAGE OF HAWTHORN WOODS
1.Name of Organization
2.Circle One: Profit / Non-Profit
3.Authorized Representative Phone(H)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 178/426
(W)
4.Address:
City, State, Zip Code
5.Activity/Purpose
6.Date Requested
7.Attendance Expected
8.Will an Admission/Donation be collected for the activity? Circle One: Y/N
9.Percentage of expected attendance by residents of the Village of Hawthorn Woods %
10.Please turn the page entitled "Community Park Gazebo Permit Agreement" and complete.
11.A copy of insurance showing the Village of Hawthorn Woods as "Additionally Insured" must be supplied prior to the permit
being issued.
F.Permit Agreement:
VILLAGE OF HAWTHORN WOODS
COMMUNITY PARK
GAZEBO AREA PERMIT
AGREEMENT
2 LAGOON DRIVE _ HAWTHORN WOODS, ILLINOIS 60047
(847) 438-5500
We/I (NAME OF ORGANIZATION)
AGREE TO HOLD HARMLESS THE VILLAGE OF HAWTHORN WOODS, LAKE COUNTY, ILLINOIS, THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES, IT'S MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES, AND TO ASSUME RESPONSIBILITY FOR, AND DEFEND AT OUR/MY OWN
EXPENSE, ALL CLAIMS FOR DAMAGE TO PROPERTY AND PERSONS, INCLUDING MEDICAL EXPENSE, FOR INJURIES
INCURRED AND ARISING INCIDENTAL TO THE USE OF THE PARKS INVOLVED. IT BEING FURTHER UNDERSTOOD AND
AGREED THAT THE VILLAGE OF HAWTHORN WOODS ASSUMES NO OBLIGATION OR RESPONSIBILITY IN
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 179/426
CONNECTION WITH SAID USE OF THE PARKS. WE/I FURTHER AGREE TO ASSUME ALL COST OF DAMAGE TO THE
PARKS AND/OR BUILDINGS, AND/OR CONTENTS DURING THE PERIOD AUTHORIZED AND ALL RESULTS OF SUCH
SAID USE OF THE PARKS. WE/I FURTHER AGREE TO ADHERE TO THE STATEMENT OF POLICY, PERMIT PROCEDURES
AND THE ATTACHED PERMIT TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
CANCELLATION CLAUSE: APPLICANT CANCELLATIONS MUST BE RECEIVED IN WRITING AT LEAST FIVE (5) DAYS
PRIOR TO THE RESERVED DATE. FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THIS REQUIREMENT WILL RESULT IN THE LOSS OF THE
PERMIT FEE. THE VILLAGE OF HAWTHORN WOODS RESERVES THE RIGHT TO CANCEL THIS PERMIT WITH IN 48
HOURS WHEN DEEMED NECESSARY.
Date/ Permit Holders SignatureDate/ Authorized Signature
Village of Hawthorn Woods
G.Schedule Of Fees:
DEPOSIT
Resident and non-resident groups under 75 people require a $50.00 deposit. Groups of 75 or more require a $100.00 deposit.
Deposits are required for all groups using the Village of Hawthorn Woods property. You will be charged for any damages, and
time spent for clean-up by the Village staff. These charges will be deducted from your deposit. The Village of Hawthorn Woods
reserves the right to make adjustments in these fees as necessary. Damages over and above the deposit fee will be charged to
the group and/or contact named on the application.
PERSONS RESIDENT NON-RESIDENT
1 - 75 persons $60.00 $120.00
76 - 150 $90.00 $180.00
151+ Contract Only Contract Only
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
DATE
Signature of Permit Holder
Approval: Denial: Fees:
Signature
Village of Hawthorn Woods
(Ord. 941-01, 5-21-2001)
Title 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODES
8-1-1: BUILDING CODE:
This section shall be known and cited as the HAWTHORN WOODS BUILDING CODE.
A. Building Code Created: There is created and established, in and for the Village of Hawthorn Woods, the Hawthorn Woods Building
Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 180/426
B. Adoption Of The International Building Code: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, being
marked and designated as International Building Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is
hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Village, for the control of buildings and structures herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection C of this section.
The 2015 International Building Code be and is adopted as the rules and regulations for the construction, alterations, additions, repairs
or conversions of all buildings and structures, with the amendments, modifications and additions as hereafter set forth, in the Village of
Hawthorn Woods, Lake County, Illinois, applicable to existing or proposed new buildings or structures.
C. Amendments To The International Building Code:
CHAPTER 1 - SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
101.1 Title
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the Village of Hawthorn Woods, hereafter referred to as "this Code".
101.4.3 Plumbing
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
The provisions of the current Hawthorn Woods Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Village of Hawthorn Woods from
time-to-time, shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs, and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water and sewer system and all aspects of a medical gas
system. Whenever the International Plumbing Code is referenced in this Code, it shall be replaced with "the current edition of the
Hawthorn Woods Plumbing Code as adopted and amended from time to time by the Village of Hawthorn Woods".
Add as an additional section:
101.4.8 Electrical
The provisions of the current edition of the Hawthorn Woods Electrical Code as adopted and amended by the Village of Hawthorn
Woods shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances,
fixtures and appurtenances thereto. Whenever the International Electrical Code is referenced in this Code, it shall be replaced with
"the current edition of the Hawthorn Woods Electrical Code as adopted and amended from time to time by the Village of Hawthorn
Woods".
SECTION 103 - DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
SECTION 103 - BUILDING DIVISION
103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency
The Building Division, under the direction of the Community Development Director, is charged with the enforcement of this Code.
The official in charge of the Building Division shall be known as the "Building Official" and also referred to as the Community
Development Director.
103.2 Appointment
The Community Development Director shall be appointed by the Village Mayor with consent of the Board of Trustees and operate
under the direction of the Chief Operating Officer.
Add as an additional section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 181/426
SECTION 104 - DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL
104.1.1 Duties of the Community Development Director
Supervise and direct all operations and employees of the Building Division. Provide for the enforcement of all ordinance provisions
relating to building, zoning or housing, and the inspection of all buildings or structures being erected or altered within the Village.
Make recommendations for the health, safety and welfare of the community and for the improvement of the department. Maintain
safe working conditions in the department and oversee compliance with the safety procedures and policies of the Village Board.
Add as an additional section:
104.1.2 Duties of the Building Inspector
Serve as the building inspector for all new construction, alterations, modifications, or repairs on residential, commercial and
industrial buildings. Under the direction of the Community Development Director, perform all plan reviews and field inspections
associated with residential, commercial and industrial construction, inform contractors of violations, meet with owner, tenants,
contractors, businesses and others to review and explain code requirements, violations, and potential violations. Assist in
establishing and enforcing current codes, ordinances, rules and regulations. Investigate and follow-up on building code-related
complaints. Issue citations for building and zoning violations, issue stop work orders, and appear and testify in court when
necessary. Comply with all safety procedures and policies of the Village. Perform special tasks, projects and plan reviews as
assigned.
Assist the Community Development Director with enforcement of the Village building, zoning, and property maintenance codes.
Add as an additional section:
104.1.3 Duties of the Plumbing Inspector
Serve as the plumbing inspector for all new construction, alterations, modifications, or repairs on residential, commercial and
industrial buildings. Under the direction of the Community Development Director, perform all plumbing plan reviews and field
inspections, inform builders and property owners of violations, and meet with owners, tenants, contractors, businesses and others
to review and explain code requirements, violations, and potential violations. Assist the Community Development Director with
enforcement of the Hawthorn Woods Plumbing Code. Assist in establishing and maintaining current codes, ordinances, rules and
regulations. Investigate and follow-up on plumbing code-related and other complaints. Comply with all safety procedures and
policies of the Village. Perform special tasks, projects and plan reviews as assigned.
Add as an additional section:
104.1.4 Duties of the Code Enforcement Officer
Serve as the property maintenance inspector for existing residential, commercial and industrial properties under the direction of the
Community Development Director, perform field inspections and assist with enforcement of ICC Property Maintenance Code and
Village building, zoning and related ordinances. Assist in establishing and maintaining the current codes, ordinances, regulations,
programs and policies of the Village. Comply with all safety procedures and policies of the Village. Perform special tasks and
projects as assigned.
SECTION 105 - PERMITS
105.1.1 Annual Permit
Delete this section in its entirety.
105.1.2 Annual Permit Records
Delete this section in its entirety.
105.2 Work Exempt from Permit
Delete the following Numbers from this section:
Building:
1. One story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area is
not greater than 120 square feet.
2. Fences not over 7 feet high.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 182/426
5. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter of width
does not exceed 2:1.
6. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below are not part
of an accessible route.
105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application
Delete 180 days as the timeframe for abandoned permits and insert 90 days in its place.
105.5 Expiration of Permit
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
All building permits shall expire as identified in Section 8-2-5 Term of Permit of the Hawthorn Woods Municipal Code. If approved,
permits may be extended as outlined per Section 8-2-5.
Add as an additional section:
105.5.1 Permit Renewal
Permits may be renewed per subsection 8-2-5B Permit Renewal of the Hawthorn Woods Municipal Code.
105.7 Placement of Permit
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
The building permit placard must be displayed at all times during construction. The placard must be placed in a position to be
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
SECTION 107 - SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS
107.2.1 Information on Construction Documents
Delete the first sentence in this section and replace with the following:
Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon a maximum of 24" x 36" suitable material with the number of sets
submitted to the Village to be determined by the Community Development Department.
Add as an additional section:
107.2.5.2 Permit Plat Requirements
Surveys prepared by an Illinois Licensed Land Surveyor must be submitted with the following information during the course of the
building construction (for all new construction and additions): J Sll plats will be prepared in North American Vertical Datum 1988
(N.A.V.D. 88-W-2012 Geoid or most current).
1. Permit Plat. (Submitted with the building permit application)
- Be clearly labeled as "permit plat"
- Legal description, per most current recorded deed
- Lot corner and grade break spot elevations
- Indicate proposed location, including setbacks
- Top of foundation elevations including all steps in the foundation
- Finished garage floor finished elevation
- Slab on grade buildings must indicate finished floor elevations
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 183/426
- Locations of all existing and proposed utilities to the lot and on the lot
- Lot number
- Street address number
- Grading contours
- Driveway slope
- Easements and any other encumbrances
- Note the found or set monuments (type) at the lot corners
2. Spot Survey
- Survey must be labeled as "Spot Survey"
- Legal description, per most current recorded deed
- Indicate true location of foundation from all property lines
- True top of foundation elevation
- Walkout and lookout elevations including all foundation steps
- Lot number
- Street address number
- Easements and any other encumbrances
- Note the found or set monuments (type) at the lot corners
3. Final Survey
- Must be labeled as "Final - As Built Survey"
- Legal description, per most current recorded deed
- Setbacks from all property lines
- True grading contours
- As built spot elevations
- Locations of all sidewalks
- Driveway slope
- Driveway location
- Utility connection locations, b-box, sanitary, storm hydrants, light poles etc.
- Air conditioning unit location
- Location of any patios, decks, or other permanent structures on the lot
- Lot number
- Street address number
- Easements and any other encumbrances
- Note the found or set monuments (type) at the lot corners
107.3.1 Approval of Construction Documents
Add the following sentence after the last line of this section:
Upon final approval of the construction documents the applicant shall submit an electronic version of all approved construction
documents in a format acceptable to the Village of Hawthorn Woods at the time of permit issuance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 184/426
SECTION 108 - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
108.1 General
Delete "180 days" and insert "90 days".
SECTION 109 - FEES
109.2 Schedule of Permit Fees
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
On alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each plan review, building permit, inspection, certificate of occupancy or impact fee shall
be paid in accordance with the Village of Hawthorn Woods fee schedule listed in Title 11 of the Hawthorn Woods Municipal Code
and as amended from time to time, or in accordance with any applicable annexation agreements.
109.4 Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the
necessary permits shall be subject to a fine of twice the building permit fee established in the Village of Hawthorn Woods fee
schedule listed in Title 11 of the Hawthorn Woods Municipal Code and as amended from time to time for said project, or a minimum
of $100, whichever is greater, in addition to all other permit fees. The Community Development Director is authorized to waive or
reduce such fee as determined by the circumstances surrounding the commencement of work without first obtaining a permit. A
new permit shall not be issued by the Village of Hawthorn Woods while a property is in violation of the Hawthorn Woods Municipal
Code.
Add as an additional section:
109.7 Additional Fees
Additional fees related to plan reviews or inspections of work performed, including retaining professional services, by persons other
than Village staff shall become additional fees. These fees and services may be provided only with the concurrence of the
developer, owner, or applicant in advance of securing these services.
The costs associated with this performance shall become additional fees paid to the Village of Hawthorn Woods prior to approval of
the submittal, or providing the results to the developer, owner, or applicant.
SECTION 113 - BOARD OF APPEALS
Delete this section, including subsections 113.1, 113.2 and 113.3, in its entirety and replace with the following:
The owner or lessee of a building or structure, or their duly authorized agent, may appeal any determination or decision of the
Community Development Director to the Village Board of Trustees by serving a written notice thereof on the Village Clerk within
thirty (30) days after being notified of the determination or decision. In the event of such an appeal, the Village Board of Trustees
shall either affirm, reverse or modify the determination or decision.
SECTION 114 - VIOLATIONS
114.4 Violation Penalties
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Any person, firm, or corporation which shall violate any provision of this Code, or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or shall erect, construct, alter, or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive from the Building
Official, or of a permit or Certificate of Occupancy issued under the provision of this Code, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
Section 1-4-1 of the Hawthorn Woods Municipal Code, and each day any such violation shall continue after due notice has been
served shall constitute a separate offense. A new permit shall not be issued by the Village of Hawthorn Woods while a property is in
violation of the Hawthorn Woods Municipal Code.
SECTION 115 - STOP WORK ORDER
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 185/426
115.1 Authority
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Refer to Title 8, Chapter 2, Section 8-2-6 of the Hawthorn Woods Municipal Code.
Add as an additional section:
115.4 Unlawful Notice Removal
Any person, firm or corporation who removes a stop work order, violation notice or other posted notices from the Village shall be
subject to a fine of $750.00.
Add as an additional section:
SECTION 721 - PRESCRIPTIVE FIRE RESISTANCE
721.1.6 Requirements
Lightweight pre-engineered structural products (wood I joists, wood or metal open web trusses, or any other product that relies on
engineering design to provide strength), shall not be left exposed from below when a walking surface is located on the upper side of
the pre-engineered product.
Protection shall be provided by one of the following methods:
a. A minimum of 1/2" type "X" Gypsum board, taped, with no openings.
b. An approved major testing laboratory that has listed a fire rated assembly with a minimum of a one-hour fire resistance rating.
c. An approved automatic sprinkler system designed per 2015 IFC for LIMITED AREA SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
SECTION 1101 - GENERAL
1101.2 Design
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be accessible with current edition of the Illinois Accessibility Code.
SECTION 2901 - GENERAL
2901.1 Scope
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
The Hawthorn Woods Plumbing Code shall govern the erection, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to,
use or maintenance of plumbing equipment and systems. Plumbing systems and equipment shall be constructed, installed, and
maintained in accordance with the latest edition of the Hawthorn Woods Plumbing Code adopted and amended from time to time by
the Village of Hawthorn Woods.
SECTION 3001 - GENERAL
3001.2 Referenced Standards
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Referenced Standards to be as stringent as, and comply with current Illinois Elevator Safety Act (225 ILCS 312) and its Rules. For
applications not covered by the Illinois Elevator Safety Act, those conveyance applications shall be covered under the IBC code by
the Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) for new installation, permits, final acceptance, periodic inspections and testing, unsafe
conditions, power to seal equipment, put conveyance out of service, and certificate compliance as well as owner/agent
responsibility for contractor, maintenance, accident/injury responsibility.
Referenced Standard from IBC 2015: Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1), Performance Based Safety Code
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 186/426
for Elevators and Escalators (A17.7), Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts (ASME A18.1), Safety Standard for
Belt Manlifts (A90.1), Safety Standard for Conveyors and Related Equipment (B20.1)
Referenced Standards from (225 ILCS 312): Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1), the Standard for the
Qualification of Elevator Inspectors (ASME QEI-1), the Automated People Mover Standards (ANSI/ASCE/T&DI 21), and the Safety
Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts (ASME A18.1).
3001.3 Accessibility
Add the following after the last sentence in this section:
All passenger elevators must also comply with the most recent edition of the Illinois Accessibility Code.
SECTION 3002 - HOISTWAY ENCLOSURES
3002.4 Elevator Car to Accommodate Ambulance Stretcher
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Where elevators are provided in buildings, not fewer than one elevator, shall be provided for fire department emergency access to
all floors regardless of rise. One-family and two-family residential homes shall be excluded from this requirement.
Such elevator car shall be of such size and arrangement to accommodate a minimum 24 inch by 84 inch ambulance stretcher in
the horizontal open position and shall be identified by the International Symbol for emergency medical services (Star of Life).
The symbol shall not be less than 3 x 3 inches high and wide (76 mm x 76 mm) and shall be placed inside on both sides of the
main lobby hoist way door frame.
3003.3 Standardized Fire Service Elevator Keys
Add the following after the last sentence in this section:
This section shall only apply to new elevators and elevators that undergo modernization.
3004.4. Personnel and Material Hoists
Add the following after the last sentence in this section:
All miscellaneous hoisting and elevating equipment shall be subjected to tests and inspections as required by the Authority Having
Jurisdiction to ensure safe operation.
3005.1 Access
Add the following after the last sentence in this section:
The machine room is not to be used as a passageway to other areas of the building or roof.
3005.4 Machine Rooms, Control Rooms, Machinery Spaces, Control Spaces
Delete Exception Number 2 in its entirety.
Add as an additional section:
3009.1 Final Inspections and Testing
The operation of all equipment governed by the provisions of this chapter and hereafter installed, relocated or altered shall be
unlawful by persons other than the installer until such equipment has been inspected and tested as herein required and a final
certificate of compliance has been issued by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.
Add as an additional section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 187/426
3009.2 Posting of Certificate
The owner or lessee shall post the current-issued certificate of compliance in a conspicuous place inside the conveyance, a copy of
the current issued certificate is acceptable. Please refer to Illinois Elevator Safety Act.
Add as an additional section:
APPENDIX N - APPROVED AND PROHIBITED EXTERIOR BUILDING MATERIALS
The following materials are approved for exterior use in the construction of non-residential (one-family and two-family) buildings and
accessory structures in the village of Hawthorn Woods:
1. Face brick (minimum 4" thickness)
2. Stone (minimum 4" thickness, or 2" thinset as approved by building division)
3. Cedar or equivalent wood sidings
4. Stucco
5. Architectural concrete block (samples must be submitted for approval)
6. Aluminum materials for soffits and fascia boards
7. Standing seam metal roofing and canopy covers in earth-tone colors (samples must be submitted for approval)
8. Wood shake shingles
9. Vinyl asphalt shingles and architectural grade asphalt shingles (30 year minimum)
10. Individual glass windows in wood or aluminum frames (glass curtain walls are not included in this category)
11. Glass block for accenting purposes (glass block walls are not included in this category)
12. Limestone
13. Fiber-cement board
14. Fiber-cement material for trim, freeze boards, soffits and fascia boards, provided that corner trim be but a minimum of five and
one-quarter inches (51/4") wide and siding cannot protrude beyond the face of the corner trim board
15. Concrete block, as authorized by the Village
16. Precast concrete wall panels (stamped-brick or stamped-stone)
Samples of all materials to be used, in the color to be used, must be submitted to the building department.
Without in any way limiting the prohibition on the exterior use of any materials not included in the above list for construction of nonresidential
(one-family and two-family) buildings and accessory structures in the village of Hawthorn Woods, the village of Hawthorn
Woods has considered and expressly rejects the inclusion of the following materials in the list of approved exterior building
materials set forth above:
1. Aggregate matrix panels
2. Vinyl, or aluminum, steel or other metal, sidings, cornerboards or trim
3. Plywood or masonite siding
4. Panel brick
5. Curtain wall construction, unless authorized by Village
6. Reflective glass
7. Glazed wall tile or glazed masonry units
8. Bright wall flashings or copings
9. Metal wall panels
10. Exposed structural framing and miscellaneous metals
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 188/426
11. Staccato boards
12. Fiber-cement panel sheeting material
(Ord. 1801-17, 12-13-2017)
8-1-2: RESIDENTIAL CODE:
This section shall be known and cited as the HAWTHORN WOODS RESIDENTIAL CODE.
A. Residential Code Created: There is created and established, in and for the Village of Hawthorn Woods, the Hawthorn Woods Residential
Code.
B. Adoption Of The International Residential Code: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, being
marked and designated as International Residential Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is
hereby adopted as the One- and Two-Family Residential Building Code of the Village, for the control of buildings and structures as
herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the One- and Two-Family Residential
Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions and
changes, if any, prescribed in subsection C of this section.
The 2015 International Residential Code be and is adopted as the rules and regulations for the construction, alterations, additions,
repairs or conversions of all one and two family dwellings, with the amendments, modifications and additions as hereafter set forth, in
the Village of Hawthorn Woods, Lake County, Illinois, applicable to existing or proposed new one and two family buildings or
structures.
C. Amendments To The International Residential Code:
CHAPTER 1 - SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION R101 - GENERAL
R101.1 Title
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
These regulations shall be known as the One- and Two-Family Residential Building Code of the Village of Hawthorn Woods,
hereafter referred to as "this Code".
SECTION R102 - APPLICABILITY
R102.4 Referenced Codes and Standards
Add the following at the end of the section:
Whenever the International Plumbing Code is referenced in this Code, it shall be replaced with "the current edition of the Hawthorn
Woods Plumbing Code as adopted and amended from time to time by the Village of Hawthorn Woods".
SECTION R103 - DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY
Delete this section, including the title, and replace with the following:
Section R103 - Building Division
R103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency
The Building Division, under the direction of the Community Development Director, is charged with the enforcement of this Code.
The official in charge of the Building Division shall be known as the "Building Official" and also referred to as the Community
Development Director.
R103.2 Appointment
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 189/426
The Community Development Director shall be appointed by the Village Mayor with consent of the Board of Trustees and operate
under the direction of the Chief Operating Officer.
SECTION R104 - DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL
Add as an additional section:
R104.1.1 Duties of the Community Development Director
Supervise and direct all operations and employees of the Building Division. Provide for the enforcement of all ordinance provisions
relating to building, zoning or housing, and the inspection of all buildings or structures being erected or altered within the Village.
Make recommendations for the health, safety and welfare of the community or for the improvement of the department. Maintain
safe working conditions in the department and oversee compliance with the safety procedures and policies of the Village Board.
Add as an additional section:
R104.1.2 Duties of the Building Inspector
Serve as the building inspector for all new construction, alterations or modifications on residential, commercial and industrial
buildings. Under the direction of the Community Development Director perform all plan reviews and field inspections associated
with residential, commercial and industrial construction, inform contractors of violations, meet with owners, tenants, contractors,
businesses and others to review and explain code requirements, violations, and potential violations. Assist in establishing,
enforcing and maintaining current codes, ordinances, rules and regulations. Investigate and follow up on building related and other
complaints. Issue citations for building and zoning violations, issue stop-work orders, and appear and testify in court when
necessary. Comply with all safety procedures and policies of the Village. Perform special tasks, projects and plan reviews as
assigned.
Assist the Building Official with enforcement of the Village building, zoning, and property maintenance codes.
Add as an additional section:
R104.1.3 Duties of the Plumbing Inspector
Serve as the plumbing inspector for all new construction, alterations, and repairs. Under the direction of the Community
Development Director, perform all plumbing plan reviews and field inspections, inform builders and property owners of violations,
and meet with owners, tenants, contractors, businesses and others to review and explain code requirements, violations, and
potential violations. Assist the Building Official with enforcement of the Hawthorn Woods Plumbing Code. Assist in establishing and
maintaining current codes, ordinances, rules and regulations. Investigate and follow up on plumbing related and other complaints.
Comply with all safety procedures and policies of the Village. Perform special tasks, projects and plan reviews as assigned.
Add as an additional section:
R104.1.4 Duties of the Code Enforcement Officer
Serve as the property maintenance inspector for existing residential, commercial and industrial properties under the direction of the
Community Development Director, perform field inspections and assist with enforcement of ICC Property Maintenance Code and
Village building, zoning and related ordinances. Assist in establishing and maintaining the current codes, ordinances, regulations,
programs and policies of the Village. Comply with all safety procedures and policies of the Village. Perform special tasks and
projects as assigned.
SECTION R105 - PERMITS
R105.2 Work Exempt from Permit
Delete the following numbered items:
Building:
1. One story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area
does not exceed 200 square feet.
2. Fences not over 7 feet high.
4. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter of width
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 190/426
does not exceed 2:1.
5. Sidewalks and driveways.
10. Decks not exceeding 200 square feet (18.58 m2) in area, that are not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point,
are not attached to a dwelling and do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.4.
R105.3.2 Time Limitation of Application
Delete 180 days as the timeframe for abandoned permits and insert 90 days in its place.
R105.5 Expiration
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
All building permits shall expire as identified in Section 8-2-5 of the Hawthorn Woods Municipal Code. If approved, permits may be
extended as outlined per Section 8-2-5.
Add as an additional section:
105.5.1 Permit Renewal
Permits may be renewed per subsection 8-2-5.B, Permit Renewal, of the Hawthorn Woods Municipal Code.
R105.7 Placement of Permit
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
The building permit placard must be displayed at all times during construction. The placard must be placed in a position to be
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
SECTION R106 - CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS
R106.1.1 Information on Construction Documents
Delete the first sentence in this section and replace with the following:
Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon a maximum of 24" x 36" suitable material with the number of sets
submitted to the Village to be determined by the Community Development Department.
Add as an additional section:
R106.2.1 Permit Plat Requirements
Surveys will be prepared by an Illinois Licensed Land Surveyor and must be submitted with the following information during the
course of the building construction (for all new construction and additions): J Sll plats will be prepared in North American Vertical
Datum 1988 (N.A.V.D. 88-W-2012 Geoid or most current).
1. Permit Plat. (Submitted with the building permit application)
- Be clearly labeled as "permit plat"
- Legal description, per most current recorded deed
- Lot corner and grade break spot elevations
- Indicate proposed location, including setbacks
- Top of foundation elevations including all steps in the foundation
- Finished garage floor elevation
- Slab on grade buildings must indicate finished floor elevations
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 191/426
- Locations of all existing and proposed utilities to the lot and on the lot
- Lot number
- Street address number
- Grading contours
- Driveway slope
- Easements and any other encumbrances
- Note the found or set monuments (type) at the lot corners
2. Spot Survey
- Survey must be labeled as "Spot Survey"
- Legal description, per most current recorded deed
- Indicate true location of foundation from all property lines
- True top of foundation elevation
- Walkout and lookout elevations including all foundation steps
- Lot number
- Street address number
- Easements and any other encumbrances
- Note the found or set monuments (type) at the lot corners
3. Final Survey
- Must be labeled as "Final - As Built Survey"
- Legal description, per most current recorded deed
- Setbacks from all property lines
- True grading contours
- As built spot elevations
- Locations of all sidewalks
- Driveway slope
- Driveway location
- Utility connection locations, b-box, sanitary, storm hydrants, light poles, etc.
- Air conditioning unit location
- Location of any patios, decks, or other permanent structures on the lot
- Lot number
- Street address number
- Easements and any other encumbrances
- Note the found or set monuments (type) at the lot corners
Add as an additional section:
R106.2.2 Construction Site Requirements
All driveway culverts shall be of a minimum twelve (12) gauge corrugated metal, N-12, high density polyethylene corrugated pipe,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 192/426
or other material as approved by the village engineer and shall have flared end sections. All driveway culverts shall be fifteen
inches (15") minimum diameter, provided, however, if the village engineer determines that the preservation of the ditch line and/or
the drainage patterns upstream and/or downstream of the building site requires a larger or smaller driveway culvert and/or a
particular placement thereof, the village engineer shall direct such installation and/or placement, which direction shall control. All
driveway culverts shall be installed on top of six inches (6") of compacted granular base (CA-6, grade 8 or 9).
All driveway and driveway approaches, residential and non-residential, shall be hard-surfaced, dustproof, and shall not be gravel.
An indemnification shall be required for driveway approaches in the right-of-way constructed of a material other than asphalt or
concrete. Building sites shall be graded to conform to approved subdivision design. Required drainage swales shall be graded or
maintained as detailed on the approved subdivision plans. Detention or retention areas on private property shall not be altered and
shall be maintained as originally designed and constructed.
Construction debris shall be removed from the building site to maintain an orderly and safe condition. Construction debris and
materials shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements. Construction debris or
materials shall not be deposited or placed on property other than the property for which a building permit has been issued. No
burning of construction materials or debris shall be allowed.
A Building Official may determine that each construction site shall have a minimum of a twenty (20) yard dumpster at all times for
the disposal of construction debris, which shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from the property line.
A Building Official may determine that each construction site shall have portable toilets for the length of the construction, which shall
be a minimum of five feet (5') from the property line.
Add as an additional section:
R106.2.2.1 Residential Driveway Connections to Public Streets
A residential driveway that provides access to a garage shall be limited to one (1) curb opening of no more than twenty feet (20') in
width plus a maximum of a one-and-a-half-foot (1'-6") wide decorative ribbon adjacent and connecting to each side of the driveway,
except for circular drives as specifically approved by the Community Development Department. The decorative ribbon may extend
to the curb in the right-of-way. Single-family and two-family residential dwellings are permitted only one driveway per zoning lot. A
driveway apron, the width of the garage, is permitted to extend for a distance (depth) of twenty feet (20') back from the garage
doors before tapering back to the required driveway width to allow access to the additional spaces. This section shall supersede
any conflicting language provided elsewhere in the Village Code.
R106.3.1 Approval of Construction Documents
Add the following sentence at the end of this section:
Upon final approval of the construction documents the applicant shall submit an electronic version of all approved construction
documents in a format acceptable to the Village of Hawthorn Woods at the time of permit issuance.
SECTION R107 - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES
R107.1 General
Delete "180 days" and replace with "90 days"
SECTION R108 - FEES
R108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
On alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each plan review, building permit, inspection, certificate of occupancy or impact fee shall
be paid in accordance with the Village of Hawthorn Woods fee schedule listed in Title 11 of the Hawthorn Woods Municipal Code
and as amended from time to time, or in accordance with any applicable annexation agreement.
SECTION R109 - INSPECTIONS
R109.4 Approval Required
Add the following language at the end of this section:
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the
necessary permits shall be subject to a fine of twice the Building Permit Fee for said project, or a minimum of $100, whichever is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 193/426
greater, in addition to all other permit fees. The Community Development Director is authorized to waive or reduce such fee as
determined by the circumstances surrounding the commencement of work without first obtaining a permit.
Add as an additional section:
R109.5 Additional Fees
Additional fees related to the performance of the plan examination, inspection or the evaluation of a submittal, or the professional
services rendered to complete these duties shall become additional fees. These fees and services may be provided only with the
concurrence of the developer, owner, or applicant in advance of securing these services.
The costs associated with this performance shall become additional fees paid to the Village of Hawthorn Woods prior to approval of
the submittal, or providing the results to the developer, owner, or applicant.
SECTION R112 - BOARD OF APPEALS
R112 Board of Appeals
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
The owner or lessee of a building or structure, or their duly authorized agent, may appeal any determination or decision of the
Community Development Director to the Village Board of Trustees by serving a written notice thereof on the Village Clerk within
thirty (30) days after being notified of the determination or decision. In the event of such an appeal, the Village Board of Trustees
shall affirm, reverse or modify the determination or decision.
SECTION R113 - VIOLATIONS
R113.4 Violation Penalties
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be
subject to the penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of the municipal code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
SECTION R114 - STOP WORK ORDER
Add as an additional section:
R114.3 Unlawful Notice Removal
Any person, firm or corporation who removes a stop work order, violation notice or other posted notices from the Village shall be
subject to a fine of $750.00.
CHAPTER 3 - BUILDING PLANNING
Add as an additional section:
R301.9 Approved and Prohibited Exterior Building Materials
The following materials are approved for exterior use in the construction of residential buildings and accessory structures in the
village of Hawthorn Woods:
1. Face brick (minimum 4" thickness)
2. Stone (minimum 4" thickness, or 2" thinset as approved by building division)
3. Cedar or equivalent wood sidings
4. Stucco
5. Architectural concrete block (samples must be submitted for approval)
6. Aluminum materials for soffits and fascia boards
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 194/426
7. Standing seam metal roofing and canopy covers in earth-tone colors (samples must be submitted for approval)
8. Wood shake shingles
9. Architectural grade asphalt shingles (30 year minimum)
10. Individual glass windows in wood, vinyl or aluminum frames (glass curtain walls are not included in this category)
11. Glass block for accenting purposes (glass block walls are not included in this category)
12. Limestone
13. Fiber-cement board
14. Fiber-cement material for trim, freeze boards, soffits and fascia boards, provided that corner trim be but a minimum of five and
one-quarter inches (51/4") wide and siding cannot protrude beyond the face of the corner trim board.
Samples of all materials to be used, in the color to be used, must be submitted to the building department.
Without in any way limiting the prohibition on the exterior use of any materials not included in the above list for construction of
residential buildings and accessory structures in the village of Hawthorn Woods, the village of Hawthorn Woods has considered and
expressly rejects the inclusion of the following materials in the list of approved exterior building materials set forth above:
1. Concrete block
2. Precast concrete wall panels
3. Aggregate matrix panels
4. Vinyl, or aluminum, steel or other metal, sidings, cornerboards or trim
5. Plywood or masonite siding
6. Panel brick
7. Curtain wall construction
8. Reflective glass
9. Glazed wall tile or glazed masonry units
10. Bright wall flashings or copings
11. Metal wall panels
12. Exposed structural framing and miscellaneous metals
13. Staccato boards
14. Fiber-cement panel sheeting material
Add as an additional section:
R301.10 New Home Exterior Design Guidelines
Exterior elevation designs shall have harmonious materials with a maximum of three (3) dissimilar materials. Masonry design at the
front elevation only must be avoided by continuing the masonry on the side elevations, continuing the masonry on all elevations or
providing a pleasing termination of the masonry material. In general, masonry materials should terminate at inside corners or at a
change of plan. All sides of a structure shall be designed with a pleasing balance of architectural elements, features, windows or
doors. A facade unrelated to the rest of the structure is not in keeping with acceptable design. The Village reserves the right to
review all plans for design compliance.
House design shall take existing site conditions into account. Changing or altering existing site contours shall be restricted to a
maximum change of four feet (4') without approval of the Village. Foundations should be "stepped" to comply with existing contours.
Homes with side or rear elevations that back up to an arterial street may be requested to have masonry installed on the rear
elevation.
R313.2 One- and Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Systems
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 195/426
Delete the text of this section, but keep the Exception, and replace with the following:
An automatic residential fire sprinkler system may be installed in one- and two-family dwellings, but shall not be required.
R313.2.1 Design and Installation.
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13D, and the Hawthorn
Woods Plumbing Code.
Add as an additional section:
R313.2.1.1 Freeze Protection
All fire sprinkler piping located in floor or ceiling joists, exterior cold wall cavities, in unconditioned cold concealed attic spaces, shall
be protected from freezing.
Add as an additional section:
R313.2.1.3 Electrical Power Disconnect
There shall be no electrical power disconnect located at the fire pump.
Add as an additional section:
R313.2.1.5 Detached Structures
Detached structures, which comply with all of the following items, do not require automatic fire sprinklers.
1. Less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in floor area.
2. Single story
3. Not used as a dwelling
4. Not a High Hazard Use Group
5. Not used for high hazard products or hazardous materials storage
6. No basement level
7. Minimum 20 feet separation to other buildings
Add as an additional section:
R313.2.1.6 Vertical Shafts
Fire sprinkler protection is not required in vertical shafts for residential handicap lifts or elevators.
Add as an additional section:
R313.2.3. Alterations, repairs and additions
Alterations, repairs and additions to existing one and two family dwellings shall not be required to install a residential fire sprinkler
system in buildings not already provided with an automatic residential fire sprinkler system.
Exception: In accordance with Title 9, Chapter 10, Nonconforming Buildings and Uses, of the Municipal Code, dwelling units
undergoing substantial renovations or alterations where the building structure is removed from the foundation, razed due to
damage from fire or acts of god, additions that add more than 50 percent of the current square footage, or if the water service is
increased in size due to enlargement of the dwelling, shall install a residential fire sprinkler system in accordance with this Section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 196/426
Part VII - PLUMBING
Delete Chapters 26 - 33 entirely and insert:
The provisions of the current Hawthorn Woods Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the Village of Hawthorn Woods from
time-to-time, shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs, and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment,
appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water and sewer system and all aspects of a medical gas
system. Whenever the International Plumbing Code or other plumbing requirements are referenced in this Code, it shall be
replaced with "the current edition of the Hawthorn Woods Plumbing Code as adopted and amended from time to time by the Village
of Hawthorn Woods".
(Ord. 1802-17, 12-13-2017)
8-1-3: MECHANICAL CODE:
A. Code Adopted: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the
International Mechanical Code, 2000, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical
Code of the Village for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the International Mechanical Code, 2000, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as
if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments To Code: The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
Section
100.1:
Insert: Village of Hawthorn Woods.
Section
106.5.2
and
106.5.3:
Insert: See Title 11 of the Village Code.
Section
108.4:
Add a new Section 108.4 as follows:
Section 108.4 Penalties: Any person convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this code shall be subject to
penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of the Village Code, and each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
Section
108.5:
Delete in its entirety and insert:
Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a
stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall,
upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of the Village Code, and each day any such work shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Section
603.1.2:
Add the following section:
All return air shall be ducted. The use of stud cavities or joist spaces without ductwork is not allowed.
All rooms shall have returns except kitchens, bathrooms, powder rooms and utility rooms.
(Ord. 1022-03, 4-21-2003)
8-1-4: FUEL GAS CODE:
A. Code Adopted: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2000, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas
Code of the Village for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2000, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments To Code: The following sections are hereby revised as follows:
Section 101.1: Insert: Village of Hawthorn Woods.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 197/426
Section 106.5.2 and 106.5.3: Insert: See Title 11 of the Village Code.
(Ord. 1022-03, 4-21-2003)
8-1-5: FIRE CODE:
This section shall be known and cited as the HAWTHORN WOODS FIRE CODE.
A. Fire Code Created: There is created and established, in and for the Village of Hawthorn Woods, the Hawthorn Woods Fire Code.
B. Adoption Of The International Fire Code: A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the Office of the Village Clerk, being marked
and designated as the International Fire Code, 2015, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as
the Fire Code of the Village for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the International Fire Code, 2015, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this Fire Code.
C. Amendments To Chapter 1 Of The International Fire Code:
PART 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Insert the following:
Wherever the phrase "[name of jurisdiction]" or the word "jurisdiction" appear, they shall be deemed to refer to the Village of
Hawthorn Woods, Illinois or the Jurisdictional Fire Protection District.
Wherever the phrase Jurisdictional Fire Protection District appears, it shall be deemed to refer to the Countryside Fire Protection
District, Lake Zurich Rural Fire Protection District, Long Grove Fire Protection District and or Wauconda Fire Protection Districts, as
applicable.
Wherever the phrase "Fire Code Official" appears, it shall be deemed to refer to the agent or agents of Jurisdictional Fire Protection
District, as defined and amended in the International Fire Code.
Whenever there is a reference to the "Village of Hawthorn Woods Fee Schedule," the "Jurisdictional Fire Protection District Fee
Schedule," or any other general reference to fees or charges, it shall mean the applicable and then-current ordinance of the Village
of Hawthorn Woods or Jurisdictional Fire Protection District setting forth fees, charges, and other costs payable to the Village or to
the Jurisdictional Fire Protection District, relating to activities covered by, and the administration of, this Fire Code. To the extent
that fees are set forth in this Fire Code that are different than the then-current ordinance of the Village setting forth fees, charges,
and other costs payable to the Village relating to activities covered by, and the administration of, this Fire Code, the fees set forth in
the then-current ordinance of the Village setting forth fees, charges, and other costs shall control.
SECTION 101 - SCOPE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
101.1 - Title
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the Village of Hawthorn Woods, hereafter referred to as "this Fire Code".
SECTION 102 - APPLICABILITY
102.4 - Application of Building Code
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
The design and construction of new structures shall comply with the Hawthorn Woods Building Codes; and any alterations,
additions, changes in use or changes in structures required by this Fire Code, which are within the scope of the Hawthorn Woods
Building Codes, shall be made in accordance therewith.
Add as an additional section:
102.7.3 - Electrical
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 198/426
The provisions of the current Electrical Code adopted by the Village of Hawthorn Woods shall apply to the installation of electrical
systems, including alteration, repairs, replacement, equipment appliances, fixtures, and appurtenances thereto.
SECTION 105 - PERMITS
Add as additional section:
105.2.4.1 Site Development and Construction Plan Review
The Village of Hawthorn Woods building division shall submit to the Jurisdictional Fire Protection District for review and approval
plans involving new construction, additions and/or alterations, subdivision improvements, Planned Unit Developments (PUD's), fire
detection/suppression systems or any other item that will affect the Fire District's operation. The Jurisdictional Fire Protection
District shall, within ten (10) working days, examine said plans and documents to determine compliance with the applicable codes,
standards, ordinances and good fire safety practices. If said plans are approved, the Fire Prevention Bureau shall endorse said
plans accordingly, and deliver said plans to the Village of Hawthorn Woods Building Official. If said plans are found to be
unsatisfactory, then said plans shall be returned to the applicant with a memorandum listing the specified deficiencies found. A copy
of the list of deficiencies shall be delivered to the Building Official with a recommendation to reject said plans until corrected.
Add as additional section:
105.2.4.2 Plan Review, Site Inspection, and Operational Permits Fee Schedule
Each permit applicant shall pay plan review and site inspection fees for review and site inspections by the Fire Protection District
directly to the Fire Protection District. No part of said fees shall be refundable. Plan review fees shall include re-reviews, along with
preliminary site visits up to a total of three (3) inspections for the each category. Contact the Jurisdictional Fire Protection District for
the plan review and site inspection fee schedule. Submit three (3) sets of fire sprinkler shop drawings and construction documents
for plan review.
105.6 Required Operational Permits
Add the following at the end of the section:
Permits shall be obtained from the Jurisdictional Fire Protection District as required in other sections of this Fire Code. Permits
obtained from the Jurisdictional Fire Protection District shall be valid only for the calendar year they were issued for, or until the
expiration date on the permit for temporary permits. A new permit along with the fee set forth in Section 105.8 shall be required
each calendar year. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for
inspection by the Fire Code Official.
SECTION 109 - VIOLATIONS
109.4 Violation Penalties
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Any person, firm, or corporation which shall violate any provision of this Fire Code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or shall erect, construct, alter, or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive from
the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or Certificate of Occupancy issued under the provision of this Fire Code, shall be subject to
penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of the Village Code, and each day any such violation shall continue after due notice has been
served shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 113 - FEES
113.2 Schedule of Fees
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
See Title 11 of the Village Code and Section 105 of the Fire Code.
SECTION 202 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS
Delete in its entirety the definition of Fire Code Official and replace with the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 199/426
FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. The fire chief or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the Fire
Code, or duly authorized representative of the appropriate Jurisdictional Fire Protection District.
SECTION 301 - GENERAL
Add as an additional section:
301.3 Items Not Specifically Covered
Whenever or wherever a condition is found in any building, lot, or premises, that in the opinion of the Fire Code Official is not
specifically covered by the provisions of this Chapter, but that requires correction or removal for the protection of the occupants or
the public, the Fire Code Official shall order such conditions be corrected or removed and the owner or occupant of such buildings,
lots, or premises shall comply with such orders.
SECTION 305 - IGNITION SOURCES
Add as an additional section:
305.1.1 Fuel Burning Appliances Located in Garages
Any fuel burning appliance located in a garage area of any occupancy mounted less than six feet above the floor shall be enclosed
with a one-hour fire rated enclosure with makeup air taken from the exterior, not the garage area.
Exception: Any fuel burning appliance that is American Gas Association certified, with a safe, sealed combustion chamber (no open
flame) designed with an intermittent ignition device and make-up air taken from the exterior not the garage.
Add as an additional section:
305.6 Portable Heaters
Portable heaters shall be designed and located so that they cannot be easily overturned, and heaters shall be designed to shut off if
overturned. The Fire Code Official may prohibit the use of portable heaters in occupancies or situations in which such use or
operation would present an undue danger to the life or property of others.
Add as an additional section:
305.7 Heating and Lighting Apparatus
Proper clearance (a minimum of 36 inches) shall be maintained between lighting and heat producing equipment and combustibles
so that continuous operation at full capacity will not increase the temperature of the surrounding combustibles to their flash point or
ignition temperature.
SECTION 307 - OPEN BURNING, RECREATIONAL FIRES AND PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACES
307.1 General
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and approved in
accordance with Sections 307.1.1 through 307.5 of the Fire Code and Title 4, Chapter 7 of the Village Code.
SECTION 315 - GENERAL STORAGE
315.4 Outside Storage
Delete and replace with the following, but keep the Exceptions:
Outside storage of combustible materials shall not be located within ten (10) feet of a lot line nor shall outdoor storage be closer
than fifteen (15) feet to any structure.
SECTION 503 - FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 200/426
Add as an additional section:
503.1.4 Approval
The location of the fire apparatus roads or fire lanes shall be reviewed and approved by the Jurisdictional Fire Protection District.
503.2.1 Dimensions
Delete 13 feet 6 inches and replace with fifteen feet (15').
503.2.3 Surface
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
Fire apparatus access roads or fire lanes shall have a solid surface capable of supporting the appropriate fire apparatus. Fire
apparatus roads or fire lanes shall be pitched in such a manner as to allow the runoff of water and eliminate the potential of
standing water. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the surface in a usable condition at all times, including
the removal of snow.
The minimum clear height shall be fifteen feet (15').
SECTION 506 - KEY BOXES
506.1 When Required
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
Unless expressly waived in writing by the Fire Code Official, a minimum of one key lock box must be installed in an accessible
location and at a height not to exceed six (6) feet, for any commercial, industrial, or multi-family structure, or any other area that is
unduly difficult to access because of either secured openings or other impediments to gaining access to fire protection controls. All
buildings with automatic fire alarm systems and/or automatic fire suppression sprinkler systems shall have installed an approved
key lock box for access by fire department personnel. The key lock box shall be of an approved type and shall contain keys to gain
access as required by the Fire Code Official.
The appropriate Fire Protection District shall make recommendations for Knox Boxes in one and two-family dwellings.
506.1.1 Locks
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
The Fire Code Official shall first approve any lock installed on gates or similar barriers.
506.1.2 Key Boxes for Nonstandardized Fire Service Elevator Keys
Delete in its entirety.
506.2 Key Lock Box Maintenance
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
The operator of the building shall immediately notify the Fire Code Official and provide the new key when a lock is changed or rekeyed.
The key to such lock shall be secured in the key lock box. The users shall be responsible for the proper installation and
maintenance of such key lock boxes, at their expense, and shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the Jurisdictional Fire
Protection Districts, the Village, and their officers, employees and agents from any liability with respect to such key lock boxes.
SECTION 507 - FIRE PROTECTION WATER SUPPLIES
Add as an additional section:
507.1.1 General
All water distribution facilities including piping, fittings, hydrants, valves, devices, well pumps, and other needful appurtenances
shall be subject to approval of the Fire Code Official and shall be installed according to the standards herein adopted. A water
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 201/426
supply system shall be capable of supplying the hydrants prior to the construction of structures. It shall be unlawful to erect, alter,
use or occupy any structure that has been deemed to have inadequate water supply.
Add as an additional section:
507.1.2 Water Supply Demand Changes
Area water supplies shall be studied whenever additional demands will be placed on the water supply by new construction, change
in use, or changes in hazard or contents. Standard fire flow calculation methods will be used to make determinations. Upon
determination by the Fire Code Official that inadequate water supplies exist, the Fire Code Official shall reject any applicable plans
and provide the property owner, the water utility, and the Building Official with a memorandum listing said deficiencies.
Add as an additional section:
507.1.3 Rural Water Supply Demand Changes
In any subdivision/development, where an adequate water distribution system is not provided, the Fire Code Official shall require
the sub-divider, developer, builder and/or the owner to modify storm water control devices, so as to provide a pond within a
maximum distance of 2,000 feet of all buildings within the development. It shall conform to the standard of NFPA 1142. The pond
must be a minimum depth of five (5) feet and provide a minimum of 500,000 gallons of available water. (See Appendix A additional
rural water supply requirements).
507.2 Type of Water Supply
Add as additional to this end of this section:
The minimum size of water main shall be eight inches (8").
Add as an additional section:
507.3.1 Minimum Flow Requirements
Each fire hydrant shall be provided with an adequate water supply so as to develop a minimum individual supply of not less than
one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute flow with not less than 20 pounds per square inch (psi) residual pressure for a municipal
public water supply system.
Non-public municipal water supply system the minimum fire flow shall be 500 hundred (500) gallons per minute (gpm) with not less
than 20 pounds per square inch (psi).
Add as an additional section:
507.5.1.2 General
Additional fire hydrant shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of any Fire Department Connection (FDC). Hydrants shall not
be installed on a water main less than six (6) inches in diameter. Dead end water mains shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet of
six (6) inch pipe and six hundred (600) feet of eight (8) inch pipe. It is recommended that a looped water main system with a
minimum pipe diameter of eight (8) inches be required for each structure or group of structures.
Add as an additional section:
507.5.7 Identification
All fire hydrants public or private shall be marked with a number, hydrant flag that extends above the fire hydrant, and painted a
color approved by the Fire Code Official in cooperation with the Village of Hawthorn Woods and the respective water service
provider. At dry fire hydrants provide signs with the wording "No Parking" with arrows and Fire Hydrant symbol.
Add as an additional section:
507.5.8 Apartment and Cluster Type Housing
In areas where apartment buildings, town/row houses, condominium buildings, or other types of cluster-type housing are located,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 202/426
the area along the roadway within seven and one-half feet on either side of the fire hydrant shall be designated as "NO PARKING"
and either the curb shall be painted yellow or "NO PARKING" signs shall be installed (or both).
Add as an additional section:
507.5.9 Unauthorized Use
It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize any device such as a fire hydrant, drafting hydrant, dry hydrant, or other water supply
appurtenances designed for fire suppression operations without the express permission of the Fire Code Official.
SECTION 511 - ELEVATORS
Add as an additional section:
511.1 When Required
Provide elevator service for new multi-level buildings that exceed 1000 square feet of floor area in accordance with State of Illinois
Accessibility Code requirements for elevators.
Exception: One and two-family dwellings, unless covered elsewhere in this Fire Code.
Add as an additional section:
511.2 Elevator Car Requirements
Elevator cars are to accommodate the ambulance stretcher. In the buildings two stories in height or more, at least one elevator
shall be of such a size and arrangement to accommodate a 24-inch by 84-inch ambulance stretcher in the horizontal, open position
and shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency medical services (Star of Life). The symbol shall not be less than
3 inches high and shall be placed inside on both sides of the hoist way doorframe.
The inside hand rail shall be set at the maximum thirty-six-inch (36") height allowed under Americans with Disability Act standards
to better accommodate the stretcher. The cab size is to be minimum a 5' x 7' platform and minimum 2500 lb capacity with a fortytwo-
inch (42") side slide door.
SECTION 609 - COMMERCIAL KITCHEN HOODS
Add as an additional section:
609.5 Required Kitchen Hood Fire Suppression Systems
All required commercial or other occupancy kitchen exhaust hood and duct system shall be protected with an approved wet
chemical fire suppression system installed and maintained per NFPA 17 A, and UL 300 Standard. Every required automatic fire
suppression system, when activated, shall transmit a fire alarm signal to the Fire Protection District main communication center via
an approved fire alarm system.
Add as an additional section:
609.6 Maintenance
Commercial kitchen exhaust systems shall be cleaned to remove deposits of residue and grease in the system at intervals
specified in the cleaning schedule required to be submitted in accordance with the mechanical code listed in Chapter 80. Thorough
cleaning of ducts, hoods and fans shall require scraping, brushing or other positive cleaning methods.
Add as an additional section:
609.7 Cleaning Schedule
Where a cleaning schedule is not on file, the Fire Code Official shall require a schedule to be submitted, indicating the method of
cleaning and the time intervals between cleanings.
SECTION 903 - AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
903.2 Where Required
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 203/426
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in all Use Groups described in this Fire
Code. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed in accordance with applicable NFPA standards, manufacturer's
recommendations, UL listings, and good fire safety practices. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be maintained in full operating
condition at all times. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in all new residential Use Groups, including townhomes/multifamily
dwellings, which are adopted by this Fire Code. All new townhomes/multi-family dwellings shall have automatic fire sprinklers
installed throughout per NFPA 13R or 13D.
Exceptions:
1. New one and two family dwellings, unless covered elsewhere in this Code.
2. Detached structures which comply with all of the following do not require automatic fire sprinkler protection.
a. Less than one-thousand (1,000) square feet in floor area
b. Single story
c. Not used as a dwelling
d. Not a High Hazard Use Group
e. Not used for high hazard products or hazardous materials storage
f. No basement level
g. Minimum twenty feet (20') separation between buildings
3. Detached Real estate sales and construction trailers utilized during the development of property when approved by the Fire
Code Official, agriculture storage buildings less than eight-thousand (8,000) square feet in fire area.
903.2.1 through 903.2.11.6
Delete these sections in their entireties.
903.2.12 During Construction
Renumber this section to 903.2.1
Add as an additional section:
903.3.1.4 Specification Warehouse and Storage Buildings.
Unknown specification use and occupancy for new warehouse buildings (Use groups S or F) with a ceiling roof height of twenty-five
feet (25') or greater to be protected with ESFR (Early Suppression Fast Response) fire sprinkler system or a hydraulically
calculated system for class IV commodities with rack storage calculated to the greatest storage height. All sprinkler systems shall
be electronically supervised by a fire alarm system.
903.4 Sprinkler Systems Supervision and Alarms
Delete exceptions 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, and add the following:
All automatic fire suppression systems required for occupancies in Use Groups A, B, E, F, H, I, M, S, R-1, R-2 and R-3, shall be
supervised by directly connecting to the main dispatch center for the fire department with NFPA 72 and their respective listing by an
approved agency.
903.4.2 Alarms
Delete this section entirely and insert:
Approved audible devices shall be connected to every automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water flow alarm devices shall be
activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. All water flow
devices shall activate alarm notification devices in compliance with NFPA 13 and 72. Where a fire alarm system is installed,
actuation of the automatic sprinkler shall activate the building fire alarm system. When there are multiple tenants or uses, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 204/426
activation of a water flow device in any area of the building will activate all alarm notification devices in the building and structure.
Add as an additional section:
903.4.2.2 Building Notification
Where feasible, alarm indicating appliances audio visual devices shall be provided, seen and heard in all areas of every building
per NFPA 72. All fire sprinkler buildings shall be provided with occupant notification devices. This will provide full building
notification per NFPA 72.
Add as an additional section:
903.4.2.3 Inspector's Test Valve Accessibility and Identification
Fire sprinkler system inspector's test valves shall be accessible at all times and located no more than six feet (6') above the finished
floor unless approved otherwise by the Fire Code Official. On multiple riser systems, test valves shall be marked as to which riser
and area it tests.
903.4.3 Floor Control Valves
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
In multi-story buildings, approved supervised indicating floor control valves with water flow switches shall be provided for each floor
at the point of connection to the riser. In large multi-tenant buildings, approved control valves with water flow switches shall be
provided for each tenant. This will make it easier for the fire department personnel to locate the fire and will eliminate birdcage
sprinkler systems where the alarm is for the whole building.
Add as an additional section:
903.4.3.1 Sprinkler Control Valves
All new and existing sprinkler control valves shall be equipped with electronic supervision (tamper switches) in accordance with
NFPA 72. All new tamper switches installed shall have the capability to self-restore. All supervisory signals shall be transmitted to
the Fire Protection District communication center.
Add as an additional section:
903.6.1 Increasing Existing Gross Floor Area by 25% or More and up to 50%
Fire protection for additions that increase the existing gross floor area of a building or structure by twenty-five percent (25%) or
more and up to fifty percent (50%):
1. Provide fire protection for the entire building or structure as detailed in 903.2 or
2. Provide a UL listed three hour fire separation assembly between the existing building and the new addition. Provide fire
protection for the new addition as detailed in 903.2.
Exception: One- and two-family dwellings
Add as an additional section:
903.6.2 Increasing Existing Gross Floor Area by More Than 50%
Fire protection as detailed in 903.2 shall be required for the entire building or structure for additions that increase the existing gross
floor area of a building or structure by more than fifty percent (50%).
Exception: One- and two-family dwellings
Add as an additional section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 205/426
903.7 Automatic Sprinklers
Where automatic sprinklers provide protection to an area with an approved flow switch interconnected to the fire alarm system, and
area is easily identifiable as to the location, additional automatic detectors are not required. When a building has numerous rooms
protected by the zone sprinkler system, the Fire Code Official may require additional smoke detectors for a more rapid means to
identify the location of smoke or fire.
Add as an additional section:
903.8 Hydraulic Nameplate
By each hydraulically calculated area, on each drawing, provide a copy of the hydraulic nameplate. This will make it easier to check
the hydraulics of the sprinkler system for future building or storage changes.
Add as an additional section:
903.9 References to NFPA Standards
All listed references to NFPA standards are to be considered part of this Fire Code. This will require sprinkler system installations to
be installed per NFPA requirements and NFPA recommendations for good engineering practices and installations. The appendices
of all NFPA standards are to be considered as part of each standard and are considered mandatory (a "shall" requirement) and not
merely advisory ("should" information). This will require sprinkler system installations, when not in conflict with this Fire Code, to be
installed per NFPA requirements and NFPA recommendations for good engineering practices and installations.
Add as an additional section:
903.10 Fire Pump Test Header
Provide an outside test header on all fire pump installations. An OS&Y control valve shall be provided on all fire pump test headers.
Add as an additional section:
903.11 Sprinkler Riser and/or Fire Pump Room Access Door
Provide an outside access door to the sprinkler riser room and/or fire pump room that opens to street or parking lot. The door shall
be labeled with minimum four-inch (4") letters.
Add as an additional section:
903.12 Separation of Sprinkler Riser and/or Fire Pump Room
Provide a minimum one hour separation of the sprinkler riser room and/or pump room.
Add as an additional section:
903.13 Hydraulic Calculations
Provide a minimum 5 psi minimum safety factor in the fire protection system hydraulic calculation. The system demand shall be
5 psi minimum below the seasonal low water flow test supply. The safety factor will allow for low pressures in the water supply. By
each hydraulic calculated area, on each drawing, provide a copy of the hydraulic nameplate. This will make it easier to check the
hydraulics of the sprinkler system for future building or storage changes.
Add as an additional section:
903.14 Fire Hose Valves - Warehouse and/or Storage Fire Areas
In all warehouse storage areas exceeding 50,000 square feet, and where storage exceeds twelve feet (12') high, provide inside
two-and-a-half-inch (21/2") fire hose valves with one-and-a-half-inch (11/2") reducer to a one-and-a-half-inch (11/2") connection.
Locate the valves at each door entrance to the warehouse and/or storage area. Provide additional two-and-a-half-inch (21/2") fire
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 206/426
hose valves so that no portion of the warehouse and/or storage area is more than one-hundred-and-twenty-foot (120') maximum
travel distance to a fire hose valve. Show the location of all obstructions and/or racks on the drawing.
Fire hose valves system piping shall be:
1. A separate riser piping system.
2. The two-and-a-half-inch (21/2") valves shall be supplied by a minimum of a two-and-a-half-inch (21/2") drop to each valve.
3. Where system pressures exceed one-hundred (100) psi, provide Potter manufacturer reduced pressure field adjustable type valves
approved per the Jurisdictional Fire Protection District.
Add as an additional section:
903.15 Large Warehouse System Check Valves
Provide a check valve for each sprinkler riser on large warehouse systems. This will prevent multiple sprinkler system riser flow
switches from activating (backwards) when large volumes of water are flowing through another riser.
SECTION 905 - STANDPIPE SYSTEMS
905.3 Required Installations
Add the following at the end of the section before the Exception:
All required standpipe systems shall be supplied by a separate riser. The supply riser shall be hydraulically designed to supply twoand-
a-half-inch (21/2") hose drops. The riser system shall be equipped with a separate control valve and flow switch. The standpipe
shall be a two-and-a-half-inch (21/2") gated connection with a one-and-a-half-inch (11/2") reducer to a one-and-a-half-inch (11/2")
connection and all locations shall be approved by the Fire Code Official. All standpipe and sprinkler risers shall have separate
control valves and flow switches per floor.
905.3.1 Height
Delete in its entirety, except for the Exceptions, and replace with the following:
Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings or structures (1) in all newly constructed buildings so that all
areas in excess of one-hundred-and-twenty feet (120') from the nearest point of entry to the building shall be covered by a
standpipe; (2) in all areas of existing structures which have been remodeled or added to in such a manner that those areas are
located in excess of one-hundred-and-twenty feet (120') from the nearest point of entry to the building; (3) in all newly constructed
buildings or structures more than two (2) stories in height or more than two (2) stories below the highest level of fire department
vehicle access so that all areas on those floors are within one-hundred-twenty feet (120') of a standpipe; and (4) in all buildings or
structures more than two (2) stories in height or more than two (2) stories below the highest level of fire department vehicle access
which have been remodeled or added to in such a manner so that those areas are located in excess of one-hundred-twenty feet
(120') from the nearest standpipe. The standpipes shall be provided with a two-and-a-half-inch (21/2") to one-and-a-half-inch (11/2")
reducer and cap with no fire hose. There shall be an approved fire department connection at grade and hose connections located
at each floor level.
Add as an additional section:
905.12 Piping Design
The riser piping, supply piping and the water service piping shall be sized to maintain a residual pressure of at least sixty-five (65)
psi (448kPa) at the topmost outlet of each riser. The piping size shall be based on the capacity of the automatic water supply
system or, whereas automatic water supply is neither required nor provided to maintain the residual pressure of sixty-five (65) psi,
the pipe size shall be on a pressure of one-hundred-and-fifty (150) psi available at the fire department connection.
Exception: The residual pressure of sixty-five (65) psi is not required in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 903.3 and where the highest floor level is not more than one-hundred-and-fifty (150) feet above
the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
Exception: One- and two-family dwellings
Add as an additional section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 207/426
905.13 Riser Sizing
The riser size shall be based on the hydraulic calculations for a minimum flow of five-hundred (500) gallons per minute (gpm)
(1892 L/min.).
Exceptions:
1. Where only one-and-a-half-inch (11/2") valves are provided, the riser(s) shall be sized to provide a minimum flow of one-hundred
(100) gpm (378 L/min).
2. In buildings where limited area sprinkler systems are supplied with water from a common standpipe riser, the riser shall be sized
to satisfy total demand.
3. For occupancies Use Group B, I, R1, or R2 in buildings that are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3, each riser shall be sized for a minimum flow of two-hundred-and-fifty (250) gpm (946 L/min.).
4. Risers that are sized in accordance with the pipe schedule requirements of NFPA 14 listed in Chapter 35 are not subject to this
requirement.
Add as an additional section:
905.14 System Pipe Sizing
The system piping, including the horizontal or common feeder lines, shall be sized for a minimum flow of five-hundred (500) gpm
(1892 L/min.). Where more than one standpipe riser is required or provided, all common system piping shall be sized for a
minimum flow of five-hundred (500) gpm (1892 L/min.) for the first riser plus two-hundred-and-fifty (250) gpm (946 L/min.) for each
additional riser, and the total shall not be required to exceed one-thousand-two-hundred-and-fifty (1,250) gpm (4731 L/min.).
Exception:
1. Where only one-and-a-half-inch (11/2") valves are provided, the supply piping shall be sized for a minimum flow of one-hundred
(100) gpm (378 L/min.) for each riser, and the total shall not be required to exceed five-hundred (500) gpm (1892 L/min.).
2. In buildings where limited area sprinkler systems are supplied with water from a common standpipe riser, the supply piping shall
be sized for a minimum flow of five-hundred (500) gpm (1892 L/min.) plus the sprinkler demand for first riser, plus two-hundred-andfifty
(250) gpm (946 L/min.) for each additional riser, and the total shall be required to exceed one-thousand-two-hundred-and-fifty
(1,250) gpm (4731 L/min.).
3. For occupancies in Use Group B, I, R-1, or R2 in buildings that are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance with Section 903.3, all common supply piping shall be sized for a minimum flow of two-hundred-and-fifty (250) gpm
(946 L/min.) for the first riser plus two-hundred-and-fifty (250) gpm (946 L/min.) for each additional riser, and the total shall not be
required to exceed seven-hundred-and-fifty (750) gpm (2839 L/min.).
SECTION 907 - FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
907.1.3 Equipment
Add the following at the end of this section:
New fire alarm control panels shall be addressable unless otherwise approved by the Fire Code Official. The equipment shall be
capable of having the audio signal silence without resetting the fire alarm control panel. All fire alarm control panels shall have an
approved method of placing the system in trouble mode at the location of the alarm panel.
907.2 Where Required - New Buildings and Structures
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
An approved manual, automatic, or manual and automatic fire alarm system shall be provided in all Use Groups of new buildings
and structures in accordance with sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23. Fire alarm systems shall be maintained in full operating
condition at all times. All fire alarm control panels or full function annunciator panels shall be installed within ten feet (10') of the
main entrance, or in a location approved by the Fire Code Official. Occupant notification shall be in accordance with section 907.6
unless other requirements are provided by another section of this Fire Code. Where automatic sprinkler protection is installed in
accordance with section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and connected to the building fire alarm system, automatic heat detection required
by this section shall not be required. An approved automatic fire detection system shall be installed in all Use Groups, not provided
with an automatic sprinkler system, in accordance with the provisions of this Fire Code and NFPA 72. Devices, combinations of
devices, appliances and equipment shall comply with Section 907.1.2.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 208/426
The automatic fire detectors shall be smoke detectors, except that an approved alternative type of detector shall be installed in
spaces such as boiler rooms where, during normal operation, products of combustion are present in sufficient quantity to actuate a
smoke detector.
Exception: One and two family homes, unless specified elsewhere by this Fire Code.
907.2.1 Group A
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 in all Group A occupancies.
907.2.1.1 System Initiation in Group A Occupancies with an Occupant Load of 1,000 or more.
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
An automatic fire alarm detection system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 in Group A-2 occupancies that have an
occupant load of fifty (50) or more persons.
907.2.2 Group B
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.2.1 Ambulatory Care Facilities
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.3 Group E
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.4 Group F
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.5 Group H
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
A manual fire alarm system shall be installed in Group H occupancies. An automatic detection system shall be installed for highly
toxic materials, organic peroxides, oxidizers, oxidizing gases and oxidizing cryogenic fluids in accordance with Chapters 60, 62 and
63, respectively.
907.2.6 Group I
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.6.1 Group I-1
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.6.1.1 Smoke Alarms
Renumber and rename this section as follows:
907.2.6 Group I-1 Smoke Alarms
907.2.6.2 Group I-2
Renumber this section as 907.2.7
907.2.6.3 Group I-3 Occupancies
Renumber this section as 907.2.8
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 209/426
907.2.6.3.1 System Initiation
Renumber this section as 907.2.8.1
907.2.6.3.2 Manual Fire Alarm Boxes
Renumber this section as 907.2.8.2
907.2.6.3.2.1 Manual Fire Alarms Boxes in Detainee Areas
Renumber this section as 907.2.8.2.1
907.2.6.3.3 Automatic Smoke Detection System
Renumber this section as 907.2.8.2.2
907.2.7 Group M
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.7.1 Occupant Notification
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.8 Group R-1
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.8.1 Manual Fire Alarm System
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.8.2 Automatic Smoke Detection System
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.8.3 Smoke Alarms
Renumber and rename this section as the following:
907.2.8 Group R-1 Smoke Alarms
907.2.9 Group R-2
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.9.1 Manual Fire Alarm System
Delete this section in its entirety.
907.2.9.2 Smoke Alarms
Renumber and rename this section as the following:
907.2.9 Group R-2 Smoke Alarms
907.2.11 Single- and Multiple-Station Smoke Alarms
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
Listed single- and multiple-station smoke alarms complying with UL 217 shall be installed in accordance with Sections 907.2.11.1
through 907.2.11.6, NFPA 72, the current State of Illinois Smoke Detector Act (425 ILCS 60/1, et. seq.), and all the rules and
regulations of the Illinois State Fire Marshal.
907.2.11.1 Group R-1
Add the following numbers to this section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 210/426
4. Within 15 feet outside of any sleeping area
5. At the top of every stair
6. Within 15 feet of any furnace
907.2.11.2 Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1
Add the following numbers to this section:
4. Within 15 feet outside of any sleeping area
5. At the top of every stair
6. Within 15 feet of any furnace
907.2.11.6 Power Source
Delete the Exception and replace with the following:
Exceptions
1. An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units and
where each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an exit or to an exterior exit access that leads directly to
an exit.
2. Group R-3 smoke alarms are to be one-hundred-and-twenty (120) volt with a battery backup.
3. Smoke alarms are not required to be equipped with battery backup in Group R-1 where they are connected to an emergency
electrical system.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.8 Installation Compliance
Listed single-and multi-station smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this Fire Code and the
household fire warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72. When a system is installed within a dwelling unit it shall comply with UL
217.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.8.1 Where Required in Existing One- and Two-Family Dwellings
All existing one and two family residences shall have installed therein smoke detectors in accordance with Illinois Smoke Detector
Act. Every single-family residence shall have at least one smoke detector installed on every story, including basements, but not
including unoccupied attics. Smoke detectors shall be installed in each room used for sleeping purposes and within fifteen feet (15')
of the entrances of all rooms used for sleeping purposes. The signal shall be clearly audible within each room used for sleeping
purposes over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. In single-family residences with split-levels, a smoke
detector installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level if the lower level is less than one full story below the
upper level. However, if there is an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke detector shall be installed on each level.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.8.2 Alterations, Repairs, and Additions
When interior alterations, repairs or additions requiring a permit occur, or when one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in
existing dwellings, the individual dwelling unit shall be provided with smoke alarms located as required for new dwellings; the
smoke alarms shall be interconnected and hard-wired.
Exceptions:
1. Smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required to be interconnected and hardwired where the alterations or repairs do not
result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space, or basement
available which could provide access for hard wiring and interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 211/426
2. Repairs to the exterior surfaces of dwellings are exempt from the requirements of this section.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.8.3 Mounting the Detector
All smoke detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling at least six-inches (6") from the wall, or on the wall six (6) to twelve (12) inches
from the ceiling, except that all smoke detectors in interior common stairwells shall be on the uppermost ceiling.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.8.4 Responsibility for Installation
In single family and two family residences, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the building or structure to supply and install
all required smoke detectors. The owner shall be responsible for making reasonable efforts to test and maintain smoke detectors in
interior common stairwells.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.8.5 Maintenance of Detectors
It shall be the responsibility of the tenant to test and provide general maintenance for the smoke detectors within the tenant's
dwelling unit and to notify the owner or an authorized agent of the owner, in writing, of any deficiencies, which the tenant cannot
correct. The owner shall be responsible for providing the tenant with written information regarding smoke detector testing and
maintenance.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.8.6 Battery Replacement
The tenant shall be responsible for replacement of any required batteries in the smoke detectors in the tenant's dwelling unit,
except that the owner shall ensure that such batteries are in operating condition at the time the tenant takes possession of the
dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the owner or the authorized agent of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to correct any
deficiencies in the smoke detector(s), which have been reported in writing to the owner or authorized agent of the owner.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.8.7 Low-Voltage System
At the option of the owner of the building or structure, a low-voltage, standard central smoke detection system may be installed in a
one or two-family dwelling in lieu of battery-powered smoke detectors or hard-wired smoke detectors, provided that such lowvoltage
standard central smoke detection system meets the requirements for such a system set forth in this Chapter or is otherwise
approved by the Fire Code Official.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.9 Existing Multi-Family Buildings - Three or More Dwelling Units
All multi-family buildings whether existing or constructed hereafter, shall have installed therein hard-wired smoke detectors with
battery backup as provided in this subsection.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.9.1 Smoke Detector Locations
1. Each room used for sleeping purposes.
Exception: Existing multi-family buildings and structures have the option to install battery powered smoke detectors in lieu of hardwired
in sleeping areas. Hard-wire smoke detectors with battery back-up is preferred.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 212/426
2. In the immediate vicinity (minimum of fifteen feet) of all entrances to rooms used for sleeping purposes.
3. Within fifteen feet (15') of any furnace.
4. A smoke detector shall be installed in each interior common stairwell (at the top of the stairs).
5. A smoke detector shall be installed in each interior common corridor or hallway at intervals of not more than thirty feet (30').
6. A smoke detector shall be installed within each laundry room, boiler, electrical and other service room, and each tenant and
building maintenance storage room. The Fire Code Official is authorized to require an approved alternative type of detector be
installed where, during normal operation, products or combustion or other conditions are present in sufficient quantity to actuate a
smoke detector.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.9.2 Access for Maintenance
The tenant shall provide the owner or authorized agent of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to check, clean, test, maintain,
repair and replace all smoke detectors therein.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.9.3 Low-Voltage Standard Smoke Detection System Locations
The low-voltage, standard central smoke detection system shall be installed in all interior common stairwells, interior common
corridors or hallways, laundry rooms, boiler, electrical and other service rooms, and tenant and building maintenance and storage
rooms. The smoke detection devices connected to the low-voltage, standard central smoke detection system shall be located as
provided in 907.3.9.1.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.9.4 Hard-Wired Smoke Detector Locations
A hard-wired smoke detector with battery back-up shall be installed in each room used for sleeping purposes. When more than one
smoke detector is installed, all smoke detectors shall be so wired so that the actuation of one detector shall activate all the
detectors in the dwelling unit.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.9.5 Annunciator Panel and Panel Control Box
Each smoke detection device connected to the low-voltage, standard central smoke detection system shall be connected to an
annunciator and a panel control box.
1. The annunciator panel shall have a visual indicator of alarm location and be installed in the entrance or on the exterior of each
building or structure at the entrance, in a waterproof enclosure, as directed by the Fire Official.
2. There shall be Americans with Disability Act (ADA) compliant horn/strobes installed in the interior common corridors, hallways,
and stairwells leading to the dwelling units, which are clearly audible within such dwelling units over background noise levels with
all intervening doors closed.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.9.6 Fire Alarm Supervision
All new low-voltage, standard central smoke detection system installed shall be connected to the Jurisdictional Fire Protection
District Communication Dispatch Center via two-way radio transmitter at the time the system is placed into operation.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.9.7 Responsibility Maintenance
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 213/426
In multi-family buildings or structures it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the building or structure or authorized agent of the
owner thereof to install, maintain, repair, and replace, if necessary, the low-voltage, standard central smoke detection system
required hereby.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.9.8 Maintenance and Testing
The owner or authorized agent of the owner shall also be responsible for the continuous maintenance of such system through no
less than an annual inspection and testing thereof performed under a written maintenance agreement with a reliable firm actively
engaged in the servicing of such systems. A copy of each maintenance agreement shall be accompanied by a written report and a
copy of such report shall be promptly delivered to the Jurisdictional Fire Protection District. Further, the current maintenance
agreement and latest report shall be made available at all reasonable times for inspection by duly authorized personnel of the
Jurisdictional Fire Protection District Bureau of Fire Prevention.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.9.9 Power Source Existing Multi-Family Buildings - Three or More Dwelling Units
Smoke alarms are not required to be equipped with battery backup where they are connected to an emergency electrical system.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.9.10 Heat Detection Device
Where a heat detection device or combination heat and smoke detection device will be more effective than a smoke detector as a
result of conditions within the area in which the device is located, the heat detection device or combination heat and smoke
detection device shall be installed in place of a smoke detector at the direction of the Fire Code Official. The combination heat and
smoke detection device shall bear the testing label of a nationally recognized, independent testing laboratory and shall meet the
requirements of NFPA 72.
Add as an additional section:
907.2.11.9.11 Duct Smoke Detectors
Duct detectors shall be installed inside the building in a temperature controlled environment.
907.4.2 Manual Fire Alarm Boxes
Add the following at the end of the section and add the Exception:
Manual fire alarm boxes shall be installed in all Use Groups described in this Fire Code; they shall be installed in accordance with
Sections 907.4.2.1 through 907.4.2.5
Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes shall not be required in Group E occupancies where the building is equipped throughout with an
approved automatic sprinkler system, the notification appliances will activate on sprinkler water flow and manual activation is
provided from a normally occupied location.
Add as an additional section:
907.6.4.3 Multi-Tenant Use Group M, F and S Buildings
Multi-tenant Use Group M, F and S buildings will be "ring by tenant" activated by a fire sprinkler system flow switch for that space or
automatic fire detection and shall include a weatherproof clear outside strobe over the entrance to each tenant space as directed by
the Fire Code Official. All outside strobes shall be seventy-five (75) candela minimum.
907.6.6 Monitoring
Delete in its entirety, including the Exceptions, and replace with the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 214/426
All required fire protective signaling systems located within the Fire Protection Districts shall transmit alarm, supervisory, and
trouble signals to the main dispatch center for the Fire Protection District. This connection shall be made with a two-way radio
transmitter installed at each location. All required fire protective signaling systems shall report to the Fire Protection District main
communication center via a two-way radio transmitter. Future methods of connection shall be determined by the Fire Official.
Exceptions:
1. Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms required within dwelling units.
2. Smoke detectors in Group 1-3 occupancies.
3. Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings.
907.9 Existing Buildings.
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
When an existing building is expanded in size to a total of three-thousand (3,000) square feet or greater, the entire building shall
comply with the requirements of Section 903. The requirement shall be subject to the review and interpretation by the Village.
Add as an additional section:
907.10 False Fire Alarm Activation
False fire alarm: Any alarm signal which indicates the existence of an emergency situation, when in fact no such emergency exists,
and shall include any alarm signal generated by any fire protection system by whatever means, but shall not include alarms from
the following causes.
1. Fire which causes structural damage to the protected premises.
2. Earthquake causing structural damage to the protected premises.
3. Tornado winds causing structural damage to the protected premises.
4. Flooding to the protected premises due to overflow of natural drainage.
5. Lightning causing physical damage to the protected premises.
6. Telephone line malfunction verified in writing by an authorized telephone company supervisor within seven calendar days of the
occurrence.
7. Electrical service interruption verified in writing by an authorized local power company supervisor within seven calendar days of
the occurrence.
Add as an additional section:
907.10.1 False Fire Alarm Service Charge
For false fire alarms, an alarm user shall be charged a service charge of one-hundred dollars ($100.00) for each false alarm in
excess of three (3) in any calendar year. All false fire alarm service charges shall be remitted to the Jurisdictional Fire Protection
District by the alarm user upon receipt of the statement for such service charge.
Add as an additional section:
907.10.2 Newly Installed Fire Alarm Allowance
Special consideration will be given to fire alarm users should false fire alarms occur during the first three months after the user's
alarm service was commenced.
Add as an additional section:
907.10.3 Liability
The Jurisdictional Fire Protection District assumes no liability for:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 215/426
1. Any defects in the operation of an alarm system.
2. Any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm.
3. Any failure or neglect of any person in connection with the installation, operation, or maintenance of any alarm system.
4. The transmission of alarm signals, prerecorded alarm messages, or the relaying of such signals and messages.
Add as an additional section:
907.10.4 Intentional False Fire Alarm
No person shall deliberately or maliciously turn in an alarm of fire when in fact that person knows that no fire exists. No person shall
activate any installed fire warning system or any fixed fire extinguishing system for purposes other than emergency, maintenance,
drills, or prescribed testing.
Add as an additional section:
SECTION 912 - FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS
912.1 Installation
Add the following sentence at the end of this section:
All fire department connections shall be five-inch (5") Storz with a thirty degree downturn unless a different configuration has been
approved by the Jurisdictional Fire Protection District.
SECTION 1008 - MEANS OF EGRESS ILLUMINATION
1008.3.3 Rooms and Spaces
Add the following new paragraph at the end of the section:
6. All rooms containing the building fire sprinkler riser(s), fire pump(s) and fire alarm control panel(s) shall be provided with
approved emergency lighting.
SECTION 5602 - DEFINITIONS
5602.1 Definitions
Add the following language after the definition of Fireworks 1.3G:
Fireworks: The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances,
or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion,
combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the type of
balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky-rockets, Roman candles, bombs, or other
fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device containing any
explosive substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects, provided, however, that the term "fireworks"
shall not include trick noise makers known as "party poppers", "booby traps", and "snappers"; sparklers, toy pistols, toy canes, toy
guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive compound are
used, providing they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy
pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than twenty hundredths grains of explosive mixture.
APPENDIX B - FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS
Add as an additional section:
B103.4 Dry Hydrants
In any subdivision/development, where a water distribution system for fire protection is not provided, the Jurisdictional Fire
Protection district may require the owner to modify storm water control basins, lakes or ponds, to provide a pond with a minimum
depth of five feet (5') and to install a dry hydrant that conforms to the standard of NFPA 1142 and the approval of the Fire Code
Official with a suction pipe from the middle of the pond. The dry hydrant shall be installed on the road or street right of way or
easement proposed to be installed within the subdivision/development and shall meet the standards established by the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 216/426
Jurisdictional Fire Protection District. It shall be unlawful to erect any structure in any subdivision/development prior to completion of
any required fire protection water supply equipment as required by this fire code.
Add as an additional section:
B103.4.1 Distribution
Where the configuration of lots, distance between buildings and lot lines or public utility easements, accessibility to building or fire
suppression requirements requires stricter review, the Fire Code Official shall require additional dry hydrants as deemed necessary.
Add as an additional section:
B103.4.2 Fire Flow
The total gallons per minute, which dry hydrants shall be required to produce, shall be determined by the structure being served by
the dry hydrant. In no case shall the dry hydrant produce less than one-thousand (1,000) gallons per minute.
Add as an additional section:
B103.4.3 Location
The precise location of and specifications for dry hydrant(s) shall be subject to the review and approval of the Fire Code Official
prior to installation of the system.
Add as an additional section:
B103.4.4 Professional Plan Review
The dry hydrant plan submitted for review may be subject to review by an outside professional engineer or building and fire code
consultant. The submitted party will incur all associated costs of outside professional services.
Add as an additional section:
B103.4.5 Permitted Use
It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize any fire protection devices such as drafting pits, dry hydrants or other water supply
appurtenance designed for fire-fighting operations without the express permission of the Jurisdictional Fire Protection District.
Add as an additional section:
B103.4.6 Maintenance
All dry hydrants shall be maintained free from obstructions. The access to any area surrounding the dry hydrant shall be properly
cleared of obstacles, which may hide or impede the use of the dry hydrant. Furthermore, the dry hydrant shall be maintained in
working order at all times, capable of delivering the minimum required flow.
Responsibility of maintaining, repairing, replacing and/or dredging of dry hydrants within a subdivision/development shall be the
responsibility of the appropriate property owners associations. In the absence of a property owners association, each dry hydrant
will be addressed on an individual property owner responsibility basis.
Add as an additional section:
B103.4.7 Signage
The Jurisdictional Fire Protection District may require the property owner or his designated agent to install "No Parking - Fire
Hydrant" or other signs as needed. The Jurisdictional Fire Protection District may require the dry hydrants to be painted a certain
color.
(Ord. 1803-17, 12-13-2017)
8-1-6: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 217/426
This section shall be known and cited as the HAWTHORN WOODS PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
A. Property Maintenance Code Created: There is created and established, in and for the Village of Hawthorn Woods, the Hawthorn Woods
Property Maintenance Code.
B. Adoption Of The International Property Maintenance Code: The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as amended
and as issued and promulgated by the International Code Council, three (3) copies of which have been on file in the Village Hall for at
least thirty (30) days prior hereto, and open to public inspection, by this reference is incorporated herein in its entirety and adopted as
the Hawthorn Woods Property Maintenance Code with the amendments contained herein.
The Hawthorn Woods Property Maintenance Code is adopted for the purpose of regulating and governing the conditions and
maintenance of all properties, buildings and structures: by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical
things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of
buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy as hereafter set forth in the Village of Hawthorn Woods, Lake County, Illinois,
applicable to existing buildings or structures.
C. Amendments To The International Property Maintenance Code:
SECTION 101 - GENERAL
101.1 Title
Delete in its entirety and replace with the following:
These regulations shall be known as the Hawthorn Woods Property Maintenance Code, hereinafter sometimes referred to as "this
code". The Village of Hawthorn Woods is hereinafter referred to as "Village".
SECTION 102 - APPLICABILITY
102.3 Application of Other Codes
Replace "International Electric Code" and "International Plumbing Code" with "National Electrical Code" and "Hawthorn Woods
Plumbing Code" the most recent editions as adopted by Village of Hawthorn Woods.
SECTION 103 - DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION
In the section title, delete "Department of Property Maintenance" and insert "Community Development Department"
103.1 General
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
The Village Community Development Department (hereinafter referred to as "CD Department") shall be the department responsible
for the enforcement of this code, and the official in charge thereof shall be the Village Community Development Director (hereinafter
referred to as "CD Director"). The CD Director shall also be known as the "Code Official."
103.5 Fees
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Fees for activities and services performed by the CD Department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be in
accordance with the Village of Hawthorn Woods Fee Schedule listed in Title 11 of the Hawthorn Woods Municipal Code, as
amended from time to time.
SECTION 104 - DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL
104.3 Right of Entry
Delete this section and replace with:
All inspections shall be conducted in accordance with Title 4, Chapter 2 of the Village of Hawthorn Woods Municipal Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 218/426
104.4 Identification
Delete "Code Official" and replace with "CD Department personnel" in the first sentence of the paragraph.
SECTION 106 - VIOLATIONS
106.4 Violation Penalties
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation and shall be subject to the penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of the Municipal Code.
106.5 Abatement of Violation
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the Village Attorney or other attorneys retained by the Village
from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
SECTION 107 - NOTICES AND ORDERS
107.2 Form
Add the following Number to this section:
7. Inform the property owner that failure to correct the violations will result in a Notice to Appear before the Administrative Hearing
Officer of the Village being issued.
107.3 Method of Service
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
1. Delivered personally;
2. Sent by first-class mail addressed to the last known address of the owner of the property or the person who last paid the general
real estate taxes on the property according to county collector's records; or
3. If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure affected by such notice. If the property is vacant, written notice shall be placed on the premises in a
conspicuous manner.
SECTION 108 - UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
108.2 Closing of Vacant Structures
Add the following sentence after the last sentence in this section:
Whenever a structure is closed using plywood or other approved materials to prevent entry, such plywood or other approved
materials, must be tight fitting within the opening being closed and, at the discretion of the Village, painted or finished the same
color to correspond with the existing structure. The owner of the property shall maintain such construction materials in good
condition while the structure is closed.
108.4 Placarding
Add ": Declared Unfit for Human Occupancy" after the word "Condemned"
108.4.1 Placard Removal
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 219/426
The Code Official shall remove the "Condemned: Declared Unfit for Human Occupancy" placard whenever the defect or defects
upon which the "Condemned: Declared Unfit for Human Occupancy" or placard action were based have been eliminated. Any
person who defaces or removes the "Condemned: Declared Unfit for Human Occupancy" placard without the approval of the Code
Official shall be subject to penalties provided by this code.
SECTION 109 - EMERGENCY MEASURES
109.1 Imminent Danger
Add the words "or adjoining property" after the words "endangers life".
109.2 Temporary Safeguards
Add the following after the last sentence in this section:
The costs of such temporary safeguards shall be charged to the property owner and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
109.3 Closing Streets
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close structures and shall request the Chief of Police, or
designee, to close sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being
utilized.
109.5 Costs of Emergency Repairs
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
If costs incurred in the performance of emergency work are paid by the Village, the costs of such emergency repairs shall be
charged to the property owner and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
SECTION 110 - DEMOLITION
110.1 General
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
The Code Official shall seek a court order requiring the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the
Code Official's judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise
unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such
structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make such structure safe and sanitary or to
demolish and remove such structure at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any
structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such structure.
SECTION 112 - STOP WORK ORDER
112.4 Failure to Comply
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of the
Municipal Code.
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS
Add the following definition to this section:
ABANDONED VEHICLE. All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven
in its condition; or any motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and
is apparently abandoned.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 220/426
CODE OFFICIAL
Delete this definition in its entirety and replace with the following:
The official, who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative. The
Community Development Director shall be known as the Code Official.
Add the following definition to this section:
GRAFFITI. The inscription on a wall, fence, sign, other building or structure, sidewalk, pavement, post, stone, tree or other
manmade or natural object by carving, application of paint or other substance, or other means of any symbol (including any letter,
word, numeral, emblem or combination thereof), picture or other character placed thereon, other than as permitted by the Village.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE
Delete this definition in its entirety and replace with the following:
Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7) days the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on
which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being
driven under its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily
incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
Add the following definition to this section:
JURISDICTION. The Village of Hawthorn Woods.
Add the following definition to this section:
NOXIOUS WEEDS. As defined in Title 8, Chapter 1, Subchapter "f" of the Illinois Administrative Code, part 220 and Title 4, Chapter
3, Section 1 of the Village Code.
CHAPTER 3 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 302 - EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
302.3 Sidewalks and Driveways
Add the word "private" before the word "sidewalk"
302.4 Weeds
Insert "10-inches" as the maximum height.
Add as an additional section:
302.4.1 Removal Notice
The Community Development Director or Chief of Police or their designee, shall serve or cause to be served, written notice upon
the owner of any real estate on which weeds or grasses are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and to
demand the abatement of the nuisance within seven (7) days.
Add as an additional section:
302.4.2 Cost of Removal
The cost of cutting and removing weeds and grasses shall become a lien on the real estate affected, until paid, superior to all other
liens and encumbrances, except tax liens, provided the Village files a notice of lien in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lake
County, Illinois in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-7.
302.4.3 Additional Enforcement Action
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 221/426
In addition to, or as an alternative to a lien being filed on the real estate of the affected property, the Community Development
Director or the Chief of Police may issue a notice to appear before the administrative hearing officer of the Village for violations to
this section. The Village may also commence a civil proceeding to correct the violation under applicable statutory provisions.
302.4.4 Penalties for Violations
In addition to liability for the cost of abatement of such weeds or grasses, the owner, occupant or person in control of any such real
estate shall, upon being found guilty, be subject to the penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of the Municipal Code.
302.9 Defacement of Property
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any surface of any real or personal property, public or private, by
placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair within five (5) days
of receipt of written notice from the Community Development Director or Chief of Police or their designee.
SECTION 304 - EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
304.3 Premises Identification
Add the following after the last sentence to this section:
Properties that have alley access shall also have address numbers visible from the alley.
304.14 Insect Screens
Insert "April 1 to December 1" as the dates for this requirement.
Add as an additional section:
304.15.1 Door Closers
Storm doors, screen doors, and similar swinging or hinged doors must have self-closing devices to keep doors in a closed position
when not in use.
CHAPTER 5 - PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENT
SECTION 505 - WATER SYSTEM
505.4 Water Heating Facilities
Insert 120 degrees in place of 110 degrees for water temperature.
SECTION 507 - STORM DRAINAGE
Add as an additional section:
507.2 Sump Pump Drainage
Drainage from sump pumps, down spouts, window wells, or any other concentrated source of storm water shall not be discharged to
create a nuisance on neighboring properties or create a flooding or ponding condition. Sump pump discharge shall not be directed to
flow across a public walk or directed onto a neighboring property and shall not be closer than ten (10) feet from the adjacent property.
CHAPTER 6 - MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 602 - HEATING FACILITIES
602.3 Heat Supply
Insert September 15th to June 1st for required timeframes
602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 222/426
Insert September 15th to June 1st for required timeframes
(Ord. 1804-17, 12-13-2017)
8-1-7: ELECTRICAL CODE:
This section shall be known and cited as the HAWTHORN WOODS ELECTRICAL CODE.
A. Electrical Code Created: There is created and established, in and for the Village of Hawthorn Woods, the Hawthorn Woods Electrical
Code.
B. Adoption Of The National Electrical Code: The National Electrical Code of 2014 (NFPA 70-2014), as issued and promulgated by the
National Fire Protection Association and approved by the American National Standards Institute, a copy of which have been on file with
the Village Clerk's Office and the Community Development Department for at least thirty (30) days prior hereto, and open to public
inspection, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein in its entirety. Said National Electrical Code is hereby adopted as
the rules and regulations for construction, alteration, addition, modification, repair and use of electric equipment, with amendments,
modifications and additions as herein set forth in the Village of Hawthorn Woods, Lake County, Illinois, and shall be applicable to
existing or proposed new buildings or structures.
C. Amendments To The National Electrical Code:
ARTICLE 100 DEFINITIONS
Add as an additional definition:
Electrical Inspector. The Building Inspector shall be known as the ex-officio electrical inspector for the Village of Hawthorn Woods
and have all powers to perform the duties of the electrical inspector.
110.12 Mechanical Execution of Work
Add as an additional requirement to this section:
(C) Abandoned Equipment and Materials. All abandoned conduit, wire, cable or other electrical equipment and conductors, electric
appliances and materials shall be removed in their entirety. This includes low-voltage wiring, data processing cable, etc.
(D) Mounting. Free standing electrical main distribution centers, panelboards and motor control centers designed for floor-mounted
installations, shall be mounted on a four-inch (4") thick concrete housekeeping pad. The required housekeeping pad shall be raised
above all adjoining floor surfaces a minimum of four-inches (4") and shall not project past the front, sides, or rear of the equipment
into the required working space.
210.52(E) Outdoor Outlets
Add as an additional requirement to this section:
(4) Electric Openings. Exterior electric openings shall not be installed back-to-back with interior electric openings.
210.52(F) Laundry Areas
Add as an additional requirement to this section:
(1) Washer & Dryer. Separate 20-ampere dedicated circuits shall be provided for each clothes washer and each clothes dryer unit.
210.70 Lighting Outlets Required
Add as an additional requirement to this section:
(D) Entry Lighting. In all occupancies, stairs, halls, corridors, garages, or rooms with more than one (1) entry shall have the lighting
for the area switched at all entries. The lighting switch shall be located within thirty-six inches (36") of the entry into the space and
shall not be located behind any doors or permanent obstructions.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 223/426
230.23(A) General
Add as additional requirements to this section:
(1) - All residential service revisions shall be a minimum 100-ampere rated with at least twenty (20) circuit openings and a 100-
ampere main circuit breaker.
Exception: Electric services rated 100 ampere or less shall be subject to the approval of the Community Development Director or
his designee. Electric load calculations shall be submitted to justify all electric services less than 100 amperes.
(2) - New single-family dwelling units shall have a minimum 200-ampere underground service with at least forty (40) circuit
openings and a 100-ampere main circuit breaker.
Exception: Electric services rated less than 200 ampere shall be subject to the approval of the Community Development Director or
his designee. Electric load calculations shall be submitted to justify all electric services less than 100 amperes.
230.31(A) General
Add as an additional requirement to this section:
(1) - Services for industrial and commercial occupancies shall be a minimum of 200-ampere service, thirty (30) circuit openings and
shall have bolt-on circuit breakers.
230.41 Insulation of Service-Entrance Conductors
Delete the exception to this article in its entirety.
230.43 Wiring Methods for 1000 Volts, Nominal, or Less
Delete the following numbers from the list of approved wiring methods for service entrance conductors:
1. Open wiring on insulators
2. Type IGS cable
5. Electrical metallic tubing
6. Electrical non-metallic tubing
7. Service-entrance cables
11. Rigid polyvinyl chloride conduit (PVC)
13. Type MC cable
14. Mineral-insulated, metal-sheathed cable, Type MI
15. Flexible metal conduit (FMC) or liquidtight flexible metal conduit (LFMC)
16. Liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit (LFNC)
230.70(A) Location
Delete this section in its entirety and replace with the following:
The service disconnecting means shall be located at a readily accessible location whether inside the building or outside, at a point
no further than five feet (5') from the service conductor entrance into the service panelboard. If the distance must exceed five feet
(5'), then a service disconnect switch must be located on the service at the metering equipment, or directly adjacent thereto. The
service disconnect shall not be installed in bathrooms.
230.72(C) Access to Occupants
Add as an additional requirement to this section:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 224/426
(1) - Commercial, industrial, multi-family dwelling units and office buildings with multiple tenants shall have main disconnects
located within each space for the power supplied to each space.
250.104(A)(1) General
Add as an additional requirement to this section:
A metal identification tag stating "ELECTRIC SERVICE GROUND, DO NOT REMOVE" shall be placed on all exposed electric
service grounds and bonding and bonding jumper connection locations.
Add as an additional section:
250.112(N) Central Air Conditioning Unit
A separate equipment grounding conductor shall be installed for all central air conditioning units. Conductors shall be installed in
liquid-tight flexible metal conduit to avoid vibrations from the building to the unit. Electrical plastic tape shall not be used to fasten
low voltage wiring to conduit or refrigerant lines. Plastic ties approved for the purpose shall be used.
ARTICLE 322 FLAT CABLE ASSEMBLIES: TYPE FC
Delete this section in its entirety.
ARTICLE 324 FLAT CONDUCTOR CABLE: TYPE FCC
Delete this section in its entirety.
ARTICLE 326 INTEGRATED GAS SPACER CABLE: TYPE IGS
Delete this section in its entirety.
ARTICLE 328 MEDIUM VOLTAGE CABLE: TYPE MV
Delete this section in its entirety.
ARTICLE 336 POWER AND CONTROL TRAY CABLE: TYPE TC
Delete this section in its entirety.
ARTICLE 338 SERVICE-ENTRANCE CABLE: TYPES SE AND USE
Delete this section in its entirety.
ARTICLE 394 CONCEALED KNOB AND TUBE WIRING
Delete this section in its entirety.
ARTICLE 396 MESSENGER-SUPPORTED WIRING
Delete this section in its entirety.
ARTICLE 398 OPEN WIRING ON INSULATORS
Delete this section in its entirety.
700.16 Emergency Illumination
Add as additional requirements to this section:
(1) - Emergency lighting equipped with one and one-half (1-1/2) hour battery backup shall be provided in the additional following
locations: Mechanical rooms, vaults, toilet and bath/shower rooms, electric closets or rooms, switch gear rooms, transformer rooms,
adjacent to incoming electric service and distribution panelboards adjacent to the incoming fire suppression system and fire alarm
systems.
Exception: Single-family residential dwellings
(2) - All exit signs shall be equipped with L.E.D.-type lighting displays only.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 225/426
Exception: Approved self-luminous exit signs
700.20 Switch Requirements
Add as an additional requirement to this section:
(1) - Circuit lock-on devices shall be installed on all circuits providing power to emergency lighting, exit signs, fire alarms, and
smoke detectors.
D. Electrical Permits:
1. Permit Required: All persons, firms, companies, or corporations shall obtain a permit from the Village of Hawthorn Woods for all
installations, alterations, or changes to electrical equipment, wiring, and systems as provided by this Code.
2. Application: A permit may be issued for the electrical installations or alterations once an application has been submitted and reviewed
by the Community Development Department. Permit application shall be made on the official permit applications available from the
Community Development Department.
E. Inspections Required:
1. Rough-In Inspection: All installations or alterations to the electrical system and equipment must receive an approved inspection from
the Community Development Department prior to the work being concealed. The person who has secured the electrical permit shall
notify the Community Development Department twenty four (24) hours in advance of the required inspection.
2. Final Inspection: Upon completion of the permitted work, the electrical contractor must pass a final inspection by the Community
Development Department. The person who has secured the electrical permit shall notify the Building Department twenty four (24)
hours in advance of the required inspection.
3. Certificate Of Occupancy: A certificate of occupancy will not be issued for a building or structure if the electrical installation and
equipment are not in conformance with this Code.
4. Re-Inspections: A re-inspection fee will be charged for all inspections made after the first inspection. Such fee is determined by the
Village Board and is provided for in the fee schedule as set forth in this Code.
5. Liability: The inspection and control of the installation of electrical equipment or the granting of inspection certificates by the
Community Development Department shall not render the Village of Hawthorn Woods liable on account of such inspections, control of
or granting of such inspections, or lessen the liability of persons, firms or corporations owning or installing such electrical equipment.
6. Periodic Inspections: The electrical inspector may periodically make inspections of existing electrical equipment or installations within
the Village of Hawthorn Woods. If an electrical installation or piece of equipment is found to be unsafe or in a state of disrepair, the
electrical inspector will, in writing, request from the person, firm or corporation responsible for the property that it be corrected in a
reasonable amount of time, as determined by the electrical inspector.
7. Authority Of Electrical Inspector: The electrical inspector is empowered to order the discontinuance of any electrical service, which
serves any wiring, equipment, or devices, which are deemed hazardous to persons or property, or any situations, which may be found
to be an electrical shock hazard.
F. Registration Of Electrical Contractors: It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in the business of an electrical
contractor without being registered as such in the Village of Hawthorn Woods.
G. Limited Electrical Installations: Any person, firm, or corporation licensed with the Village of Hawthorn Woods as a heating, air
conditioning, and ventilation contractor may install electrical wiring or equipment associated with the installation connection and
servicing of heating, air conditioning, and ventilation equipment.
H. Appeals: Any person, firm, or corporation may appeal the decision, interpretation, or finding made by the electrical inspector to the
Village Board.
I. Penalty For Violations: Any person, firm or corporation that engages in the business of electrical contractor without furnishing a certificate
of registration as herein provided for, or that violates any of the provisions of this section, shall be subject to the penalty as provided in
the general penalty section as set forth in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1805-17, 12-13-2017)
8-1-8: PLUMBING CODE:
A. Plumbing Code Created: There is created and established, in and for the Village of Hawthorn Woods, the Hawthorn Woods Plumbing
Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 226/426
B. Adoption Of The State Of Illinois Plumbing Code: The State of Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Administrative Code, part 890, "The Illinois
Plumbing Code" by this reference is hereby incorporated herein in its entirety and adopted as the Hawthorn Woods Plumbing Code with
the amendments contained herein.
The Hawthorn Woods Plumbing Code is adopted as the rules and regulations for equipment, fixtures, appliances, or piping as used or
intended for use as water supply system or sewage disposal system that can affect the public health, in the Village of Hawthorn Woods,
Lake County, Illinois, and shall be applicable to existing or proposed water supply and sewage disposal systems. The installation, repair
or extension of the building drain and building sewer shall also comply with the provisions of this Code and the Illinois Plumbing License
Act.
C. WaterSense Fixtures Required: Pursuant to 17 Ill. Adm. Code 3730.307(c)4) and subject to the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code
890) and the Lawn Irrigation Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 892), be it hereby ordained
that in the Village of Hawthorn Woods all new plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after the effective date of this section
shall bear the WaterSense label (as designed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency WaterSense Program), when such labeled
fixtures are available.
D. Amendments To The Illinois Plumbing Code, Part 890:
SUBPART A, DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 890 Appendix B, Illustrations for Subpart A
Illustrations I - Common Vent, and Illustration M - Fixture Drain.
Back-to-back or cross fittings may only be used when an accessible cleanout is provided.
SUBPART I - WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION
Section 890.1150 Water Service Pipe Installation
Replace Item a) 3) with "The minimum depth of any water service in the Village of Hawthorn Woods shall not be less than five-feet (5')
six (6") below the finished grade."
Section 890.1190 - Water Supply Control Valves and Meter
Paragraph (F) Delete "Buildings Other Than Dwellings" from the first and second line and insert "In All Buildings", Add as an additional
requirement that line valves or stops shall be installed on all fixtures, including showers.
APPENDIX A TABLES
Section 890. Appendix A - Plumbing Materials, Equipment, Use Restrictions, and Applicable Standards
Approved Building Drainage/Vent Pipe, Table A-4
Delete Item No. (12) in its entirety. Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC with Cellular Core)
Approved Materials for Building Sewer Table A-7
Delete Item No. (8) in its entirety. Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC with Cellular Core)
E. Water Heaters And Laundry Machines: In all new construction, all water heaters and laundry machines installed over finished ceilings
shall have a drip pan, piped to a vented floor drain. Rooms, spaces or basements provided with roughed in plumbing are included in this
requirement. (Ord. 1806-17, 12-13-2017)
8-1-9: ACCESSIBILITY CODE:
A. Rules And Regulations: The rules and regulations set forth in the Illinois Accessibility Code, State of Illinois, Capital Development Board,
1997 edition, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this title, with amendments prescribed in subsection B of this section,
as the rules and regulations of the Village; and it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, alter or repair, or cause to be
constructed, installed, altered or repaired, any public facilities or multi-story housing units in the Village in violation of or without
complying with those rules and regulations. At least three (3) copies of said pamphlet have been filed in the Office of the Village Clerk
for use and examination by the public.
B. Amendments To Code: The following amendments to the Illinois Accessibility Code are hereby made a part of these regulations:
The stricter of the requirements shall apply when there is a conflict between the Illinois accessibility code and chapter 11 of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 227/426
international building code.
(Ord. 1022-03, 4-21-2003)
Chapter 2
BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES
8-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall begin the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or removal of any building, structure, wall, fence, pool, tennis
court, underground lawn sprinkler, invisible dog fence, siding, reroofing, or driveway approach, or part thereof, nor shall any person begin
the clearing or excavation of the site of any such improvement without first having applied to the village clerk for a permit to do so and
obtaining such permit in writing from the village.
No person shall begin the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or removal of any dog run, regardless of the estimated cost of
such work, without first having applied to the village clerk for a permit to do so and obtaining such permit in writing from the village.
No person shall perform any work in connection with any improvement listed above in a manner which alters or disrupts the existing
drainage pattern to and from adjoining properties. No such improvement, except a driveway approach, shall be located in or on any public
right of way. (Ord. 1626-16, 2-22-2016)
8-2-1-1: AFFORDABLE HOUSING CONSULTATION PROCEDURE:
A. Applicability: The provisions of this section shall be applicable to the following types of projects that are required to obtain any permit
under the provisions of this chapter:
1. Property within an existing multiple-family zoning district (R-3 general residence district), any land or territory hereafter rezoned to a
multiple-family zoning district, or any land or territory hereafter annexed into the village and zoned as a multiple-family zoning district;
2. Any parcel or portion thereof where it is proposed to construct either:
a. Multi-family dwelling(s);
b. Two-family dwelling(s);
c. Single-family detached units constructed on lots with a minimum lot size less than that provided for in either the R-2 one-family
residence district or the R-3 general residence district currently in force or as hereafter amended from time to time; or
d. In a planned unit development with zero lot lines, where the product of the number of housing units multiplied by twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet is greater than the net lot area of the property;
3. All new applications for zoning, subdivision, or other types of development; and
4. Any existing application that has not yet: a) been given final approval by the village, b) completed a public hearing process where one
is necessary, c) been issued building permits; and/or d) been issued occupancy permits. (Ord. 1118-05, 4-18-2005)
B. Prior Consultation Concerning Affordable Housing Required:
1. Notwithstanding any other provision in this code to the contrary, prior to submitting to the village any application for any permit
required by this chapter for a construction project identified in subsection A of this section, the applicant shall meet with the chief
operating officer or his or her designee. At such meeting, the chief operating officer shall provide the prospective permit applicant with
a copy of the village of Hawthorn Woods affordable housing plan and will discuss with the prospective applicant whether there are
reasonable options for including affordable housing units in the project. Additionally, at such meeting the Administrator shall provide
the prospective applicant a copy of all other relevant zoning, building, and development provisions of this Code. (Ord. 1118-05, 4-18-
2005; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
2. The meeting required in subsection B1 of this section shall be held at least sixty (60) calendar days prior to the date when an
applicant for a project identified in subsection A of this section files an application with the Village, or, if an application has been filed,
at least sixty (60) calendar days before any public hearing or other approval by the Village, provided that after the required meeting,
the Village Board by resolution may waive any remaining portion of the sixty (60) day waiting period in cases where it determines that
requiring an exhaustion of the waiting period would not serve the purposes of the plan. (Ord. 1118-05, 4-18-2005)
8-2-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
All applications for permits to construct, erect, alter or excavate for which a permit is required by this chapter, shall be made to the Village
Clerk in writing over the signature of both the owner and any contractor, on printed blanks to be furnished by the Village, which application
shall be completed by the payment of the fee specified. Every application shall state the location of the proposed work, and shall be
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 228/426
accompanied by complete plans and specifications signed by the owner or architect or contractor, in sufficient detail to enable the building
inspector to obtain full and complete information as to the character of the work proposed to be done under the permit sought. If such plans
are approved, a copy thereof shall remain on file in the Office of the Village Clerk. (Ord. 1814-18, 2-26-2018)
8-2-3: FEES:
A. Permit Fees: Fees for building permits shall be as set forth at subsection 11-1-1H of this Code. (Ord. 782-97, 3-10-1997)
B. Inspection Fees: Fees for inspections shall be as set forth at subsection 11-1-1H of this Code. Unless otherwise provided, a reinspection
fee, equal in amount to the inspection fee, shall be charged for each reinspection. In addition, prior to the issuance of a building permit,
the applicant shall pay such amount to the appropriate fire protection district as such district charges for inspection services related to
sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems and other fire suppression systems. The current fee schedule for each fire protection district shall
be on file with the Chief Operating Officer.
C. Plan Examination Fees: Fees for plan examination shall be as set forth at subsection 11-1-1H of this Code, provided, however, that plan
examination fees for any type of construction not otherwise detailed at subsection 11-1-1H of this Code shall be made by the Village's
plan reviewer and/or Village Engineer on a cost of review basis. Applicant shall deposit a predetermined dollar amount with the Village
to cover such review costs. Upon completion of the project, any excess deposit monies shall be refunded to the applicant. In addition, at
the time of filing an application for a building permit, the applicant shall pay such amount to the appropriate fire protection district as
such district charges for plan review services. The current fee schedule for each fire protection district shall be on file with the Chief
Operating Officer. The applicant also shall pay, prior to the issuance of any permit, the actual costs and expenses incurred by the Village
or appropriate fire protection district for extraordinary reviews of plans or specifications beyond the review customarily involved in the
usual course of such plan reviews. Such costs and expenses shall include actual review fees by consultants or outside contractors or
time spent by Village staff. Village staff time shall be billed at the rate for each person of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour. (Ord. 782-97, 3-
10-1997; amd. Ord. 1003-02, 9-23-2002; Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
8-2-4: CASH OR SURETY BOND:
A. Amount Of Cash Or Surety Bond: At the time of application for a permit, the applicant, in addition to other fees, shall deposit with the
Village Clerk a cash bond in such amount as set forth in subsection 11-1-1H6 of this Code, or post a cash bond concurrent with a surety
bond as set forth in this section. (Ord. 1697-16, 10-24-2016)
B. Purpose Of Cash Or Surety Bond: Such cash or surety bond shall be for the purpose of indemnifying the Village against damage to,
and/or securing the restoration and repair of, any and all public property and/or improvements, as hereinafter set forth. At the discretion
of the Village, the cash bond may also be applied to any unpaid reinspection fees, additional inspection fees or the temporary certificate
of occupancy fees associated with the permit to which it applies. (Ord. 1796-17, 12-13-2017)
C. Surety Bond: The Village may accept from an applicant, in lieu of a cash bond for each dwelling unit constructed, an initial cash bond in
such amount as set forth in subsection 11-1-1H6 of this Code that the Village may draw down upon in accordance with this section,
concurrent with acceptance of a surety bond in such amount as set forth in subsection 11-1-1H6 of this Code for no fewer than four (4)
residential dwelling units within the same subdivision; for example, a surety bond for four (4) residential dwelling units would equal the
amount set forth in subsection 11-1-1H6 of this Code for a new home multiplied by four (4). As a condition of providing a surety bond in
accordance with this section, the applicant shall, at no time, permit the initial cash bond to be reduced to an amount below fifty percent
(50%) of the initial deposit. Should the cash bond fall below fifty percent (50%) of the initial deposit, the Village shall have the right, but
not the obligation, to issue stop work orders on the associated permits until such time as the cash bond amount is sufficiently
replenished in accordance with this section.
1. A surety bond submitted in accordance with this section shall be provided as follows:
a. An expiration date not less than one year from the date of issuance and an express provision that such surety bond will not expire
prior to the issuance by the Village of the requisite certificate of occupancy for each bonded residential dwelling unit;
b. That written notice shall be given by certified or registered mail to the Village Clerk of the expiration date, if any, of the surety bond
not less than sixty (60) days before said expiration, and that the surety bond shall not expire absent such notice;
c. The surety bond shall be irrevocable and shall be clearly marked "irrevocable";
d. That the surety bond will not be discharged by the issuing institution except upon written certificate of the Village Clerk that said
surety bond may be discharged in accordance with this section and the amount of such discharge;
e. That the issuing institution will pay all attorney fees and other costs reasonably incurred in enforcing collection of such financing
surety in the event that the issuer wrongfully fails to honor the Village's demand for payment under the terms of such surety bond;
f. A surety bond submitted in accordance with this section to guarantee the completion of public improvements may not be reduced or
partially discharged prior to completion and issuance of each certificate of occupancy for covered residential dwelling units; that is,
all certificates of occupancy need to be issued prior to discharge of said surety bond;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 229/426
g. Upon issuance of all certificates of occupancy for the residential dwelling units covered by a surety bond, the Village Clerk shall
send a written certificate within five (5) days after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy to the issuing institution and to
the applicant that such financing surety may be discharged; and
h. This section shall be binding upon and applicable to all applicants, developers and successors in title of property which is bonded
in accordance with this title.
D. Restoration And Repair Of Public Property And Improvements: At the completion of all construction and prior to final occupancy, the
building inspector shall perform an inspection of the surrounding public property and improvements. All such property and
improvements, including, but not limited to, the roadway, parkway and culverts, must be restored to a condition at least equal to the
condition at the time of starting work, or in the case of new construction, the roadway, parkway and culverts are to be restored in
workable condition satisfactory to the Village Engineer. All restoration work shall be performed in accordance with the ordinances of the
Village.
Should such public property and improvements be in satisfactory condition, the cash or surety bond shall be returned to the applicant.
The applicant shall not be entitled to interest on such cash deposit. Should such public property and improvements be damaged in any
way, the building inspector shall notify the applicant and the applicant shall have fourteen (14) calendar days in which to repair the
same. If the applicant fails to make such necessary repairs within said time, the building inspector is directed to have the necessary
repairs made and the costs paid from the cash or surety bond. The balance of the cash or surety bond, if any, shall be returned to the
applicant. Should the cash or surety bond be insufficient to pay the full amount of the costs, the applicant shall promptly reimburse the
Village, upon demand, for such additional costs. (Ord. 1697-16, 10-24-2016)
8-2-5: TERM OF PERMIT:
A. Completion Of Construction: Each permit issued by the building inspector under the provisions of this chapter shall become null and void
if the work is not completed within the time period set forth below, unless the permit is renewed for the period and at the fee set forth
below:
Type Of
Construction
Time
Period
Term Of
Extension
Renewal Fee
New residential 12
months
3 months $500.00 for the first renewal;
$1,000.00 thereafter
Additions, pools, gazebos, decks, and all other residential 9
months
1 month $100.00 for the first renewal;
$500.00 thereafter
New commercial 12
months
3 months $1,000.00 for all
Finishing of new commercial space, remodeling or alteration or additions
of existing commercial space
6
months
3 months $750.00 for all
In addition, if work is not commenced within six (6) months of the date of issuance of the permit, or is suspended for six (6) months, a new
permit will be required before work can be resumed. Upon expiration of the building permit, all bond money held by the Village will be
automatically forfeited to the Village. (Ord. 994-02, 7-22-2002)
B. Permit Renewal: Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of the building permit, the permit holder or homeowner may
request that the building permit be renewed. The Chief Operating Officer, in the case of a first renewal, or the Architectural Review
Commission, in the case of all subsequent renewals, shall have the authority to grant or deny renewals for the time periods indicated in
subsection A of this section. The grant of extension may be conditioned upon the posting of a cash bond, or a letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the Village Attorney, in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the cost of completion of all unfinished
items, as determined by the building inspector, whose determination shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 876-99, 9-13-1999; amd. Ord.
1290-09, 8-17-2009)
If at the end of the renewal period the construction has not been completed so as to cause the issuance of a temporary or final
occupancy certificate, the building permit shall expire and the Village shall have the right, but not the obligation, to cause the completion
of said construction or to commence an appropriate action to require the completion or demolition of the unfinished construction, and to
draw upon the cash bond and/or letter of credit for the purpose of defraying the costs thereof. The foregoing shall not prevent the Village
from issuing, upon proper application, payment of all fees and compliance with all other requirements of this Code, a new building
permit with respect to such unfinished construction. (Ord. 876-99, 9-13-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 230/426
At the time of issuance of a temporary occupancy certificate, the time periods and renewal fees in subsection A of this section shall no
longer apply and the terms in section 8-2-7 of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 1796-17, 12-13-2017)
8-2-6: STOP WORK ORDERS:
A. The Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Chief Administrative Officer and/or Chief Operating Officer shall have the power to
order all work stopped on construction, installation, alteration or repair of any building or structure, and parts and appurtenances thereof,
whether regulated by this chapter, any ordinance governing the construction of such building or structure, or the Village Zoning Code,
when such work is being done in violation of any provision of such ordinances (including, but not limited to, any violations of title 3,
chapter 1 of this Code relating to business licenses), or when such work is being performed in an unsafe and dangerous manner. A stop
work order may be verbal; provided, however, a verbal stop work order shall be followed by a written stop work order within one
business day. A stop work order may be served by the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Chief Administrative Officer, Chief
Operating Officer or Police Officer. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of a verbal or written stop work order except on the
written permission of the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Chief Administrative Officer or Chief Operating Officer and the
payment of a fee as set forth in subsection 11-1-1H11 of this Code. (Ord. 1321-10, 5-17-2010)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to continue any work in or about any building or structure in violation of a stop work order, except for
such work as that person is directed to perform by the building inspector to remove a violation of unsafe condition. Any such person
shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on
each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 445-90, 4-9-1990; amd. 1995 Code)
8-2-7: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY2:
A. Certificate Required:
1. No building or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date hereof, shall be used or occupied until an occupancy certificate
has been issued by the Village Clerk after inspection by the building inspector. No certificate of occupancy for any building or addition
thereto shall be issued without the submission of a spotted survey verifying the location of said building on the lot in question. Said
spotted survey shall be submitted by the applicant as soon as is practicable following the completion of the foundation for said
building. (Ord. 473-90, 12-10-1990; amd. Ord. 529-92, 7-13-1992)
2. No change in occupancy and no change in use within the same zoning classification shall be made until an occupancy certificate has
been issued by the building inspector.
3. No change in use after a change in zoning classification shall be made until after an inspection by the building inspector and the
issuance of an occupancy certificate.
4. An occupancy certificate shall also be required for occupancy after the extension of a main building or the remodeling of any building
which includes a change in the bearing walls, supports, chimneys or roof. (Ord. 529-92, 7-13-1992)
B. Application For Certificate: An application for an occupancy certificate, permanent or temporary, must be submitted to the Village Clerk,
on forms supplied by the Village and shall be signed by the record owner, as well as the contractor performing work on the property. If
only a change of occupancy or use is involved, forms shall be signed by the record owner only, provided there is no contractor
performing work on the property. Such occupancy certificate must be issued prior to the time the new occupants take possession or a
new use is made of the premises. (Ord. 1190-06, 11-20-2006)
C. Fee: The fee for an occupancy certificate, when applied for in connection with construction, shall be part of the building permit fee. When
application for an occupancy certificate is made in connection with a change of occupancy or use, there shall be a fee as set forth in
subsection 11-1-1H4 of this Code. (Ord. 1796-17, 12-13-2017)
D. Issuance Of Certificate:
1. No occupancy certificate for a building or addition thereto shall be issued until construction has been completed and the premises
have been inspected and certified by the building inspector to be in full and complete compliance with the plans and specifications
and the Building Code of the Village3.
2. No occupancy certificate, following a change in occupancy or use, shall be issued until the building inspector has inspected the
premises and has certified that there are no Building Code violations. The occupancy certificate shall be issued, or written notice shall
be given to the applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued, not later than seven (7) days after the building
inspector is notified in writing that the premises are ready for occupancy or that a change in occupancy or use will be made. (Ord.
529-92, 7-13-1992)
E. Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy:
1. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued when the structure created, erected, changed or converted is nearly complete
and use or occupancy of the premises will not, in the opinion of the Chief Operating Officer, present a hazard to the occupants. Both
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 231/426
the owner and any contractor must sign any application for a temporary certificate of occupancy. In addition, prior to the issuance of a
temporary certificate of occupancy the owner and contractor must execute an agreement, acceptable in form to the Village Attorney,
providing as follows:
a. That all corrections indicated on the final inspection check sheet shall be completed within six (6) months of the issuance of the
temporary certificate of occupancy;
b. That reinspection of the subject premises shall be permitted within the six (6) month period in order to verify the corrections;
c. That failure to make the corrections within the six (6) month period shall be cause for the Village to record the final inspection check
sheet with the Recorder of Deeds of Lake County, Illinois;
d. That the owner and contractor shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its officers, agents and employees from any
and all claims, losses or damages which may be incurred by reason of occupancy of the premises prior to the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy; and
e. That there shall be posted a cash bond or letter of credit, in a form satisfactory to the Village Attorney, in an amount equal to one
hundred fifty percent (150%) of the Village's estimate of completion costs prior to the issuance of the temporary certificate of
occupancy. In the event that a structure for which a temporary occupancy certificate has been issued has not been fully completed
so as to comply with all applicable Village ordinances at the end of the six (6) month period, the owner and contractor agree that the
Village may cause said premises to be vacated and to remain vacated until full compliance with all applicable ordinances of the
Village has been obtained. During the time period of the temporary certificate of occupancy, all cash bonds and/or letters of credit
required in connection with the issuance of the building permit will be held by the Village. Failure to complete all items on the final
inspection check sheet may cause the forfeiture of any or all cash bond or letter of credit with respect to said structure and the
Village may record said final inspection check sheet with the Recorder of Deeds for Lake County, Illinois. The Village has the right,
but not the obligation, to utilize the cash bond or letter of credit posted hereunder to cause the completion of any remaining items
necessary to obtain a permanent certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 1642-16, 3-21-2016)
f. Prior to expiration of the temporary certificate of occupancy, the Village may extend the time period by a period of three (3) months
from the date of issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy. The Village may grant a three-month extension no more than
two (2) times for a total of six (6) months. There shall be a fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy extension as set forth in
subsection 11-1-1H4 of this Code. (Ord. 1796-17, 12-13-2017)
F. Authority To Note Deficiencies: The Chief Operating Officer or building inspector shall be free to note any deficiency in the plans,
specifications or construction of improvements for which building permits are required hereunder, irrespective of whether plans and/or
specifications have been approved and regardless of whether building permits or occupancy certificates have been issued. (Ord. 473-
90, 12-10-1990; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
8-2-8: VIOLATIONS, PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
chapter, or who refuses to remedy a violation of any such provision or to remedy a hazard of fire, explosion or collapse where no other
provision is provided, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and
each day upon which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 363-86, 2-11-1986; amd. 1995 Code)
8-2-9: CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS:
A. Construction Debris; Public Property: The deposit of construction debris and excavated materials, including, but not limited to, all mud,
dirt, gravel and other debris (collectively, "construction debris"), on any street or other public property in the Village is hereby prohibited.
The property owner and each hauler, developer, contractor or subcontractor of a work site shall take all necessary actions to ensure
compliance with this prohibition. At a minimum, such actions shall include all of the following:
1. Use of rumble strips, gravel driveways or other systems designed to remove construction debris from vehicles exiting the work site;
2. All open areas of any vehicles entering and exiting the work site shall be securely covered with a tarp so as to prevent construction
debris from exiting the vehicle; and
3. All vehicles with more than two (2) axles shall be pressure washed to remove construction debris therefrom prior to exiting the work
site. (Ord. 1126-05, 7-25-2005)
Prior to beginning construction, the property owner or contractor may apply for a variance from the actions listed in subsections A1
through A3 of this section, based on the size of the project and economic hardship imposed by these provisions. The application for
such a variance shall be made to a committee consisting of the Chief Operating Officer, Mayor and Director of Public Works and shall
set forth the reasons why the applicant is entitled to a variance and include alternative methods and systems by which streets and
other public property shall be protected from the deposit of construction debris. If the committee determines that, based upon the
circumstances presented, the applicant is entitled to a variance, the property owner and each hauler, developer, contractor or
subcontractor shall utilize the alternative methods and systems approved by the committee to ensure that construction debris is not
deposited on public streets and other public property. The granting of a variance does not relieve the property owner and each hauler,
developer, contractor or subcontractor of the responsibility to comply with the other provisions of this section, including the prohibition
of depositing construction debris on any public street or other public property. (Ord. 1126-05, 7-25-2005; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 232/426
2009)
Any construction debris that is deposited on any public streets or other public property shall be immediately removed.
Trash containers or dumpsters shall not be placed on streets and must be located a minimum of five feet (5') from the public right-ofway.
Trash containers shall be placed in such a manner that they do not obstruct the vision of motorists or interfere with pedestrian
traffic.
B. Removal Of Construction Debris; Private Property: Construction debris shall not be thrown, dropped or swept from any floor above the
ground or from any roof, but shall either be carried or lowered in such a manner as not to cause dust, and shall be removed from day to
day, or placed in an approved noncombustible container and shall be protected in such a manner as not to be blown or scattered onto
adjacent properties. Trash containers or dumpsters shall be located on private property and no closer than five feet (5') to the property
line.
C. Violations; Penalty: Notwithstanding the provisions of section 8-2-8 of this chapter, the property owner and each hauler, developer,
contractor or subcontractor, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
offense. The term "offense" as defined in this section shall mean violation of any provision of this section; further:
1. Each separate tire or wheel or any trailer or vehicle depositing mud, dirt or gravel upon the roadway during any ingress or egress
from the construction site, or during travel upon any roadway, in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense; and
2. Each day upon which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition, a stop work order may be issued as set forth in section 8-2-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 1126-05, 7-25-2005)
Chapter 3
SWIMMING POOLS
8-3-1: DEFINITION:
The term "swimming pool" is hereby defined as a receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than
two feet (2'), intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment.
(Ord. 186-70, 7-13-1970)
8-3-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any swimming pool in the Village except in compliance with all the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 186-70, 7-13-1970)
8-3-3: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED, FEE:
It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and
appurtenances within the Village unless permits therefor shall have first been obtained from the Village. The fee for a permit for the erection
or construction of a swimming pool shall be as set forth in subsection 11-1-1H1 of this Code, which fee shall be paid to the Village at the
time application for said permit is made, and shall be in addition to all applicable plan review and inspection fees established by ordinance
of the Village. (Ord. 1796-17, 12-13-2017)
8-3-4: LOCATION OF POOLS AND APPURTENANCES:
All swimming pools and appurtenances, including, but not limited to, pumps, pool filters and pool water disinfection equipment, fences and
sidewalks, shall be located so as to comply with all codes and ordinances of the Village and all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances, rules
and regulations of any other governmental body having jurisdiction over the property. (Ord. 552-93, 1-11-1993)
8-3-5: DRAWINGS AND PLANS:
A. Approval: All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any swimming pool and appurtenances
shall first be presented to the Village for examination and approval as to proper location and construction.
B. Scale Of Plans, Required Information: All plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-fourth inch to one foot
(1/4" = 1') and shall be under the seal of a licensed architect of the State of Illinois. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 233/426
figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot line, and including information pertaining to the pool, walk and fence
construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems, and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool. Detail
plans and vertical elevations shall also be provided in accordance with the Building Code1.
C. Conformance To Plans: All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems shall be constructed
in conformity with the approved plans. (Ord. 186-70, 7-13-1970; amd. Ord. 546-92, 11-16-1992; 1995 Code)
D. Pool Locations: Pool locations shall be approved by the Lake County Health Department for required distance to septic systems. Pools
shall not be placed in areas designated for septic expansion area. (Ord. 1793-17, 11-13-2017)
8-3-6: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Materials For Construction: Swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material which will provide a tight
tank with white or light colored finish and easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a nonslip finish as
smooth as possible. The side and end walls of a pool shall present a smooth finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at least six feet (6')
or shall have a slope or curvature meeting one of the following conditions:
1. The pool wall may be vertical for thirty inches (30") from the water level, below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a
radius at any point equal to the difference between the depth at the point, and thirty inches (30").
2. To a depth of six feet (6'), except as in subsection A1 of this section, the wall's slope shall not be less than one foot (1') horizontal in
six feet (6') vertical.
B. Structural Design: Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within and to resist the pressure of the earth
when the pool is empty, to a pressure of two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds per square foot. The slope of the bottom of any part
of a pool in which the water is less than five feet (5') in depth shall not be more than one foot (1') in each ten feet (10'). The maximum
slope where water is five feet (5') or more in depth shall not exceed one foot (1') in two feet (2'). (Ord. 186-70, 7-13-1970)
8-3-7: RECIRCULATION AND FILTERING:
A. All swimming pools shall be underground type. Underground pools in sloping areas of the property may be a maximum of two feet six
inches (2'6") above grade for not more than fifty percent (50%) of the pool area. (Ord. 351-85, 4-9-1985)
B. The swimming pool's recirculation system shall consist of pumping equipment, hair and lint catcher, filters, together with the necessary
pipe connections to the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe connections necessary for backwashing filters, and facilities and
equipment for disinfecting the pool water.
C. Every swimming pool shall have a recirculating system with an hourly capacity equal to the pool volume divided by eight (8).
D. The recirculation system pump shall have sufficient capacity to discharge the volume of water required for an eight (8) hour turnover of
the pool against the maximum head in the recirculating system.
E. The pump used for backwashing filters shall have sufficient capacity to provide a filter backwash rate of at least twelve (12) gallons per
minute per square foot of filter area.
F. A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall be installed on the suction side of the circulation pump to prevent hair, lint and other extraneous
matter from reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be so designed that they can be easily dismantled for the cleaning
and inspection and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning. The design features shall be as follows: water passes
through the strainer from the outside; the strainer is made of noncorrosive material; the width or diameter of strainer openings is not
more than one-eighth inch (1/8"); the area of the strainer openings shall be at least five (5) times the cross-sectional area of the inlet
pipe to the strainer.
G. Recirculating systems shall contain rapid pressure filters. Sufficient filter area shall be provided to filter the entire contents of the pool in
eighteen (18) hours at the rate of not more than three (3) gallons per square foot of filter area per minute. The filter backwashing
facilities shall be sufficient to backwash at a rate of twelve (12) gallons per minute per square foot of filter area. All backwash water and
effluents shall be discharged to the sewer through an indirect connection. Pressure filters shall be equipped with readily accessible air
relief valves, loss of head or pressure gauges on the inlet and outlet pipes, and an access head or hole large enough to permit
inspection, maintenance and repair work. Sight glasses that can be easily removed for cleaning shall be provided in the effluent line
from the filter units. (Ord. 186-70, 7-13-1970)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 234/426
8-3-8: INLETS, OUTLETS AND MAKE-UP WATER:
A. Inlets:
1. Swimming pool water recirculation system inlet shall be located so as to produce, so far as possible, uniform circulation of water
throughout the pool without the existence of dead spots and to carry pool bottom deposits to the outlets.
2. The inlets shall discharge at a minimum depth of ten inches (10") below the pool overflow level.
3. A minimum of one recirculation system inlet shall be provided for every six hundred fifteen (615) square feet of surface area of the
pool.
B. Make-Up Water:
1. Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding make-up water as needed.
2. There shall be no physical connection between the water supply line and the pool system. If the make-up water is added directly to
the pool, the outlet shall be at least six inches (6") above the rim of the tank.
3. If a hose connection from a sill cock or other plumbing fixture is to be used for supplying make-up water, then an approved vacuum
breaker shall be installed between the sill cock or control valve at the fixture and the hose connection. The vacuum breaker shall be
installed at a height not less than seven feet six inches (7'6") above the floor, platform or ground upon which a person would stand
when operating the sill cock or control valve. Maximum size of the fill-pipe is to be two inches (2").
C. Outlets:
1. In swimming pools thirty feet (30') in width or less, water circulation system outlets shall be located so as to provide at least one outlet
at the deepest point in the pool.
2. If the pool width is more than thirty feet (30'), multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced not more than thirty feet (30') apart, nor
closer than four feet (4') to any wall.
3. All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of openings not less than four (4) times the cross-sectional area
of the outlet pipe. The gratings shall be of such design so they cannot be readily removable by bathers and will not injure bathers'
fingers.
4. One outlet shall be provided for each eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area.
D. Construction Specifications: The system supplying recirculated water and make-up water to the pool shall be constructed in
conformance with the ordinances regulating plumbing. (Ord. 186-70, 7-13-70)
8-3-9: SKIMMERS:
A. In every swimming pool, at least one skimming device shall be provided for each eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area or
fraction thereof and shall be located at least thirty feet (30') apart.
B. Handholds shall be provided and consist of a bull-nosed coping not over two and one-half inches (21/2") thick for the outer two inches
(2") or an equivalent approved handhold. The handhold must be no more than nine inches (9") above the normal water line.
C. Skimming devices shall be built into the pool wall, shall adequately remove floated oils and waste and shall meet the following general
specifications:
1. Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow-through rate of at least thirty (30) gallons per minute and a total capacity of all skimmers
on any pool shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the required filter flow of the recirculation system.
2. Skimmers shall be automatically adjustable to variations in water level over a range of at least three inches (3").
3. An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through which all overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap large
solids.
4. The skimmer shall be provided with a device to prevent airlock in the suction line. If an equalizer pipe is used, it shall provide an
adequate amount of make-up water for pump suction, should the water of the pool drop below the weir level. This pipe shall be at
least two inches (2") in diameter and shall be located at least one foot (1') below the lowest overflow level of the skimmer.
5. An equalizer line shall be provided with a valve that will remain tightly closed under normal operating conditions, but will automatically
open at a differential of not more than four inches (4") between the pool level and the level of the overflow tank.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 235/426
6. The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a rate of flow of at least twenty (20) gallons per minute per linear foot of weir
lip. (Ord. 186-70, 7-13-1970)
8-3-10: WATER SUPPLY AND CONDITIONING:
A. Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool waters. Disinfection equipment installed for the use of chlorine compounds
shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a minimum free chlorine residual of 0.5 parts per million.
B. Any disinfection method using materials other than chlorine compounds shall be subject to the approval of the Village.
C. The disinfectant shall be introduced into the recirculation system ahead of the filters.
D. Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be made use of as a disinfection method for pool water. (Ord. 186-70, 7-13-1970; amd. Ord.
546-92, 11-16-1992; 1995 Code)
8-3-11: WATER DRAINAGE:
A. Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool and the discharge of the pool water to the sewer shall be at a
rate not exceeding two hundred (200) gallons per minute.
B. No direct connection shall be made to the sewer.
C. Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the sewer system during periods of rain or storms.
D. At no time shall the rate of drain water discharge exceed a flow of two hundred (200) gallons per minute.
E. Plans for draining water from pool must be approved by the Village. (Ord. 186-70, 7-13-1970; amd. Ord. 546-92, 11-16-1992; 1995
Code)
8-3-12: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction with private residential swimming pools shall be in conformance
with the ordinances regulating electrical installations.
B. No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground or within fifteen
feet (15') of such pools.
C. All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to swimming pools which might become electrically charged as a result of
contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause shall be effectively grounded. (Ord. 186-70, 7-13-1970; amd. 1995
Code)
8-3-13: STEPS OR LADDERS:
A. Two (2) or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided for all swimming pools.
B. At least one such means of egress shall be located on a side of the pool at both the deep end and shallow end of the pool.
C. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material and at least three inches (3") wide for their full length.
D. Steps and ladders shall have a handrail on both sides. (Ord. 186-70, 7-13-1970)
8-3-14: WALK AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 236/426
A. Unobstructed walk areas not less than three feet (3') wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool. (Ord. 1793-17, 11-13-
2017)
B. The walk area shall be constructed of impervious material, and the surfaces shall be of such material as to be smooth and easily
cleaned and of nonslip construction.
C. The slope of the walks shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch (1/4") to the foot, designed so as to prevent back drainage from
entering the pool. (Ord. 186-70, 7-13-1970)
8-3-15: FENCES2:
A. All pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence erected along the periphery of the pool and any immediately adjacent pool walk, deck
or terrace area appurtenant to the pool; provided, however, that any such fence shall meet the yard requirements set forth in title 9 of
this Code. In addition, no such fence shall be located in or on an easement and must be no farther than fifteen feet (15') from the edge
of the pool and no closer than three feet (3') to the edge of the pool. A fence may start at and be connected to the house, encircle the
pool and return to and connect to the house, provided that the distance between the house and the edge of the pool is no greater than
twenty five feet (25') and that any exterior door leading from the house to the pool must be equipped with an audible alarm. (Ord. 1793-
17, 11-13-2017)
B. All fence openings or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates and all gates shall be equipped with selfclosing
and self-latching devices placed at the height of four feet (4') and shall be so placed as to be inaccessible to small children.
Fence and gates shall be a minimum of four feet (4') and a maximum of five feet (5') in height above the surface of the ground as
measured along the fence line, and shall be of the open type and shall be wrought iron or similar alternate material as approved by the
Village. Stockade fences are not permitted. All fence posts shall be decay or corrosion resistant and shall be adequately braced below
grade (minimum of 42 inches) in a concrete base.
C. Berms are not permitted adjacent or near to the pool as a means of denying entry into the pool area or for any other purpose, nor is a
fence permitted on top of a berm. Any landscaping inside a swimming pool fence must be so located as not to contribute to the
contamination of the pool water. Landscaping shall be provided outside the fence to screen the fence from the view of the neighbors.
D. All applications for a building permit shall also be deemed an application for a fence permit. Such applications shall be accompanied by
a grading plan and a plat of survey which indicates the placement of the fence, pool walk, pool and all other accessories to be installed
or constructed, in addition to the other requirements set forth in applicable Village codes and ordinances. (Ord. 1047-03, 10-27-2003)
8-3-16: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not more than fifteen inches (15") in diameter and having
sixty feet (60') of three-sixteenths inch (3/16") manila line attached, and one or more light but strong poles with blunted ends and not less
than twelve feet (12') in length, for making reach assists or rescues. (Ord. 186-70, 7-13-1970)
8-3-17: INSPECTIONS:
The Building Department periodically shall inspect all swimming pools during construction to determine whether or not the applicable
Village codes and ordinances are being complied with. Such inspections shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: site, pool
foundation, fence foundation, underground electric, underground plumbing, electrical bonding, concrete deck slab, final electric, final
plumbing, final building and final site. (Ord. 1627-16, 2-22-2016)
8-3-18: VIOLATION, PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of a violation of any section of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code, and
each day any violation of any section of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 546-92, 11-16-1992; amd.
1995 Code)
Chapter 4
FENCES
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 237/426
NATURAL FENCE: Same as a structural fence, except that it is made of natural growth such as shrubs, hedge, evergreens, etc.
STRUCTURAL FENCE: A structure which is a barrier and is used as a boundary or means of protection or confinement which is made of
manufactured material such as, but not limited to, wire mesh, chainlink, wood or stone material. (Ord. 209-74, 7-9-1974)
8-4-2: FENCES PROHIBITED:
No structural fence shall hereafter be constructed, and no natural fence shall hereafter be planted within the boundaries of the Village. (Ord.
209-74, 7-9-1974)
8-4-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
A. Fencing of swimming pools1. (Ord. 1100-05, 1-24-2005)
B. Land zoned Agricultural District (AG) or Agricultural Business District (AB) and used for agricultural or agricultural business purposes
within the Village, provided said fence meets the following standard:
1. Maximum height shall be eight feet (8'). (Ord. 1628-16, 2-22-2016)
C. Dog runs, provided said dog runs meet the following standards:
1. Minimum height shall be four feet (4').
2. Maximum height shall be six feet (6').
3. Maximum area shall be two hundred (200) square feet.
4. Maximum width shall be fifteen feet (15').
5. Maximum length of any side shall be twenty feet (20').
6. The dog run shall be constructed of either chainlink with black vinyl coating, wrought iron, or material similar to wrought iron.
7. Landscaping shall be planted to achieve one hundred percent (100%) opacity at the time of installation. One hundred percent (100%)
opacity shall be maintained twelve (12) months per year.
8. An inside corner of the house or alcove shall be used to screen the dog run, if available.
9. The dog run shall not be visible from the street.
10. The dog run must be attached to the house; if the dog run is rectangular in shape, the longest side of the dog run must be attached
to the house. (Ord. 1100-05, 1-24-2005)
D. Land zoned municipal and used for Municipal purposes within the Village. (Ord. 1611-15, 11-23-2015)
E. Seasonal garden fencing, provided said seasonal garden fencing meets the following standards:
1. Maximum height of fencing shall be two feet (2') from grade, not artificial built up soil mounding.
2. Fencing color shall be neutral in tone, such as silver/gray, black, green, or brown.
3. Fencing design shall be open type with clear visible openings (e.g., wire mesh). Snow fences, construction fences, or tarps
(tarpaulins) of any kind shall not be permitted.
4. Maximum of two (2) fenced gardens shall be allowable per residential property.
5. Each fence shall enclose or surround an active or operative garden area with live plantings, no greater than one hundred forty four
(144) square feet.
6. Fencing shall only be located in the rear yard.
7. Minimum of five feet (5') from property line.
8. No fencing shall be allowed between November 1st and March 1st of each year. (Ord. 1814-18, 2-26-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 238/426
8-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
Code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after notification by the Village Clerk shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 209-74, 7-9-1974; amd. 1995 Code)
Chapter 5
SATELLITE ANTENNA SYSTEMS
8-5-1: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to install, erect or operate a satellite antenna system without having secured a building permit
therefor prior to the commencement of construction. (Ord. 345-84, 9-11-1984; amd. 1995 Code)
B. Fee: The building permit fee for a satellite antenna system shall be as set forth in subsection 11-1-1H1 of this Code. (Ord. 1796-17, 12-
13-2017)
8-5-2: SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A person desirous of installing, erecting, constructing or operating a satellite antenna system may apply for a special use permit therefor
from the Village Plan Commission1. The Plan Commission shall consider the application in accordance with applicable procedures set forth
in this Code. The Plan Commission may recommend a special use permit to the Village Board of Trustees to construct a satellite antenna
system; provided, that the proposed system shall satisfy all of the following criteria:
A. The system as proposed shall be compatible with existing uses in the surrounding area.
B. The system as proposed shall be screened, or otherwise situated, so as not to be a visual obtrusion to surrounding properties.
C. The construction and installation of the satellite antenna system shall strictly conform to all applicable Village Code provisions.
D. The proposed satellite antenna system shall only be situated within the buildable areas of a lot, exclusive of front yard and corner side
yard.
E. The proposed satellite antenna system shall have no adverse impact on adjacent properties.
F. The proposed satellite antenna system shall be structurally sound and adequate for anticipated wind loads, and must have a permanent
foundation therefor. (Ord. 345-84, 9-11-1984)
8-5-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day during, or upon which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 345-84, 9-11-1984; amd. 1995 Code)
Chapter 6
GRADING AND DRAINING OF LOTS
8-6-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
A. Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any grading, defoliation, filling or excavation work on any property within the village
without first having obtained a permit therefor from the village engineer, or to perform such work in violation of any term or condition
contained in said permit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 239/426
B. Fee: The fee for a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as set forth in subsection 11-1-1H7 of this code which shall be paid at
the time of application. (Ord. 471-90, 11-12-1990; amd. 1995 Code)
8-6-2: EXCEPTIONS TO REQUIREMENTS:
This chapter shall not apply to, nor shall a permit be required hereunder, for grading, defoliation, filling or excavation work on any property
within the village which involves:
A. Excavations below finished grade for septic tanks and drain fields, vaults, driveways, swimming pools or footings of buildings or
structures, for which a building permit shall have been issued by the village.
B. Excavation or removal of vegetation in public utility easements by public utility companies for the purpose of installing underground
utilities.
C. The tilling of the soil for farming or agricultural purposes upon property zoned for such uses.
D. Grading, defoliation, filling or excavation work which:
1. Involves less than one hundred (100) square feet in area; and
2. Involves fill not exceeding one foot (1') in vertical depth, as measured from the natural ground surface at any point and one hundred
(100) cubic feet in total volume; and/or
3. Involves excavation not exceeding one foot (1') in vertical depth, as measured from the natural ground surface at any point and one
hundred (100) cubic feet in total volume; and
4. Does not alter drainage onto or off of adjacent property; and
5. Does not involve any work within any flood plain, floodway, wetlands, drainage easement or drainage facility. (Ord. 471-90, 11-12-
1990)
The village engineer or designated representative may approve a waiver of compliance with the permit requirements of this chapter,
upon the written request of a property owner, where the property has been previously improved with the principal use or structure and
the project consists only of minor additions to existing dwellings or structures or the construction of accessory buildings, or minor
landscaping. A permit waiver request shall include: a) a legal description and address of the property; b) a brief description of the
work to be performed; c) a site plan; and d) a statement signed by the property owner as follows:
The applicant hereby certifies that he is the owner of the property described herein, and certifies that to the best of his knowledge,
the above described project will not disturb existing topography within three (3) feet of adjacent properties or will not create adverse
drainage problems on adjacent property. The applicant does hereby, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, release, acquit
and forever discharge the Village, its officers, agents and employees, from any and all actions, causes of actions, claims, damages,
expenses, fees, attorneys fees, interest, costs or expenses, arising or which could have arisen out of the above described project,
including any claim which may now or hereinafter exist. Further, the applicant hereby agrees, to the fullest extent permitted by
applicable law, to indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its officers, agents and employees, against all injuries, expenses, deaths,
loss, damages, claims, suits, liabilities, judgments, cost and expenses, which may otherwise accrue against the Village, its officers,
agents and employees, arising in whole or in part out of or in consequence of the above described project.
The village engineer or designated representative may approve a waiver of compliance with the site development plan submittal
requirements of this chapter, upon the written request of a property owner, if the village engineer or designated representative
determines that: a) no major watercourse is crossing the buildable portion of the property; b) no portion of proposed building or site
grading is within the flood plain; c) no portion of proposed building or site grading is within bluff or ravine areas; d) no filling, grading,
paving or construction of accessory buildings or structures is within ten feet (10') of side or rear lot lines; e) the principal structure will
be located forty feet (40') or more from any side or rear lot lines; and f) a contour map of the area or property at no more than two foot
(2') contour intervals and the scale no less than one inch equal to two hundred feet (1" = 200'), shall be on file in the office of the
village engineer and/or building department. A site development plan submittal waiver request shall include: a) a legal description and
address of the property; b) a brief description of the work to be performed; c) a plot plan of project showing dimensions from lot lines,
height of foundation, location of driveway, provisions for roof drainage, and proposed grading limits; and d) a statement signed by the
property owner as follows:
The applicant hereby certifies that he is the owner of the property described herein, and certifies that to the best of his knowledge
that the described project will conform to the conditions for grading site development plan submittal set forth in the Village's Code of
Ordinances, and will not create adverse drainage problems on adjacent property. The applicant does hereby, to the fullest extent
permitted by applicable law, release, acquit and forever discharge the Village, its officers, agents and employees, from any and all
actions, causes of actions, claims, damages, expenses, fees, attorneys fees, interest, costs or expenses, arising or which could have
arisen out of the above described project, including any claim which may now or hereinafter exist. Further, the applicant hereby
agrees, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, to indemnify and hold harmless the Village, its officers, agents and
employees, against all injuries, expenses, deaths, loss, damages, claims, suits, liabilities, judgments, cost and expenses, which may
otherwise accrue against the Village, its officers, agents and employees, arising in whole or in part out of or in consequence of the
above described project.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 240/426
(Ord. 894-00, 3-13-2000)
8-6-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for a permit authorizing grading, defoliation, filling or excavation work shall be made to the village on a form furnished for that
purpose. Each application shall be accompanied by four (4) sets of site development plans, drawn on sheets no less than eight and onehalf
inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11") and no larger than twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"), and at a scale of one inch
equals twenty feet (1" = 20') except where property exceeds two (2) acres, in which case a larger scale may be used. Said plans shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer and contain the following information:
A. A drawing showing acreage of site, boundary line survey, zoning, type and location of proposed work, location of existing utilities
(including septic systems and wells), buildings and drains on and within one hundred feet (100') of the site, together with a legend and
scale. There shall be included on or with such drawing:
1. Topographic features and contours for the property and areas abutting or adjacent to the property, extending not less than fifty feet
(50') beyond each lot line of the property, at one foot (1') intervals except where the average slope of the property is two percent (2%)
or less, in which case contours shall be shown at one-half foot (0.5') intervals. Contour elevations shall be USGS elevations datum
where USGS elevation bench marks are available within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property, and where USGS elevation bench
marks are not so available, elevations shall be determined from the closest manhole rim elevation as shown on the as-built
engineering improvement plans. In the event that neither USGS elevation bench marks or manhole rim elevations are available, the
center of the adjacent roadway shall be used as the bench mark. Bench marks utilized shall be clearly indicated.
2. A soil map of the subject property showing the predominant soil types on the site.
3. Spot elevations of all critical locations, including, but not limited to: all lot corners; points along the property lines or along the
perimeter of the area to be regraded or landscaped, at twenty five foot (25') intervals; and, all points where drainage courses cross
the property lines.
4. Structure locations; foundation elevations of all buildings; limits of flood plain(s), floodways, wetlands, drainage easements and
drainage facilities; and, trees six inches (6") in diameter or greater.
5. The proposed: contours and final grades; top of foundation for all buildings; elevations of all building entrances; elevations of
proposed finished ground grade at all significant points around each proposed building; connections to public sanitary and storm
sewers including invert elevations, size and location of said public sewers; location and disposition of downspouts and footing drain
discharges; and, street profiles for any street(s).
6. Areas to be sodded, seeded, mulched or paved, including proposed driveway locations and gradients. Where driveway culverts are
required, the plan shall show: the proposed location, size and type of culvert; the proposed culvert entrance and discharge elevations;
ditch gradients at twenty five foot (25') intervals within one hundred feet (100') of the lot line in each direction from the proposed
culvert; and, inverts of existing upstream and downstream culverts.
7. Acreage of an area to be vegetatively stabilized, if any.
8. Areas to be left undisturbed.
B. Generally:
1. With respect to site grading, the measures that will be employed to protect cut and fill slopes from surface runoff.
2. No foundation elevation shall be placed higher than four feet (4') above existing established grade.
3. Utility services (water, sanitary, storm, gas, electric, telephone and cable television) shall, wherever possible, be located so as to
prevent damage to or destruction of trees on the site. Utility services may be augured, if necessary to minimize damage to or
destruction of trees.
4. With respect to excavation or filling, the area and scope of the work including volume calculations, the type of excavation or fill
material, and a grading plan. The existing grade shall not be altered, either by cutting or filling, by more than a total of four feet (4').
5. With respect to defoliation, the types and quantity of material to be removed.
C. Storm drainage plan based upon a competent storm drainage study, including a drainage area map and computations, and indicating
what conditions prevail at both current and proposed outlets.
D. An outline of the development schedule, including:
1. The start of clearing date.
2. Installation of temporary sediment control measures (vegetative and structural) by phase and date.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 241/426
3. Installation of storm drains and storm water control facilities by phase and date, if any.
4. Date of excavation, filling or grading, if any.
5. Paving of streets and parking areas, if any, by phase.
6. Establishment of permanent vegetative cover.
7. Installation of permanent structural sediment control measures.
E. All hydraulic and volume design computations.
F. All flood plain development plans shall include computations of volumes by the "Average end areas" method for existing and proposed
flood plain volumes. In addition, calculations showing the effect of any floodway shall be submitted as part of the application.
G. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the village engineer for approval showing all the erosion and sediment
control measures needed to provide protection throughout all the phases of construction. These plans shall also include any off-site
borrow and spoil areas, sewer lines, utility lines, and haul and access roads. Said erosion and sediment control plans shall meet the
following standards:
1. The smallest practicable area of land shall be exposed at any given time in the development.
2. The area exposed shall be kept to as short a duration of time as practicable.
3. Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or soil traps shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters
from land undergoing development.
4. Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil surface conditions during and after
development.
5. Permanent, final plant covering of structures shall be installed as soon as practicable.
6. The erosion control plan shall relate to the topography and soil at the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.
7. The applicable requirements of title 10, chapter 4 of this code, or any successor ordinances of the village.
H. Certification from a registered professional engineer that floodproofing methods are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated with the base flood. (Ord. 894-00, 3-13-2000)
8-6-4: SECURITY DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
The applicant shall be required to deposit with the village a cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit to cover all the costs of improvements
and landscaping required for compliance with the site development plan. Such security shall not be reduced to less than ten percent (10%)
of its original amount, or three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), whichever is greater, until after the completion of the entire work to the
satisfaction of the village engineer and until the receipt of a certificate from a registered professional engineer attesting to the compliance of
the entire work to the requirements of the site development plan. With respect to new construction where the applicant is required to submit
a security deposit in connection with the building permit, the applicant shall not be required to deposit a separate security deposit under this
section. (Ord. 471-90, 11-12-1990; amd. Ord. 894-00, 3-13-2000)
8-6-5: CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
If the village engineer finds the application to be in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and that the proposed work is in
compliance with all applicable ordinances of the village, he shall issue a permit for the proposed work. The village engineer may issue such
permit subject to such reasonable conditions as he deems necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable ordinances of the village.
However, no permit shall be issued unless:
A. Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit issued by the village; or
B. The proposed grading, fill or excavation is coordinated with any overall plan previously approved by the village for the area in which the
site is situated. (Ord. 471-90, 11-12-1990)
8-6-6: APPEAL DECISION OF VILLAGE ENGINEER:
The village engineer shall make a determination as to approval or denial of the application for a permit within thirty (30) days after receipt of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 242/426
all necessary information. The applicant may appeal the decision of the village engineer to the village board. Factors to be considered by
the village board in their review shall include, but not be limited to, the effects of the proposed work on the surface water flow to tributary
and downstream lands, any comprehensive watershed management plans, or the multi-use of any retention facilities; possible saturation of
fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; runoff surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainageways;
nature and type of soil or rock that, when disturbed by the proposed work, may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be
landscaped, and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through grading or removal of vegetation. (Ord. 471-90, 11-
12-1990)
8-6-7: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN RETENTION; INSPECTION:
Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be retained in original form or on microfilm by the village engineer. The
village engineer shall make inspections as required to ensure compliance with the site development plan and any permit conditions. As a
part of any request for an occupancy permit, the applicant shall submit an as built survey showing the work's compliance with the approved
plans. In connection with issuance of an occupancy permit for any work where the site grading work does not comply with any permit
conditions or applicable requirements of this code at the time of any requested inspection, the village engineer or designated representative
shall give notice to the permit holder, including a copy of the inspection report. The permit holder shall complete all corrective measures
identified in the inspection report within thirty (30) days of said notice, provided, however, that where the village engineer or designated
representative makes a finding that an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or to other property, results from the
noncompliance with permit conditions or violation of applicable code requirements, such finding shall be set forth in said notice and the
permit holder shall complete all corrective measures identified in the inspection report as relating to said danger within five (5) days of said
notice. (Ord. 471-90, 11-12-1990; amd. Ord. 894-00, 3-13-2000)
8-6-8: STOP WORK ORDER; FEE:
A. Issuance: In the event that any person attempts to perform any work requiring a permit under this chapter without having obtained such
a permit or, in the event any person holding a permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or conducts or carries on
said work in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood of the property of the said permittee, or conducts or carries on said site development so that it is materially detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to property, improvements in the neighborhood, public ways, watercourses, or any drainage structures,
the village engineer shall issue, in writing, a stop work order which shall be effective immediately. The stop work order shall be given to
the owner of the property involved or to the owner's agent or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which
work may be resumed.
B. Fee: Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of a written stop work order except on the written permission of the village engineer
and the payment of a fee as set forth in subsection 11-1-1H11 of this code, a stop work order administrative fee. (Ord. 471-90, 11-12-
1990; amd. 1995 Code)
8-6-9: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has
not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days, or is not completed within one year from date of issuance; except that the village
engineer may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed
within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the expiration date of the permit.
(Ord. 471-90, 11-12-1990)
8-6-10: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Each day such
violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 471-90, 11-12-1990; amd. 1995 Code)
Title 9
ZONING
Chapter 1
ZONING PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION
9-1-1: TITLE:
This Title shall be known, cited and referred to as the HAWTHORN WOODS ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 243/426
9-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
This Title is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of the people.
B. To divide the Village into zones or districts restricting and regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration
and use of buildings, structures and land for residence, business, manufacturing and other specified uses.
C. To protect the character and the stability of the residential, business and manufacturing areas within the Village of Hawthorn Woods and
to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas.
D. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property.
E. To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide
adequate light and air, and to protect the public health.
F. To establish building lines and the locations of buildings designed for residential, business and manufacturing or other uses within such
areas.
G. To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform therein.
H. To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character or development or intended uses within specified zoning
districts.
I. To prevent additions to or alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereunder.
J. To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for off-street
parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles.
K. To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in the interest of public health, safety, comfort and general welfare.
L. To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by
regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them.
M. To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the Village.
N. To provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings and structures which are adversely affecting the
character and value of desirable development in each district.
O. To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as provided herein.
P. Protecting the air, water and land resources of the Village from the hazards of pollution.
Q. Protecting land and buildings and the lawful uses of land and buildings from natural hazards including flooding and erosion.
R. Encouraging the construction and maintenance of a full range of housing opportunities so as to enable all persons working within the
jurisdiction to reside therein. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-1-3: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Minimum Requirements: The provisions herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, morals
and welfare.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 244/426
B. Relationships with Other Laws: Where the conditions imposed by any provision herein upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk
of buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision herein or any other
law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive shall govern. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-1-4: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
A. Change in Structures or Use: Except as may otherwise be provided, all buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings and
structures established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings and structures occurring hereafter, and all
enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter, shall be subject to all regulations herein which are applicable to the
zoning district in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located.
B. Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses: Any lawful building, structure or use existing on the effective date hereof may be
continued, even though such building, structure or use does not conform to the provisions herein for the district in which it is located,
and whenever a district shall be changed hereafter, the then existing lawful use may be continued, subject to the provisions in Chapter
10 of this Title.
C. Building Permits: Where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date
hereof; and provided that, construction is completed within fifteen (15) months of permit issuance, said building or structure may be
completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued, and further may, upon
completion, be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions
of Chapter 10 of this Title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-1-5: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Village that the several provisions of this Title are separable in accordance with the following:
A. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this Title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions not specifically included in said judgment.
B. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this Title to a particular property, building or
other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provisions to any other property, building or structure not
specifically included in said judgment. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
Chapter 2
ZONING RULES AND DEFINITIONS
9-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this Title, the rules and definitions contained in this Chapter shall be observed and applied, except when the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number.
C. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied for".
D. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
E. The word "may" is permissive. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 245/426
As used in this Title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
ABANDONMENT: An action to give up one's rights or interest in property.
ACCESSORY BUILDING or USE: A. An "accessory building or use" is one which:
1. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
2. Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use served;
3. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served; and
4. Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or principal use served with the single exception of such accessory offstreet
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the building or use served.
B. An "accessory use" includes, but is not limited to, the following:
1. A children's playhouse, garden house and private greenhouse;
2. A shed, garage, or building for domestic storage;
3. Incinerators incidental to residential use;
4. Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot with any retail service or business use, unless such storage is
excluded by the district regulations;
5. Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities on the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities unless
such storage is excluded by the district regulations;
6. A non-paying guest house or rooms for guests within an "accessory building", provided such facilities are used for the occasional
housing of guests of the occupants of the principal building and not for permanent occupancy others as housekeeping units;
7. Servant's quarters comprising part of an accessory garage and solely for occupancy by a servant or household employee (and his
or her family) of the occupants of the principal dwelling;
8. Swimming pool private, covered or uncovered, for the use by the occupant and his guests;
9. Off street automobile parking areas, loading and unloading facilities;
10. Signs (other than advertising signs) as permitted and regulated in each district incorporated herein;
11. Carports; (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
12. Public utility facilities. All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber
optic cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables,
water and sewer lines and appurtenances thereto), for the transmission, reception, conveyance, storage, control, safety, or
otherwise offering, providing or furnishing electricity, gas, steam, telecommunications, cable or video services as defined in the
Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v), and all other utilities; (Ord. 1242-07, 12-
17-2007)
13. Survival shelter.
ACRE, GROSS: Forty three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet.
ACREAGE: Any tract or parcel of land having an area of one acre or more which has not heretofore been subdivided or platted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 246/426
AGRICULTURE: All the processes of planting, growing, harvesting of crops in the open and the raising and feeding of livestock and poultry;
including farming, farm buildings, and farm dwellings, truck gardens, flower gardens, aviaries, mushroom growing, nurseries, orchards,
forestry, dairying, greenhouses and commercial vegetables.
ALTERATIONS: Any change in size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a building or structure.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL: Any change which would tend to prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such
as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care, observation or treatment of domestic animals. (Ord. 381-
87, 6-9-1987)
ANTENNA, NO IMPACT: A PWS antenna which is virtually invisible to the casual observer, such as an antenna installed behind louvers on
a building, or inside a steeple or similar structure; or camouflaged so as to blend in with its surroundings to such an extent that it is not
more obtrusive to the casual observer than the structure on which it is placed, such as a rooftop, lighting standard, or existing PWS tower.
ANTENNA, PWS: Any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, and used for personal
wireless services. (Ord. 911-00, 9-11-2000)
ANTENNA, TV: Attached to the side or mounted on the roof shall be less than seven feet (7') above the highest point of the residence it is
attached to or mounted on.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single
housekeeping unit. Complete kitchen facilities, (sink, stove, refrigerator and storage facilities) permanently installed and complete bath and
toilet facilities, permanently installed must always be included for each apartment.
APARTMENT HOTEL: See definition of Apartment.
AUDITORIUM: A room, hall or building made a part of a church, theater, school, recreation building or other building assigned to the
gathering of people as an audience to hear lectures, plays and other presentations.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY (AUTOMATIC): A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing automobiles, using production line
methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other mechanical devices.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY (SELF-SERVICE): A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing automobiles, using self-service
mechanical devices.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning, worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service,
including body, frame or fender straightening or repair, and painting of vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: Incidental repair, replacement of parts and motor service to automobiles, but not including any operation
specified under "Automobile Repair, Major".
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline, stored only in underground tanks, lubricating oil or grease for operation of
automobiles are offered for sale directly to the public, on the premises, and including minor accessories and the servicing of automobiles,
but not including major automobile repairs; and including the washing of automobiles where no chain conveyor, blower or steam-cleaning
device is employed. When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or oils is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the
premises shall be classified as a public garage. Automobile service stations shall not include sale, rent or storage of automobiles or trailers
(new or used).
AWNING: A roof-like cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the wall of a building or overhangs the public way.
BANKS AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS: Commercial banks, currency exchanges, saving and loan associations, brokerage offices and
other similar financial institutions, but not including loan offices, finance companies and pawnshops.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also
known as the 100-year flood.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The highest water surface elevation of the base flood.
BASEMENT: A portion of the building partly or wholly underground. Finished basement areas less than four feet (4') below the exterior
grade may be used to augment the minimum square foot requirement for a one story structure in order to arrive at the minimum square foot
requirement for a two (2) story structure.
BEACH: Beach is that portion of the shoreline of a lake or pond both above and below the high-water line which is sanded, pebbled or
graveled and used for activities normally associated with shore front properties. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
BED AND BREAKFAST: A single-family dwelling unit that is owner-occupied where overnight accommodations, short-term lodging and
breakfast are provided for compensation. (Ord. 827-98, 5-11-1998)
BEDROOM: Any room used for sleeping purposes other than a living room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom, utility room or family room for
the purpose of this title shall be considered a bedroom.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 247/426
BILLBOARD: Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or advertisements used as an outdoor display. This definition does not
include bulletin boards used to announce church services or to display court or other public office notices, or signs offering the sale or lease
of the premises on which the sign is located.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or in lieu of a street or streets, by public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead
lines or shorelines of waterways or corporate boundary lines of municipalities.
BOATHOUSE: Any structure designed for the purpose of protecting or storing of boats used in conjunction with a residence for
noncommercial purposes, and located on the same lot as the principal building and not for human habitation.
BORROW PIT: Any place or premises where dirt, soil, gravel or other material is removed by excavation or otherwise below the grade of
surrounding land for any purpose other than the necessary and incidental to grading or to building construction or operation on the
premises.
BUILDABLE AREA: The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum yard requirements have been complied with.
BUILDING: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other
structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings, and which is designed or intended for the
shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals or chattels.
Any structure with interior areas not normally accessible for human use, such as gas holders, oil tanks, water tanks, grain elevators, coal
bunkers, oil cracking towers and other similar structures are not considered as buildings.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space or from other buildings or other
structures by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open space on the same zoning lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance as measured from the average ground elevation of the structure perimeter to the highest point of
such structure (not including chimney).
BUILDING LINE: A line on a lot, parallel to a lot line or street right of way line of sufficient distance to provide the required yards, delineating
the area in which structures are permitted subject to the provisions of this title.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit by the building official of the village of Hawthorn Woods for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition
of a building or structure within the village of Hawthorn Woods.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which the principal use of the zoning lot on which it is located is conducted.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A building line establishing the minimum allowable distance between a street right of way line and any
structure.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located in the place where it is or where it is intended to be placed
or affixed.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or structures and location of same with respect to one another and
includes the following:
A. Size and height of buildings;
B. Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, street or other buildings;
C. All open spaces allocated to the building;
D. Amount of lot area per dwelling unit;
E. Required parking areas.
BUS LOTS: Any lot or land area used for the storage or layover of passenger buses or motor coaches.
BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: The office of an engineer, doctor, dentist, attorney, real estate broker, insurance broker,
architect, or other similar professional person, and any office used primarily for accounting, correspondence, research, editing or
administration. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
CARDHOLDER: A qualifying patient or a designated caregiver who has been issued and possesses a valid registry identification card by
the Illinois department of public health. (Ord. 1529-15, 2-23-2015)
CARPORT: A roofed over area attached to the principal building for vehicle storage, which may be open on three (3) sides.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 248/426
CELLAR: See definition of Basement.
CLINIC OR MEDICAL HEALTH CENTER: A medical center or medical clinic is an establishment where licensed doctors of medicine
engage in the practice of medicine, operating on a group or individual basis, with pooled facilities such as coordinated laboratory, X-ray and
allied departments, for the diagnosis and treatment of humans, which need not, but may include, a drug prescription counter (not a
drugstore) for the dispensing of drugs and pharmaceutical products to the patients of the said organization. In addition to the above, the
medical center or medical clinic may include the space for the practice of dentistry.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or
leases land, a building or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests.
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION: A land subdivision with a majority of the individual building sites abutting directly on parks or other common
open space.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which:
A. Complies with all the regulations of this title or of any amendment thereof governing bulk of the district in which said building or
structure is located; or
B. Is designed or intended for a permitted use or conditioned permitted use, as herein allowed in the district in which it is located.
COURT, OUTER: An open unoccupied space opening onto a street or yard.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. Where a building faces on
more than one street the "curb level" shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center of the front of each street. Where no curb
elevation has been established, the level of the street centerline shall be considered the "curb level". (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
DAYCARE CENTER: Any childcare facility which regularly provides daycare for less than twenty four (24) hours per day for: a) more than
eight (8) children in a family home, or b) more than three (3) children in a facility other than a family home, as defined by the "childcare act
of 1969".
DAYCARE HOME: Any childcare facility which regularly provides daycare for less than twenty four (24) hours per day for up to six (6)
children (exclusive of applicant's family members) in a family home. (Ord. 983-02, 5-20-2002)
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of
sound are calibrated in "decibels". (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
DESIGNATED CAREGIVER: A person who: a) is at least twenty one (21) years of age; b) has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use
of cannabis; c) has not been convicted of an excluded offense, as defined in the state statute; and d) assists no more than one registered
qualifying patient with his or her medical use of cannabis. (Ord. 1529-15, 2-23-2015)
DISTRICT: The area into which the village of Hawthorn Woods has been divided for which uniform regulations governing the use, size and
intensity of land and buildings and open space about buildings is established. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: The use of buildings, structures, or parts thereof, to provide or dispense products or services, either wholly
or in part, through an attendant or window or automated machine, to persons in motorized vehicles that are in a designated stacking space.
A drive-through facility may be allowed only as a special use, and only accessory to a principal use. A drive-through facility does not include
a vehicle washing facility external to a building, a vacuum cleaning station accessory to a vehicle washing facility, or an automobile/gasoline
service station. (Ord. 1398-12, 6-18-2012)
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof, but not including house trailer or mobile home designed or used exclusively for residential
occupancy, including one-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and multiple-family dwelling units, but not including hotels, motels,
boarding or lodging houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space and is not connected to any other dwelling unit by roof,
walls or porches on the same lot.
DWELLING, GROUP: Two (2) or more one-family, two-family or multiple-family dwellings or boarding or lodging houses, located on one
zoning lot but not including tourist courts or motels.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof, designed or altered for occupancy by three (3) or more families living
independently of each other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A dwelling unit designed exclusively for use and occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, ROW (PARTY WALL): A row of two (2) or more attached one-family party wall dwellings, not more than two and one-half (21/2)
stories in height nor more than one dwelling unit in depth, measured from the building line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 249/426
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED: A dwelling joined to one other dwelling by a party wall, or vertical cavity wall, and aboveground physically
unifying horizontal structural elements.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed or altered to provide dwelling units, each with a separate entrance, for occupancy by two
(2) families living independently of one another.
DWELLING UNIT: Consists of one or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters for one family only. Individual
bathrooms and complete kitchen facilities, permanently installed, shall always be included with each dwelling unit.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS: Public, parochial, charitable or nonprofit junior college, college or university, other than trade or business
schools including instructional and recreational uses with or without living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants and other
incidental facilities for students, teachers and employees.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room for living, sleeping and eating plus facilities for cooking and a complete
bath and toilet facilities. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
ENCLOSED, LOCKED FACILITY: A room, greenhouse, building, or other enclosed area equipped with locks or other security devices that
permit access only by a cultivation center's agent(s) or a dispensing organization's agent(s) working for the registered cultivation center or
the registered dispensing organization to cultivate, store, and distribute cannabis for registered qualifying patients. (Ord. 1529-15, 2-23-
2015)
FAA: The federal aviation administration.
FCC: The federal communications commission. (Ord. 911-00, 9-11-2000)
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive
of household servants. A number of persons but not exceeding two (2) living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit though
not related by blood, adoption, or marriage shall be deemed to constitute a family. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
FARMSTAND: An establishment devoted to seasonal retail sales of horticultural and floricultural produce, Christmas trees, nursery stock
and related supplies. Farmstands shall occupy a minimum of two (2) acres, shall take access only from arterial or collector streets, shall
provide adequate off street parking and screening, and shall involve no sales or storage of bulk materials nor any sales of animals, poultry,
fish or fowl. (Ord. 520-21, 6-8-1992)
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN: Floodplains may be either riverine or inland depressional areas. Riverine floodplains are those areas contiguous to a lake,
pond, stream, or streambed whose elevation is greater than the normal water pool elevation but equal to or lower than the projected 100-
year flood elevation. Inland depressional floodplains are floodplains not associated with a stream system to which surrounding lands drain
causing periodic inundation by stormwaters that are subject to inundation by the base flood.
FLOODWAY: The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the regional flood.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (For The Purpose Of Determining Requirements For Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading): The sum of the
gross horizontal area of the several floors of the buildings or portion thereof, devoted to such use, including accessory storage areas
located within selling or working space, such as counters, racks or closets, and any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to
the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.
However, floor area, for the purposes of measurement for off street parking spaces, shall not include floor area devoted primarily for
storage purposes. The following areas shall not be included for the purpose of measurement of off-street parking spaces:
A. Floor area devoted to off street parking or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps and maneuvering space;
B. Basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing or service activities or the production or processing of goods, or to business
or professional offices.
FLOOR AREA, SINGLE-FAMILY: Gross living area excluding porch, garage, breezeway and similar portion of the structure not intended for
continued living.
FREEWAY: A major highway having no intersections at grade and having fully controlled access, hence "free" from conflicts and
interruptions.
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave measuring the pitch of the resulting sound.
FRONTAGE: All the property fronting on one side of a street between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets measured along the line of the
street or, if dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street or the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 250/426
property on one side of a street between an intersecting street and a right of way, waterway or other similar barrier.
GARAGE, BUS: Any building used or intended to be used for the storage of one or more passenger motor buses or motor coaches used in
public transportation, including school buses.
GARAGE, BUS OR TRUCK: A building which is used or intended to be used for the storage of motor trucks, truck trailers, tractors and
commercial vehicles exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: Any accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal building which is intended for and used to store the
private passenger vehicles of the family or families residing on the premises, and in which no business, service or industry connected
directly or indirectly with the automobile vehicles is carried on; provided, that not more than one-half (1/2) of the space may be rented for the
private vehicles of persons not residing on the premises, except that all the space in a garage of one or two (2) car capacity may be so
rented. Such a garage shall not be used for more than two (2) commercial vehicles and the load capacity of such vehicles shall not exceed
two and one-half (21/2) tons.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building other than a private garage used for the care, incidental servicing and sale of automobile supplies or where
motor vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale within the structure but not including trucks, tractors, truck trailers and
commercial vehicles exceeding one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
GOLF COURSE: Public, semipublic or private grounds over which the game of golf is played, including accessory buildings and land uses
incidental thereto. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
GRADE: The average elevation of the finished ground level adjoining the building as established by the lowest points within the area
between the building and a point five feet (5') from the building. For buildings with "walkout" type basements, the grade shall be established
as provided herein, except that the ground level adjoining the exterior wall of said basement which includes said "walkout" area shall be
excluded for purposes of calculating said average elevation. (Ord. 752-96, 1-8-1996)
GRADE, STREET: The elevation of the established street in front of the building measured at the center of such front and at the centerline
of the street. Where no street grade has been established, the village engineer shall establish such street grade or its equivalent for the
purposes of this section. In establishing the street grade, the village engineer shall use reasonable engineering standards and practices to
determine the elevation.
GROSS DENSITY: The ratio between total number of dwelling units on a lot and total lot area in acres.
GROUND FLOOR AREA: The lot area covered by a principal building measured at grade from the exterior faces of exterior walls. (Ord.
381-87, 6-9-1987)
HEAD SHOP: A retail outlet that specializes in drug paraphernalia related to consumption of cannabis, other recreational drugs, and/or new
age herbs, as well as counterculture art, magazines, music, clothing, and home decor. Products typically include, but are not limited to,
water pipes, bongs, roach clips, pipes, rolling papers, rolling machines, and whipped cream chargers containing nitrous oxide. (Ord. 1529-
15, 2-23-2015)
HOME OCCUPATION: See section 9-3-4 of this title.
HOSPITAL OR SANATORIUM: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or
care for not less than twenty four (24) hours in any week of three (3) or more nonrelated individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury,
deformity or other abnormal physical conditions.
HOTEL, MOTEL OR INN: An establishment containing lodging accommodations designed for use by transients or travelers or temporary
guests. Facilities provided may include main service, laundering of linen used on the premises, telephone and secretarial or desk service,
meeting rooms, restaurants, including the sale of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: A structure or portion thereof, or lot of record used for housing, keeping and/or maintenance of more than three
(3) dogs, or three (3) cats, or three (3) other domestic animals, or any combination thereof, over the age of four (4) months. (Ord. 799-97,
7-14-1997)
LABORATORY, COMMERCIAL: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing. Manufacturing, assembly or
packaging of products is not included within this definition.
LAND USE INTENSITY: The overall structural mass and open space relationship in a developed property.
LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE OR BERTH, OFF STREET: An open, hard surfaced area of land other than a street or a public way,
the principal use of which is for the standing, loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers, to avoid undue interference with
public streets and alleys.
LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE: A building with not more than five (5) guestrooms where lodging is provided for compensation pursuant
to previous arrangement, but not open on a daily, overnight or per meal basis to transient guests.
LOT: Parcel of land legally described as a district portion or piece of land of record.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by vertical planes containing the front, side and rear lot lines but excluding any street,
easement for street purposes or right of way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 251/426
LOT, CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, or a lot at the point of deflection in
alignment of a single street, the interior angle of which is one hundred thirty five degrees (135) or less.
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines of a lot measured within the lot boundaries. (Ord. 381-87,
6-9-1987)
LOT FRONT: A lot that is part of a lot in depth subdivision which has frontage along a public street and is situated between said street and
a lot in depth. (Ord. 843-98, 9-14-1998)
LOT FRONTAGE: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a street; for a corner lot, the front of a lot shall be the shortest
boundary along a street excluding the turning radius. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
LOT IN DEPTH: A lot that does not have frontage along a public street, but has access to a public street by virtue of a permanent
ingress/egress easement.
LOT IN DEPTH SUBDIVISION: A subdivision of one or more lots which results in one or more lots in depth and one or more front lots.
(Ord. 843-98, 9-14-1998)
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership, except that where any portion of the lot extends to the
abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The front property line of a zoning lot.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A side lot line common with another lot.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel to and most remote from the front lot lines.
LOT LINES, SIDE: Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines are side lot lines.
LOT OF RECORD: A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of
Lake County, Illinois; or a single parcel of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Lake County,
Illinois.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of another lot, whether across an alley or not.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot
both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured within the lot boundaries.
MANUFACTURE: The production, making or processing of products or commodities for general consumption by the public or for sale to
specialized institutions or organizations. Also included is the subassembly, fabrications or processing of parts or components for use in
other products or commodities.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY: A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects from the wall of a building and may overhang the public
way and is designed and intended to protect pedestrians from adverse weather conditions. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
MEDICAL CANNABIS CONTAINER: A sealed, traceable, food compliant, tamper resistant, tamper evident container, or package used for
the purpose of containment of medical cannabis from a cultivation center to a dispensing organization.
MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER OR CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or business that is
registered by the Illinois department of agriculture to perform necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis dispensing
organizations with usable medical cannabis.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION, OR DISPENSING ORGANIZATION, OR DISPENSARY ORGANIZATION OR
DISPENSARY: A facility operated by an organization or business that is registered by the Illinois department of financial and professional
regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or related
supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients.
MEDICAL CANNABIS FACILITY: A medical cannabis cultivation center or a medical cannabis dispensary.
MEDICAL CANNABIS INFUSED PRODUCT: Food, oils, ointments, or other products containing usable cannabis that are not smoked.
(Ord. 1529-15, 2-23-2015)
MOBILE HOMES: Any vehicle or portable structure constructed so as to permit occupancy thereof for lodging or dwelling purposes or for
use as an accessory building or structure in the conduct of a business, trade or occupation, and which is designed and constructed so that
it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on streets and highways and which is propelled or drawn by its own or other
power.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 252/426
MOTEL: See definition of Hotel, Motel Or Inn.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building in which freight, brought to said building by motor trucks, is assembled and sorted for routing in
either interstate or intrastate shipment by motor truck.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building or the name of an occupant thereof and the practice of a permitted
occupation therein.
NET SITE AREA: The area of a zoning lot, parcel or tract, excluding boundary rights of way.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure which:
A. Does not comply with all the regulations of this title or of any amendments thereto governing bulk of the zoning district in which such
building or structure is located; or
B. Is designed for, or intended to be used in, a nonconforming manner.
NONCONFORMING USE: The use of land, buildings or structures which does not comply with all the regulations of this title or of any
amendments hereto governing the use of the zoning district in which such use is located.
NOXIOUS MATTER: Material, gas or vapor which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of
causing detrimental effect upon the psychological, social or economic well being of human beings.
NURSERY, CHILDCARE: An establishment for the part time care of five (5) or more children of preelementary school age in addition to the
members of the family residing therein.
NURSING HOME OR REST HOME: A commercial establishment for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those
suffering bodily disorders but not including facilities for the treatment of sickness or injuries or surgical care.
OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE: A certificate issued by the building inspector stating that the occupancy and use of land or a building or
structure referred to therein complies with the provisions of this title.
OCTAVE BAND: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electrical frequency analyzer, designed according to standards formulated by the American Standards
Association and used in conjunction with a sound level meter to take measurement in specific octave intervals (American Standard for
Sound Level Meters, ASA No. 244, 3-1944).
OPEN SALES LOT: A lot or parcel of land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling or trading of all goods and commodities and
including the storage of same prior to sale or exchange. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
PWS FACILITIES: PWS antennas, PWS towers, associated accessory structures and appurtenant electrical and mechanical equipment.
(Ord. 911-00, 9-11-2000)
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE: An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or public way, designed, arranged and made available for the
storage of private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings for which the parking area is developed and is
accessory.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or public way, intended to be used for the parking or storage of
passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity, and available to the public, whether for
compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: Space within a public or private parking area of not less than nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20'), exclusive
of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office and work areas, for the storage of one passenger automobile or commercial vehicle
under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material which is suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in finely divided form as a liquid or solid at
atmospheric pressure and temperature.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or
glare or heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES (PWS): Commercial mobile services, common carrier wireless exchange access services, and
unlicensed wireless services (i.e., telecommunications services using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses, but
not including direct-to-home satellite services). (Ord. 911-00, 9-11-2000)
PLAN COMMISSION: See title 2, chapter 2 of this code and section 9-16-8 of this title.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land which is planned as a whole for development under single ownership or control and which, by
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 253/426
virtue of such unified planning and development, provides greater amenities, convenience or other benefits than normally would be had
through the development. Adequate provision shall be made for basic community facilities such as schools, parks, playgrounds and
churches, among others.
PORCH: A roofed over structure, projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure and commonly open to the weather in part.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
PRIVATE SEWER: A sewer privately owned and not directly controlled by public authority. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
PRIVATE TUTORING/PERSONALIZED EDUCATIONAL SERVICE FACILITY: A privately owned educational facility, other than a school,
which provides private tutoring and/or personalized educational services. (Ord. 997-02, 8-19-2002)
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: Any publicly owned open area including, but not limited to, the following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves,
beaches, waterways, parkways and streets. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation or governmental entity offering, providing or furnishing water, sewer, electricity, gas, steam,
telecommunications, cable or video services as defined in the Illinois cable and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-201(v), and all other utilities. Public utility does not include personal wireless services (PWS) facilities. (Ord. 1312-10, 1-19-
2010)
PUBLIC WAY: Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public thoroughfare.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track operation, but not including depot loading platforms,
stations, train sheds, warehouses, car shops, car yards, locomotive shops, water towers, etc.
RESTAURANT: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house where meals are provided for compensation including a
cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunchroom, drive-in stand, tearoom and dining room and including the serving of alcoholic beverages when
served with and incidental to the serving of meals.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area on the Ringelmann chart that coincides most nearly with the visual density of smoke
emission.
ROADSIDE STAND: A farm building used or intended to be used solely by the owner or tenant of the farm on which such building is located
for the sale of farm products.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A method of disposing of solid fill by spreading and covering with earth.
SETBACK: See definition of Building Setback Line.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building, inside of a building, structure, tree, rock or other object or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place,
activity, person, institution, organization or business.
However, a sign shall not include any display of official court of public office notice or shall it include the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation,
political unit, school or religious group. A sign shall not include a sign located completely within an enclosed building unless the context
shall be exposed to view from a street or public way. Each display surface of a sign shall be considered to be a sign.
SIGN, ADVERTISING (BILLBOARD): A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to where it is affixed.
SIGN, CHURCH BULLETIN BOARD: A sign attached to the exterior of a church or located elsewhere on the church premises, used to
indicate the services or activities of the church and including its name, if desired.
SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times
when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this title, any revolving, illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF: A sign shall be the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of
such sign and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, such perimeter shall not include any
structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A structure, building wall or other outside surface used to display and identify the name of the individual,
business, profession, organization or institution occupying the premises upon which it is located.
SIGN, MOVING: A moving sign is a pennant, streamer, whirling disk or other moving object to attract attention.
SMOKE UNITS: The number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in Ringelmann numbers by the time of emission in minutes. For the
purpose of this chart, Ringelmann density reading is made at least once every minute during the period of observation; each reading is then
multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is observed, and the various products are added together to give the total number of
"smoke units" observed during the total period under observation. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 254/426
SNOWPLOWING SERVICE: The maintenance and storage of vehicles and equipment used for snowplowing and ice removal services off
site. (Ord. 1377-11, 10-17-2011)
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American Standards Association for measurement of intensity of sound.
STACKING REQUIREMENTS: For the purposes herein, stacking requirements are the number of cars that must be accommodated in a
reservoir space while awaiting ingress or egress to specified business or service establishment. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
STACKING SPACE: A space specifically designated as a waiting area for vehicles patronizing a drive-through establishment. (Ord. 1398-
12, 6-18-2012)
STORY: That portion of a building or structure included between the surface of any floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement shall be
counted as a story if the floor next above it is more than five feet (5') above the average ground elevation.
STORY, HALF: A half story is that portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2)
opposite exterior walls are not more than four and one-half feet (41/2') above the finished floor of each story.
STREET: A place of way, however designated, for vehicular travel which affords principal means of access to abutting property.
STREET, FRONTAGE: All of the property fronting on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead end
street, all of the property along one side of the street between an intersecting street and the end of such dead end street.
STREET LINE: A line separating a lot, piece, or parcel of land from a street right of way.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: See definition of Alterations, Structural.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on or in the ground or is attached to something having location on
or in the ground including a fence or freestanding wall. A sign, billboard or other advertising medium, detached or projecting, shall be
construed to be a structure.
SWIMMING CLUB, PRIVATE (COMMERCIAL): A private club operated for profit, maintaining and operating a swimming pool and
apparatus and equipment pertaining to the swimming pool, with specified limitations upon the number of members for the exclusive use of
members and their guests.
SWIMMING CLUB, PRIVATE (NONPROFIT): A private club incorporated as a nonprofit club or organization, maintaining and operating a
swimming pool, with specified limitations upon the number of members limited to residents of a block, subdivision, neighborhood,
community or other specified area of residence, for the exclusive use of members and their guests.
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the swimming pool, operated for
profit, open to the public upon payment of an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, annual or other fee.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the swimming pool located on a lot as an
accessory use to a residence and maintained by an individual for the sole use of his household and guests, without charge for admission,
and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated for profit.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment pertaining to the swimming pool, maintained and
operated by a municipality or other units of government for the general public whether or not an admission fee is charged.
TAVERN OR LOUNGE: A building where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises but not including restaurants where the principal
business is serving food.
TOURIST HOME: A dwelling designed or used for single-family dwelling in which sleeping accommodations are provided or offered for
transient guests for compensation. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
TOWER, PWS: Any structure primarily designed, constructed and used for the purpose of supporting one or more PWS antennas. (Ord.
911-00, 9-11-2000)
TOXIC MATERIALS: A substance (liquid, solid or gaseous) which, by reason of an inherent deleterious property, tends to destroy life or
impair health.
TRAILER: See title 6 of this code. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
TREE TRIMMING BUSINESS: A use involving the trimming or removal of trees or similar landscape material from customers' property. The
activities of sawing, splitting, shaving, stripping, chipping, grinding, cutting, logging, lumbering or otherwise processing of trees, logs, tree
branches or similar wood material must take place at the customers' property as opposed to the zoning lot where the tree trimming
business is located. (Ord. 1281-09, 3-16-2009)
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or buildings thereon are designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or
maintained, let or leased.
USE, PERMITTED: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all the
requirements and regulations of such district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 255/426
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses.
USE, SPECIAL: Permission by the municipal authority to use the land in a way not ordinarily permitted in a given classification.
VARIATION: A relaxation of the terms of the zoning regulations where such variations will not be contrary to the public interest and where,
owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the results of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the zoning regulations
would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this title, a variation is authorized only for height, area and size of structure or
size of yards and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use, otherwise prohibited, shall not be allowed by variation nor shall a
variation be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district. (Ord. 381-87,
6-9-1987)
VETERINARY CLINIC: A place where animals are given medical or surgical treatment on an outpatient basis and overnight stays are
limited to short term care incidental to the treatment. (Ord. 821-98, 4-13-1998)
VILLAGE: The village of Hawthorn Woods, Illinois.
YARD: An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or group of buildings, which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its
lowest level upward to the sky, except as otherwise permitted herein and which extends along a lot line and to a depth and width specified
in the yard regulations for the zoning district in which the zoning lot is located.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending the full width of the front of a zoning lot between a street right of way and the building setback line, or the
building facade furthest from the street, whichever is greater.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending the full width of the rear of a zoning lot between the rear lot line and the nearest building facade.
YARD, SIDE: A yard located on either side of a zoning lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the furthest building
facade and a lot line or street right of way line in the case of a corner lot.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The zoning administrator of the village of Hawthorn Woods, as constituted by ordinance1.
ZONING BOARD: See title 2, chapter 3 of this code and section 9-16-6 of this title.
ZONING DISTRICT: An area or areas within the village for which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot and bulk of buildings
and premises are uniform.
ZONING LOT: A single tract of land within a single block which (at the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or
developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. Therefore, a zoning lot may or may not
coincide with a lot of record.
ZONING MAP: The map incorporated herein as a part hereof, designating zoning districts. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
Chapter 3
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
9-3-1: GENERAL USE AND BULK REGULATIONS:
A. Use: No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected,
raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located.
B. Bulk: All new buildings and structures shall conform to the building regulations established herein for the district in which each building
shall be located, except that parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, stacks and necessary mechanical
appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the maximum height provisions when erected in accordance with all other ordinances of the
village. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-3-2: LOT COVERAGE:
A. Maintenance Of Yards, Courts And Other Open Spaces: The maintenance of yards, courts and other open spaces and minimum lot area
legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of the property on which it is located, as
long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or other open space or minimum lot area allocated to
any building shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for any reason, be used to satisfy yard, court or other open space or minimum lot
area requirements for any other building.
B. Division Of Zoning Lots: No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be divided into two (2) or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning
lots resulting from each such division shall conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 256/426
located.
C. Location Of Required Open Space: All yards, courts and other open spaces allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be located on
the same zoning lot as such building or dwelling group.
D. Required Yards For Existing Buildings: No yards now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the effective date of this zoning title
shall subsequently be reduced below or further reduced below if already less than the minimum yard requirements of the ordinance for
equivalent new construction.
E. Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses: The following accessory buildings, structures and uses are permitted and may be
obstructions in the yards as follows:
Note:
F Denotes permitted obstruction in front yards and side yards adjoining streets
S Denotes permitted obstruction in interior side yards
R Denotes permitted obstruction in rear yards
O Denotes permitted obstruction in open courts
1. Awning and canopies but not projecting more than 10 feet and at least 7 feet above the average level of the
adjoining ground. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
F
S
R
O
2. Arbors, trellises, flagpoles, fountains, sculptures, plant boxes, other similar ornamental objects and TV antennas
attached to the principal structure no higher than 7 feet above the point of attachment. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd.
Ord. 606-94, 7-11-1994)
F
S
R
O
3. Air conditioning units:
a. Window units may project not more than 18 inches. F
S
R
O
b. Central air conditioning units may project into a required yard by not more than 4 feet, provided the unit is
adequately screened.
S
R
4. Architectural entrance structures on a lot not less than 1 acre in area or at entrance roadways into subdivisions or
planned developments containing 50 or more lots.
F
S
R
5. Balconies, projecting by not more than 4 feet. F
S
R
O
6. Bay windows, projecting not more than 3 feet into a yard. F
S
R
O
7. Chimneys, attached, projecting not more than 24 inches into a yard or court. S
R
O
8. Eaves and gutters on principal buildings or accessory buildings, projecting not more than 3 feet into a required
yard. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
F
S
R
O
9. Reserved. (Ord. 843-98, 9-14-1998)
10. Vegetable gardens. S
R
O
11. Open entrances, stoops, porches, terraces, when not covered, may project not more than 5 feet. F
S
R
O
12. Open off street loading spaces accessory to nonresidential uses, see chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-
1987)
F
S
R
O
13. Open off street parking spaces, provided that such spaces are located not less than 7 feet from any lot line, and
no such spaces are located in the portion of the front yard between the street right of way and the building setback
line. (Ord. 606-94, 7-11-1994)
F
S
R
14. Ornamental light standards. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987) F
S
R
O
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 257/426
15. Playground and laundry drying equipment shall be located not less than 10 feet from the lot line. (Ord. 1368-11, 6-
20-2011)
R
16. Signs and nameplates as herein regulated. F
S
R
O
17. Sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features of the principal building, projecting not more than 18 inches
into a yard or court.
F
S
R
O
18. Steps, 4 feet or less above grade, which are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning
lot from a street or alley. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
F
S
R
O
19. Swimming pools, private, which comply with all other codes or ordinances of the village and are located such that
the swimming pool and all appurtenances, including, but not limited to, pumps, pool filters, water disinfection
equipment, fences and sidewalks, are not less than 20 feet from the rear lot line. In the case of corner lots, swimming
pools will be allowed in the rear yard only if the swimming pool does not extend into any required side yard setback as
extended rearward to the rear lot line and only if it is not within 20 feet of the rear lot line. Furthermore, any portion of
the pool that may be viewed by any street or public right of way must be landscaped at 100 percent opacity at the
time of construction with a combination of berms and landscaping and 100 percent opacity shall be maintained 12
months per year. The front yard shall be deemed to be based on the orientation of the house as built. (Ord. 553-93, 1-
11-1993; amd. Ord. 1093-04, 10-18-2004)
R
20. Tennis courts, private. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987) R
21. Terraces, patios, outdoor fireplaces, recreational firepits and decks shall be located not less than 20 feet from the
lot line. (Ord. 1368-11, 6-20-2011)
R
22. Landscaping: F
S
R
O
a. Trees and shrubs, but not to create natural fences, hedgerows or barriers,
b. Flowers, and (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
c. Berms of only irregular patterns and shapes not to exceed 50 feet in length, not to exceed 2.5 feet in height above existing grade,
not to create a barrier or restriction, not to redirect the natural flow of surface water runoff, and located not less than 10 feet from
any street right of way.
d. Berms along major and arterial streets, in conjunction with significant landscaping, so as to create a sight and sound barrier
between such major and arterial streets and adjoining property, in accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-10 of this code.
(Ord. 821-98, 4-13-1998)
23. Gazebos which comply with all applicable ordinances, codes, rules and regulations, and are located no less than 20 feet from any
side or rear property line; provided, however, in the case of corner lots, gazebos shall not occupy any portion of the area formed by
extending any corner side yard rearward to the rear lot line. Gazebos shall not be enclosed so as to permit year round usage,
although wire and fiber mesh screen material is permitted. Gazebos shall not be used for the storage of any household, lawn and
garden or similar type equipment. Gazebos shall be constructed so as to maintain a minimum 60 percent opacity, as viewed from any
side of the gazebo. (Ord. 606-94, 7-11-1994)
24. Book exchange boxes, commonly known as "little free libraries", in a public park or private park, owned and/or maintained by the
village of Hawthorn Woods or an active homeowners' association ("HOA"), in accordance with the following:
a. Structure shall be visible from the right of way;
b. Structure shall not be located in the right of way or an established easement;
c. Structure shall be set back a minimum of 3 feet from any sidewalk or path so as not to obstruct or interfere with passersby;
d. The height of the structure shall not be more than 5 feet from finished grade as measured from the highest point of the structure;
e. The box size shall not exceed 23 inches wide x 25 inches tall x 21 inches deep. Any proposed box exceeding these size
requirements shall require a variation request in accordance with section 9-16-7 of this title;
f. Box and post shall be comprised of a natural material and neutral in color. Any proposed structure comprised of different materials
and/or color shall require a variation request in accordance with section 9-16-7 of this title;
g. Structure shall be nonpermanent in construction; that is, a temporary foundation comprised of concrete or masonry pavers or other
similar movable material, or consistent with installation methods for village street signs and residential mailboxes, as approved by
the village;
h. A structure proposed for installation in a private park owned and/or maintained by an HOA shall not be installed unless a signed
letter from the president of the HOA requesting said structure and evidencing approval of the structure by the HOA is submitted to
the village. The HOA letter shall include the following information:
(1) Site plan identifying the exact location of the structure;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 258/426
(2) Box dimensions, including overall structure height, as well as box width, height, and depth;
(3) Structure materials - confirm natural material or proposed material, if other than natural;
(4) Explanation of how the structure will be affixed to the ground;
(5) Depiction of proposed structure, such as a photo or marketing material drawing; and
(6) A maintenance schedule that includes the contact information of the party responsible for maintenance;
i. A building permit shall not be required, but proposed structure shall require official administrative sign off by village staff;
j. A $25.00 review fee shall apply;
k. The village shall not be responsible for maintenance or removal of a structure in a park owned and/or maintained by an HOA;
l. The HOA shall be responsible for removal of the structure once it is no longer in use or at the discretion of the Village as it relates to
nuisance or health, safety and welfare issues; and
m. With proper notice to the HOA, the Village shall retain the right to require removal of the structure if, in its determination, the
structure becomes a nuisance or a health, safety, and welfare issue. (Ord. 1599-15, 10-19-2015)
25. Solar energy systems. See section 9-18A-4 of this title for requirements. (Ord. 1791-17, 10-23-2017)
F. Vision Clearance, Corner Lots: No building or structure hereafter erected and no planting or other obstruction to the vision of drivers of
motor vehicles shall be located:
1. In any residential district exceeding a height of three feet (3') above the street grade within twenty five feet (25') of the intersecting
street right-of-way lines bordering corner lots; and
2. In any business or industrial district within twelve feet (12') of the intersecting street right-of-way lines bordering a corner lot; provided,
that this regulation shall not apply to that part of a building above the first floor.
G. Exceptions For Existing Development Within R-2 And R-3 Zoning Districts:
1. Where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with
buildings that have observed (within a variation of 5 feet or less) a front yard greater in depth than required herein, new buildings shall
not be erected closer to the street than the average front yard so established by the existing buildings.
2. Where forty percent (40%) or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with
buildings that have not observed a front yard as herein required, then:
a. Where a building is to be erected within one hundred feet (100') of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be
a line drawn between the closest front corners of the two (2) existing buildings.
b. Where a building is to be erected within one hundred feet (100') of an existing building on one side only, it may be erected as close
to the street as the existing building. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-3-3: LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONS:
A. Contiguous Parcels: When two (2) or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimension to qualify for a permitted
use under the requirements of the use district in which they are located, are contiguous and are held in one ownership, they shall be
used as one zoning lot for such use.
B. Lots Or Parcels Of Land Of Record: Any single lot or land, held in one ownership, which was of record at the time of the effective date of
this title that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot width and area may be utilized for a permitted use; provided, that yards,
courts or usable open spaces are not less than seventy five percent (75%) of the minimum required dimension of areas. (Ord. 381-87,
6-9-1987)
9-3-4: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
In all residential districts, a home business shall be permitted provided:
A. It is conducted entirely within the dwelling by a member of the family residing in the dwelling and when such home occupation is
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 259/426
B. It is not conducted from a detached or attached accessory building or require internal or external alteration or involve construction
features or the use of equipment not customary in a dwelling, and an entrance to the space devoted to such occupation shall be from
within the dwelling and not more than one-fourth (1/4) of the floor area of a story including also a cellar of the dwelling shall be devoted
to such home occupation;
C. There is no display or activity that will indicate from the exterior of the dwelling that it is being used in whole or in part for any use other
than a dwelling;
D. No exterior storage or display of the business equipment, materials, merchandise, inventory or heavy equipment shall be permitted;
E. No shipping or delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment shall be by other than U.S. mail and/or more than one courier service per
day or by passenger automobile;
F. The provisions of this section shall apply to activities that are permanent, temporary, or part time in nature;
G. An annual business license is obtained through the Village, unless exempted;
H. That any such home business is registered with the State of Illinois, if required;
I. That there shall be no manufacturing or processing of any kind, nor shall any hazardous material be used in conjunction with any home
business.
In all residential districts, a special use permit shall be required for any home occupation conducted by any person whose business
requires client or customer visits or meetings at the home business. This provision does not apply to instructions in music or educational
tutoring, provided that the total class size does not exceed two (2) students at any one time. The special use provision of this section
shall not apply to home occupation businesses established prior to the passage of the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 1443-13, 2-19-
2013)
9-3-5: ACCESS TO STREETS:
Except as otherwise provided for herein, every building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a
street. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-3-6: NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON ZONING LOT:
Except in the case of a planned development, not more than one principal detached residential building shall be located on a residential lot,
nor shall a principal detached residential building be located on the same zoning lot with any other principal building. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-
1987)
9-3-7: REZONING OF PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC AREAS:
An area indicated on the zoning map as a public park, recreation area, public school site, cemetery or other similar open space, shall not
be used for any other purpose than that designated, and when the use of the area is discontinued, it shall automatically be zoned to the
most restricted adjoining district until appropriate zoning is authorized by the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-3-8: PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
A. Outdoor Parking: Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall park outdoors, store outdoors, occupy, or cause, permit or
suffer the outdoor parking, outdoor storage or occupation of, any camping trailer, commercial vehicle, commuter vehicle, commuter van,
farm tractor, house trailer, motor home, mini-motor home, van camper, pole trailer, recreational vehicle, road tractor, semitrailer, special
mobile equipment, trailer, travel trailer, truck, truck camper, truckster, truck tractor or nonmotorized apparatus containing two (2) or more
wheels on any land zoned or classified in any residence district within the Village. For the purposes of this section, the vehicles specified
hereinabove shall be as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., except that the term "recreational vehicle" shall also
include boats, boat trailers, rafts, snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers, personal watercraft trailers, personal watercraft and motorcycle
trailers. (Ord. 499, 9-9-1991; amd. Ord. 1049-03, 11-17-2003)
B. Permitted Activities: Subsection A of this section notwithstanding, the following activities shall be permitted: (Ord. 499, 9-9-1991; amd.
Ord. 569-93, 8-16-1993)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 260/426
1. Residents: The outdoor parking of not more than one recreational vehicle, Friday through Monday, provided such parking complies
with all applicable statutes and ordinances. A permit shall not be required. A recreational vehicle may be covered by a tarp or
tarpaulin.
2. Non-resident guests: Not more than two (2) times per calendar year, the outdoor parking of not more than one camping trailer, motor
home, mini-motor home or van camper owned, leased or rented by a bona fide guest of the owner or tenant, for a period of not more
than ten (10) consecutive days, provided a permit is obtained. A guest's recreational vehicle may be covered by a tarp or tarpaulin.
(Ord. 1825-18, 3-26-2018)
3. The outdoor parking of trucks owned, leased or rented by contractors performing on site construction of improvements on the
premises, for a period of not more than fourteen (14) days.
4. The outdoor parking of trucks, owned by the Village, on land owned by the Village.
5. The outdoor parking of trucks; provided, that such trucks do not display any commercial lettering, symbols, insignia or designation of
any kind and that such trucks do not exceed three-fourths (3/4) of one ton of gross vehicle weight. (Ord. 499-91, 9-9-1991)
6. The outdoor parking of delivery trucks while such trucks are being loaded or unloaded, provided that such trucks are not parked
overnight. (Ord. 569-93, 8-16-1993)
C. Displaying Vehicles For Sale: Parking an automobile, sport utility vehicle, motorcycle, boat or boat trailer for the purpose of displaying it
for sale shall be permitted only in the driveway of the property where the owner of such automobile, sport utility vehicle, motorcycle,
boat or boat trailer resides and only so long as such automobile, sport utility vehicle, motorcycle, boat or boat trailer is parked no closer
than thirty five feet (35') to any street pavement line. No such automobile, sport utility vehicle, motorcycle, boat or boat trailer shall be
parked anywhere else on such property, including, but not limited to, the front, side or rear yard or other buildable area of the property.
(Ord. 1049-03, 11-17-2003)
Except as permitted above, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street, public right-of-way or other public property or any
private property in the Village, for the purpose of displaying it for sale (except by special use granted in the B Retail
Business/Commercial District). For purposes of this subsection, the term "vehicle" shall have the definition set forth in 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-217, except that said term shall also include boats, boat trailers, rafts, snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers,
personal watercraft trailers, personal watercraft, nonmotorized apparatus containing two (2) or more wheels and motorcycle trailers.
(Ord. 1049-03, 11-17-2003; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
The parking and display of any vehicle for sale shall only be permitted once in any twelve (12) month period and the length of time a
vehicle is displayed for sale may not exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1340-10, 7-19-2010)
D. Other Restrictions: In addition to the other restrictions set forth in this section: 1) no parking of a vehicle that is otherwise permitted by
this section shall take place on any portion of a residential lot other than the paved driveway, and 2) no automobile, sport utility vehicle
or motorcycle shall be parked anywhere on a residential lot other than the paved driveway; provided, however, that in the event of a
special occasion or gathering, automobiles, sport utility vehicles or motorcycles may be parked in areas outside the paved driveway
area for a period of not more than six (6) hours and not more frequently than one day per calendar year. (Ord. 1049-03, 11-17-2003)
E. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code for
each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each and every day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. 1825-18, 3-26-2018)
9-3-9: EXISTING SPECIAL USES:
Where a use is classified as a special use and exists as a permitted use on the effective date hereof, it shall be considered a legal use,
without further action of the Village Board of Trustees, the Zoning Administrator, the Board of Appeals or the Plan Commission. (Ord. 381-
87, 6-9-1987)
9-3-10: USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED IN DISTRICT:
When a use is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to "permitted uses", it shall be assumed that such uses are hereby expressly
prohibited unless by a written decision of the Village Board of Trustees it is determined that said use is similar to and not more
objectionable than uses listed. Such uses may then be permitted. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-3-11: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW:
A. No commercial, business, retail, research, office, industrial or multi-family structure, or architectural entrance structure in accordance
with subsection 9-3-2E4 of this chapter, shall be erected, nor shall exterior modifications to any such existing structure be made, unless
the owner thereof has first obtained a certificate of approval therefor from the Village Board of Trustees. No certificate of approval shall
be required for any public work or improvement of the Village. (Ord. 1643-16, 3-21-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 261/426
9-3-12: SKATEBOARD PIPES AND RAMPS:
A. General: It has been determined that the unregulated construction and use of skateboard pipes or ramps in the village can be
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of residents of the village, and that regulation of these pipes and ramps is therefore
essential.
1. "Skateboard pipe or ramp" shall mean any outdoor structure, whether or not permanently affixed to the ground, that has a
semicircular or semioval shape and that is intended or used to permit persons on skateboards or roller skates to move continuously
from one side to the other, or any other outdoor structure, whether or not permanently affixed to the ground, that has one or more
surfaces designed, intended or used to permit persons on skateboards or roller skates to jump, to accelerate, to decelerate or to
change directions.
2. "Height" shall mean the vertical height of a skateboard pipe or ramp measured from the established natural grade to the highest point
on the pipe or ramp.
3. "Setback" shall mean the minimum distance between a specified lot line, measured along a straight line and at a right angle to such
lot line, and the nearest point of any skateboard pipe or ramp.
B. Use On Public Property Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or use a skateboard pipe or ramp on any public
street, right of way, park or other public property or to skate onto any public property by means of momentum obtained by the use of any
skateboard pipe or ramp.
C. Restrictions And Requirements On Private Property:
1. No skateboard pipe or ramp shall be located in any nonresidential zoning district. No more than one skateboard pipe or ramp shall be
permitted on any residential zoning lot.
2. Skateboard pipes and ramps having a maximum height of three feet (3') or less shall be permitted in all residential zoning districts
and shall not require a building permit. Every such skateboard pipe or ramp shall be set back at least fifteen feet (15') from every lot
line.
3. Skateboard pipes and ramps in excess of three feet (3') in height shall require a building permit and shall be permitted only in the R-1
one-family residence district and only in accordance with the following requirements:
a. Maximum height permitted: Five feet (5').
b. Minimum setback required from every lot line: Five (5) x height.
4. No skateboard pipe or ramp shall be located in any front yard, in any side yard adjoining a street, in the front half of any lot, in any
easement, or in violation of any building line.
5. The area of land covered by a skateboard pipe or ramp shall be counted as "lot coverage" for purposes of lot coverage limitations
established in each residential zoning district.
6. The longest dimension of every skateboard pipe or ramp shall face the dwelling unit on the zoning lot where such skateboard pipe or
ramp is located. There shall be a fire separation of at least ten feet (10') between every skateboard pipe or ramp and every dwelling
unit.
7. No skateboard pipe or ramp shall be wider than two (2) times the height of such skateboard pipe or ramp, measured by outside
dimensions.
8. No skateboard pipe or ramp shall be longer than four (4) times the height of such skateboard pipe or ramp, measured by outside
dimensions.
9. No materials or equipment of any kind shall be placed, kept or stored under the framework or structure of any skateboard pipe or
ramp.
10. Every skateboard pipe or ramp that exceeds three feet (3') in height shall be constructed in accordance with recognized engineering
standards, including, but not limited to, materials, connectors, dead loads, live loads and impact loads.
11. All structural members of every skateboard pipe or ramp that exceeds three feet (3') in height shall be enclosed with solid exterior
walls made of the same material as the rolling deck of such skateboard pipe or ramp and such walls shall be insulated with sound
deadening insulation, type R-13, to reduce noise generated by the use of such skateboard pipe or ramp.
D. Restrictions And Requirements For All Skateboard Pipes And Ramps:
1. It shall be unlawful to charge, to receive or give any consideration for the use of any skateboard pipe or ramp.
2. No more than one person shall use any skateboard pipe or ramp at any one time.
3. No skateboard pipe or ramp shall be used before twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on any Sunday or before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on
any other day. No skateboard pipe or ramp shall be used after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. or sunset, whichever comes first, on any day.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 262/426
4. No skateboard pipe or ramp shall be lighted.
E. Applicability Of Provisions And Compliance: The provisions of this section shall apply to all skateboard pipes and ramps located in the
village, whether constructed, erected, placed or maintained before or after the effective date of this section; provided, however, that in
the case of any skateboard pipe or ramp in existence on the effective date of this section, the owner of such skateboard pipe or ramp
and the owner of the zoning lot on which such skateboard pipe or ramp is located shall have a period of twelve (12) months from the
effective date of this section either to remove such skateboard pipe or ramp or to bring it into compliance with the requirements of this
section. (Ord. 534-92, 8-10-1992)
9-3-13: DIAGRAMS:
See the following pages of this chapter for various diagrams applicable to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord.
1314-10, 1-19-2010)
EXAMPLE OF
LOT-IN-DEPTH SUBDIVISION
(Ord. 843-98, 9-14-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 263/426
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 264/426
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 265/426
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 266/426
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-3-14: SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR PWS FACILITIES:
Personal wireless service (PWS) facilities shall not be installed, constructed or altered without first obtaining a building permit from the
village. The regulations set forth in this section shall govern the installation of PWS facilities (including all collocation of such facilities on
existing facilities), in addition to all other applicable provisions of this code. Applications for a building permit to construct PWS facilities
shall be referred to the building department for review.
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the installation of PWS facilities and minimize the total number of PWS facilities
throughout the village; encourage owners and operator of PWS facilities to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the
adverse impact on the village is minimized; encourage owners and operators of PWS facilities to configure them in a way that minimizes
the adverse visual impact of the PWS facilities; and to comply with the requirements of federal law.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 267/426
B. Use Provisions/Location: PWS facilities (specifically includes no impact facilities without PWS towers) complying with the requirements
of this section may be installed on lots in the M or I district as a special use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the village may permit as a
special use in any zoning district, PWS facilities when specifically located along existing overhead electrical high tension transmission
lines or railroad tracks. Where there are existing PWS facilities located in any zoning district, collocation may be considered by a special
use permit.
PWS facilities may be installed on zoning lots along with existing principal structures or uses. Lawfully constructed PWS facilities shall
not be deemed to be either principal or accessory structures or uses, but shall be permitted additional structures. Such PWS facilities
shall be included for the purpose of determining maximum lot coverage for the zoning lots so occupied.
C. Standards For Construction Of PWS Facilities: PWS facilities may be installed on lots as provided in this section, in accordance with the
following:
1. Collocation: In order to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation of PWS facilities, collocation of PWS
facilities by more than one carrier on existing or new PWS facilities or other structures shall take precedence over the construction of
new single use PWS facilities. The village may deny an application for special use permit or building permit to construct a new PWS
facility if the applicant has not made a good faith effort to collocate the PWS facility on an existing PWS facility or other structure in
accordance with the provisions of this section. If a new PWS facility is deemed to be necessary, then it shall be designed and
constructed to accommodate more than one user, and shall include appropriate provision for the PWS facilities of such additional
users.
2. Exceptions: No new PWS facility shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the village
that no existing PWS facility or other structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed PWS facility. Evidence submitted to
demonstrate that no existing PWS facility or other structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed PWS facility may consist of
any of the following:
a. No existing PWS facility or other usable structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's
engineering requirements.
b. Existing PWS facilities and other structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements and cannot
be adapted or retrofitted to meet those requirements.
c. Existing PWS facilities and other structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's PWS antenna and
related equipment.
d. The applicant's proposed PWS facility would cause unavoidable electromagnetic interference with an antenna or other facility on
the existing PWS facility or other structures, or an antenna or other facility on the existing PWS facilities or other structures would
cause unavoidable electromagnetic interference with the applicant's proposed PWS facilities.
e. The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing PWS facilities and other structures unsuitable
or unusable.
3. Type And Finish: Each PWS facility shall be aesthetically designed to blend in with the character of the site or be aesthetically
camouflaged, such as designed to look like a pine tree, for example. Each PWS facility design shall be maintenance free. The design
and finish shall be approved by the village board.
4. Structural Attachment: Each PWS tower shall be roof mounted (i.e., structurally attached to the roof of a building), freestanding (i.e.,
structurally attached to the ground), or mounted to high tension towers.
5. Installation And Maintenance: Each PWS facility shall be installed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local, state, and
federal laws, including those of the FAA and the FCC, and the village's building regulations.
6. Security: Each PWS facility shall be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing device or devices; and shall feature security wall
and/or other appropriate security measures as detailed in subsection D2 of this section.
7. Number Of Towers: Not more than one freestanding PWS facility shall be installed on any zoning lot without a variance and special
use.
8. Lighting: No PWS facility shall be artificially illuminated unless such is required by the FAA or other regulatory agency having
jurisdiction in which case, such artificial illumination shall be limited to that which is so required.
9. Setbacks: Each freestanding PWS facility shall comply with all required setbacks for the zoning district in which such are located and
further, shall be set back from any residential lot line a distance of not less than the height of the tower. Setbacks shall be measured
from the nearest property line or street right of way to the base of the PWS facility.
10. Distance Between Towers: No freestanding PWS tower shall be installed less than five hundred feet (500') from any other
freestanding PWS tower.
11. Height For Roof Mounted Towers: No PWS facility installed by structural attachment to a roof mounted PWS tower or directly to a
building shall overhang or project more than twenty four inches (24") beyond the plane of any exterior wall of such building. No PWS
facility installed by direct structural attachment to an existing structure shall exceed a total height of ten feet (10') above the height of
such structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 268/426
12. Height For Freestanding Towers: No freestanding PWS towers shall exceed a total height of twenty feet (20') above the zoning
district's maximum building height, and no roof mounted PWS tower shall exceed a total height of twenty feet (20') above the height of
the building to which it is attached, both as measured from grade to the highest point of the tower, including the height of any
antennas attached thereto, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning, building and zoning commission
that more height is physically necessary in order to permit the provision of personal wireless services and no alternative location or
locations exist which would permit the provision of personal wireless services without a tower of such height in which case, the tower
shall not exceed the minimum height necessary to provide personal wireless services.
D. Aesthetics, Screening, And Wall: PWS facilities shall be designed so as to be aesthetically compatible with the surrounding buildings
and land uses in the area in which they are located, to the extent practical, in accordance with the following:
1. All new PWS facilities shall be designed to use materials, colors, and textures, which will visually blend with the surrounding property.
2. A well constructed masonry or stone wall (not to include concrete masonry units [CMUs]), not less than eight feet (8') in height from
finished grade shall be provided around each freestanding PWS tower and its accessory structures. The perimeter of such wall shall
be landscaped in a natural manner consistent with the surrounding area. Canopy trees, ornamental trees, evergreens and other plant
material may be used, subject to review by the planning, building and zoning commission and approval by the village board. Access
to the freestanding PWS facilities shall be provided through a locked gate.
E. Abandonment And Removal:
1. Abandonment: One of the conditions of a special use permit shall be that all equipment, structures and foundations be removed if the
antenna and/or the antenna support structure are not in service. The telecommunication service provider shall provide the village with
a copy of the FCC notice that an antenna site is taken out of service. Failure to provide such copy of the FCC notice, or failure to
remove the antenna support structure within four (4) months of the date of such FCC notice shall result in a daily fine of seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). In addition, the village retains the right to remove said antenna and/or antenna support structure after
said four (4) month period and charge all costs and expenses of removal and restoration to the owner.
F. Application Requirements: Applicants for a special use permit and/or a building permit to construct PWS facilities shall provide the
following plans, information and reports, in addition to any other requirements set forth in this code:
1. A site plan, drawn to scale, depicting the location, type and height of the proposed PWS facilities; on site land uses and zoning;
adjacent land uses and zoning; adjacent roadways and proposed method of access; and setbacks from property lines.
2. A landscape plan depicting the method of screening and landscaping the PWS facilities in accordance with the provision of this
section.
3. Architectural elevations of the proposed PWS facility and screening which indicate the proposed finished material and colors.
4. A current aerial photo depicting the location of the proposed PWS facility and delineating residential areas and the separation
distance therefrom.
5. A legal description of the parcel.
6. Where the proposed PWS facilities include a new PWS tower: a) a report proving that a diligent effort has been made to locate the
proposed PWS antennas on an appropriate existing PWS tower or other structure, and that, due to valid considerations including
physical constraints, technical feasibility or refusal to lease by lessor, no other appropriate location is available; b) a technical report
demonstrating by technological evidence that the height requested is the minimum height necessary to fulfill the site's function within
the intended grid system; and c) an inventory of its PWS facilities within the village and within one-half (1/2) mile of the corporate limits
of the village, including specific information detailing the location, height and design of each PWS tower or antenna.
7. A written statement by the applicant that the proposed PWS facilities will accommodate collocation of additional PWS antennas for
future users, and that requests for collocation will be considered in good faith.
8. The operator of every personal wireless services facility shall submit to the village copies of all licenses and permits required by other
agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location, and operation of such antenna and shall maintain
such licenses and permits and provide evidence of renewal or extension thereof when granted. (Ord. 1312-10, 1-19-2010)
9-3-15: SHEDS PROHIBITED; AMORTIZATION OF SHEDS:
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall control:
AESTHETIC DISREPAIR: Any visual deficiency relating to subjective attractiveness specifically limited to paint or other aesthetic
coating or broken windowpanes, but shall not mean or include any structural disrepair.
SHED: Shall mean, without limitation, any attached or detached structure, whether single-story or multiple-story, whether open on any
side, including the front or back, which is used for any purpose, including, but not by way of limitation, shelter or storage of boats, motor
vehicles, agriculture, chattel, tools, firewood, gardening supplies, farm equipment, animals, hobbies or hobby equipment including,
without limitation, motorcycles or bicycles, workshops including, without limitation, repair shops, auto workshops, metal workshops or
woodworking workshops, whether such shed is considered a lean to, permanent, portable or temporary structure constructed of wood,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 269/426
metal, vinyl, plastic, brick, fiberglass or any other material.
STRUCTURAL DISREPAIR: Any physical flaw in need of repair with respect to the construction of the shed including damage,
deterioration, decay and dilapidation to the following, including, but not by way of limitation, the foundation, floor, walls, roof, doors and
windows.
B. Sheds Prohibited: From and after December 15, 2007, sheds shall be prohibited within the village. Any shed constructed, placed or
installed after December 15, 2007, is hereby declared to be illegal and shall be subject to immediate removal.
C. Sheds Amortized: Any "shed" as defined herein, existing within the village as of December 15, 2007, or which shall thereafter come to
be located within the corporate limits of the village by virtue of annexation, whether illegal, legal or lawfully existing nonconforming, shall
be subject to the amortization provisions of this section.
D. Provisions Related To Amortization; Elimination Of Sheds:
1. No shed shall be changed, altered or expanded. No shed shall be moved to a new location. No shed shall be repaired except as
hereinafter permitted.
2. If a shed falls into aesthetic disrepair, such shed shall only be repaired (i.e., repainted, refinished or the windowpane replaced) or
eliminated (removed).
3. If a shed falls into structural disrepair it shall only be eliminated (removed). No shed with structural disrepair shall be repaired or
replaced.
4. From and after December 15, 2007, upon the sale or transfer of any property upon which a shed is located, such shed shall be
removed and eliminated prior to the closing or consummation of such sale or transfer.
5. Seven (7) years from and after December 15, 2007, all illegal, legal and lawfully existing nonconforming sheds, if not earlier removed
and eliminated, shall be removed and eliminated. Said seven (7) year period shall for all purposes be deemed an appropriate
amortization period for each and every illegal, legal and lawfully existing nonconforming shed located within the corporate limits of the
village as of December 15, 2007, or which thereafter comes to be located within the corporate limits of the village by virtue of any
annexation.
E. Inventory Of Sheds; Notice; Recordation: The village will develop and maintain an inventory of sheds existing within the corporate limits
of the village. The village shall, as soon as practicable, notify in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of each
shed of the existence of this section and provide a copy thereof. A copy of this section shall be recorded against every property on
which a shed is located. (Ord. 1235-07, 11-26-2007)
9-3-16: PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS AND DUMPSTERS:
A. Portable Storage Units: Portable storage units, which shall be limited to fully enclosed temporary storage structures, shall be permitted to
be located outside of a building on real property, subject to the following conditions:
1. Maximum Number Permitted: Two (2) per zoning lot;
2. Maximum Size: No individual portable storage unit shall exceed one thousand one hundred (1,100) cubic feet in size;
3. Maximum Duration: The placement and usage of portable storage units on a property shall be limited to two (2) separate instances
per calendar year, not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days per instance;
4. Location: Portable storage units shall be kept on a solid dust free surface;
5. Encroachment Prohibited: Portable storage units shall not encroach into any easement;
6. Stacking Prohibited: Portable storage units shall not be stacked on top of any other portable storage unit, container, or similar
structure;
7. Dumpsters Not Considered Portable Storage Units: Dumpsters, or other similar containers, shall not be considered portable storage
units under this subsection;
8. Permit Fee: The property owner on whose property the portable storage unit is to be placed shall pay a permit fee per unit per
instance as set forth in subsection 11-1-1K of this code.
B. Dumpsters: Dumpsters, or other similar containers, shall be permitted to be located outside of a building on real property where no
building permit is required pursuant to title 8 of this code, subject to the following conditions:
1. Maximum Number Permitted: Two (2) per zoning lot;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 270/426
2. Maximum Duration: The use of any dumpster on a property shall be limited to two (2) separate instances per calendar year, not to
exceed thirty (30) consecutive days per instance;
3. Location: Dumpsters shall be kept on a solid dust free surface;
4. Encroachment Prohibited: Dumpsters shall not encroach into any easement;
5. Waste Not To Overflow: Debris or any other waste or items placed in a dumpster shall not exceed the top or sides of any such
dumpster;
6. Stacking Prohibited: Dumpsters shall not be stacked on top of any other dumpster, container, or structure;
7. Portable Storage Units Not Considered Dumpsters: Portable storage units or other similar containers shall not be considered
dumpsters under this subsection;
8. Permit Fee: The property owner on whose property the dumpster is to be placed shall pay a permit fee per dumpster per instance as
set forth in subsection 11-1-1K of this code. (Ord. 1246-08, 2-18-2008)
Chapter 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
9-4-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to accomplish the purpose of this title as stated in section 9-1-2 of this title, the village is hereby divided into the following districts:
R-1 One-family residence district
R-2 One-family residence district
R-3 General residence district
GO General office district
ORD Office research and development district
B Retail business/commercial district
I Industrial district
AG Agricultural district
AB Agricultural business district
OS Open space district
AO Agricultural overlay district
PU/IB Public use and institutional buildings district
M Municipal government office district
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 584-93, 12-13-1993; Ord. 808-97, 10-13-1997; Ord. 943-01, 6-18-2001; Ord. 1313-10, 1-19-2010; Ord.
1314-10, 1-19-2010)
9-4-2: ZONING MAP:
The boundaries of the zoning districts are established as shown on the map entitled "official zoning map of Hawthorn Woods, Illinois",
which map is made a part hereof, and shall have the same force and effect as if the zoning map, together with all notations, references and
other information shown thereon, were fully set forth and described herein. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-4-3: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundary lines are either the centerlines of railroads, highways, streets, alleys or easements, or the boundary lines of sections,
quarter sections, divisions of sections, tracts or lots, or such lines extended unless otherwise indicated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 271/426
B. In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the
depth of such strips shall be in accordance with the dimension shown on the map measured at right angles from the centerline of the
street or highway, and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the sections, quarter sections, divisions
of sections, tracts or lots, or such lines extended unless otherwise indicated.
C. Where a lot held in one ownership and of record on the effective date hereof is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be
construed to be within the less restricted district; provided, that the construction shall not apply if it increases the less restricted frontage
of the lot by more than twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-4-4: ZONING OF PUBLIC WAYS:
All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the
same zone as the property immediately abutting on such streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights of way or waterways. Where the
centerline of a street, alley, public way, waterway or railroad serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise
specially designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-4-5: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
A. A petition for annexation to the village may include a request from the petitioner that the land being annexed shall, upon annexation, be
zoned other than for single-family residence. Should such a request be contained in the petition, the proper authorities shall refer the
matter to the plan commission to conduct a public hearing and make their recommendation. Following the recommendation of the plan
commission, the board of trustees shall proceed to take a vote as they normally do in zoning matters and notify the petitioner of the
result. The petitioner then may withdraw his petition for annexation or may continue unless new evidence is introduced with it if the
decision is adverse to his request.
B. Except as modified by a valid annexation agreement or other provision authorized by law, all property, upon annexation to the village,
shall be classified to R-1 one-family residence. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-4-6: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS; MULTIPLE ZONING DISTRICTS:
Notwithstanding anything in this title to the contrary, multiple zoning districts shall be permitted with respect to property that is granted a
special use permit for a planned unit development. (Ord. 1079-04, 7-26-2004)
Chapter 5
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. R-1 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
9-5A-1: PURPOSE:
The R-1 district is established to encourage the orderly transition of land from agricultural to low density residential use, to provide areas
well suited as to location and topography, to meet the market demands for large lots and to prohibit any uses which are incompatible. The
principal use of land is for one-family dwellings on large lots where minimum community services may be appropriate. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-
1987)
9-5A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted:
One-family detached dwellings and permitted accessory uses.
Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas of five (5) acres or less, when publicly owned and operated1.
Signs, as permitted in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1012-02, 12-16-2002)
9-5A-3: SPECIAL USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 272/426
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of chapter 14 of this title:
Cemeteries, including crematories and mausoleums in conjunction therewith.
Churches, rectories, seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious institutions, including dormitories and other accessory
uses required for operation.
Daycare homes, provided:
A. The daycare activities shall be accessory to an owner occupied single-family residential structure.
B. The applicant shall obtain a license from the state of Illinois department of children and family services ("DCFS") authorizing the
conduct of the daycare home on the subject realty, unless DCFS does not require such a license. A copy of the license, and each
renewal thereof, shall be provided to the village. Should such license expire or be revoked, the special use permit shall
automatically expire.
C. The conduct of daycare activities shall be limited to Monday through Friday, inclusive, of each week.
D. The conduct of daycare activities shall be limited to the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. through seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. each
day.
E. The conduct of daycare activities shall be subject to all business license regulations and fees imposed now or in the future by the
village.
F. The applicant shall maintain liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), or such other amount as DCFS
may require. A copy of the insurance policy and any renewals thereof or changes thereto shall be provided to the village.
G. No daycare home shall be located within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of another daycare home, as measured in a
straight line, from all property lines.
H. The issuance of the special use permit shall not be in conflict with any other village ordinance.
I. The special use permit shall be valid for a period of three (3) years from the date of issuance. At the end of the third year, the
special use permit shall automatically expire and the applicant shall be required to apply for a new special use permit.
J. Should the applicant move from the subject realty, the special use shall automatically expire.
Display homes, which shall refer to a home built for the purpose of temporary demonstration of quality of construction options and
amenities available to buyers and for the purpose of sale after completion of construction, and not for the purpose of providing a
model or prototype for substantially similar homes within the subdivision or otherwise in violation of the village's antimonotony
regulations, provided, however:
A. Such special use permit shall be granted for a period not to exceed two (2) years in duration;
B. No display homes shall be occupied for residential living purposes during the term of the special use permit;
C. The applicant shall provide such necessary off street parking facilities on the display home site, in accordance with the provisions
of this title, so as to eliminate traffic obstruction on the public right of way, subject to review by the plan commission and approval by
the village board. In no event shall any such off street parking facility contain less than two (2) spaces;
D. A special use permit to operate a display home shall not relieve the applicant from otherwise complying with all applicable
ordinances pertaining to construction and occupancy of residential dwellings including, but not limited to, building permits,
inspections and occupancy permits;
E. The applicant shall not seek, or accept, any favorable real estate assessment or property tax treatment which may be available
under the revenue act of 1939, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/1 et seq., as amended, including, but not limited to, section
205/20d-4, or any successor act thereto, with respect to the parcel upon which the display home is located.
Farmstands.
Golf courses, including ancillary uses normally provided, such as restaurants, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, residential
uses for guests, managers and other employees, but not including commercially operated driving ranges or miniature golf courses;
and provided, that no clubhouse or accessory building shall be located nearer than five hundred feet (500') to any dwelling on another
zoning lot.
Addition of acceptable fill material in holes, pits, lowlands or to alter the grade from its existing state.
Home occupations (see section 9-3-4 of this title).
Horticultural uses, including the growing of grains, fruits, vegetables and flowers (but not other agricultural uses), provided:
A. The horticultural use is a temporary use and shall be maintained for only so long as the real estate cannot be used for its zoned
residential purpose; and
B. No farm equipment shall be operated on village rights of way except upon one day prior notice to the village police department.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 273/426
Lot in depth subdivisions.
One-family detached dwellings and permitted accessory uses on lots not meeting the minimum lot size requirements set forth in
section 9-5A-4 of this article, provided that such lot was platted prior to March 10, 1958.
Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas of more than five (5) acres, when publicly owned and operated2, provided:
A. In order to preserve open space, no more than one soccer, baseball or football field per ten (10) acres of land, one basketball court
per one and one-half (11/2) acres or one tennis court per two (2) acres shall be permitted on the premises. The uses per acre shall
be calculated separately, not cumulatively (e.g., a 10 acre parcel of land may have a soccer field, but may not have a soccer field
and a tennis court).
B. No building in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet shall be permitted on the premises. Such building shall comply with
the building materials and architectural requirements set forth in the village's architectural overlay ordinance (section 9-9A-5 of this
title). No administrative offices shall be permitted on the premises.
C. No temporary bathrooms or other temporary structures shall be permitted on the premises.
D. No wetland mitigation shall be permitted either on or off of the premises.
E. The premises shall comply with the parking requirements set forth in chapter 11 of this title. A minimum of forty eight (48) parking
spaces shall be provided for each baseball or soccer field and eighty (80) parking spaces shall be provided for each football field.
Additional parking spaces for other uses shall be provided in such amount as is determined by the zoning administrator. To the
extent that the provisions of this section are more restrictive than chapter 11 of this title, the provisions of this section shall apply.
F. The perimeter of the premises shall contain sufficient landscaping and berming so as to provide seventy five percent (75%) opacity
from all adjacent property. Such landscaping shall, at a minimum, provide for one coniferous tree of a minimum height of ten feet
(10') every fifteen feet (15'). In addition, the applicant shall comply with all other requirements set forth in chapter 17 of this title,
including, but not limited to, filing a landscape plan with the village. To the extent that the provisions of this section are more
restrictive than chapter 17 of this title, the provisions of this section shall apply. If the property is to be maintained solely as open
space, with no improvements located thereon, it shall not be subject to this requirement.
G. No outdoor lighting or public address (or other similar audio amplification) systems shall be permitted on the premises.
H. No fencing, parking lot, playing field, equipment, apparatus, structure or other amenity or improvement shall be placed or permitted
within one hundred feet (100') of any property line, wetland or right of way.
I. No fencing or gates may be used except as an integral part of a playing field. Perimeter fencing shall not be permitted on the
premises.
J. Any seating, stands, bleachers, storage containers, gang boxes or similar structures must be reviewed by the architectural review
committee and approved by the village board.
K. Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas not owned and operated by the village of Hawthorn Woods shall have a minimum
front, side and rear yard of not less than two hundred fifty feet (250').
L. The use of the premises shall comply with all other applicable village codes and ordinances, including, but not limited to, title 10,
chapter 4 of this code, relating to storm water management. To the extent that the provisions of this section are more restrictive
than other applicable codes and ordinances, the provisions of this section shall apply.
Planned developments, under single ownership or control, in which incidental business or recreational facilities for the convenience of
the occupants may be furnished, provided the property proposed for development shall have a gross area of at least five (5) acres.
For such developments, the village board may vary the regulations herein, provided such variations are consistent with the general
purpose and intent of the ordinance and will result in better site planning and thus be of greater benefit to both the occupants of the
development and to the community.
Private recreational areas or camps, when not operated for profit.
Private roads serving no more than four (4) one-family detached dwellings.
Public service uses, including filtration plant, pumping station and water reservoir, sewage treatment plant, sanitary landfill, police and
fire stations, telephone exchanges, electric substations and other similar public service uses.
Public utility facilities.
Schools, public denominational or private, elementary and high, including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto.
Tennis courts, private, as accessory uses which shall be located in the rear yard and may be an obstruction in the required rear yard.
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 520-92, 6-8-1992; Ord. 554-93, 1-11-1993; Ord. 827-98, 5-11-1998; Ord. 843-98, 9-14-1998; Ord.
977-02, 2-18-2002; Ord. 983-02, 5-20-2002; Ord. 987-02, 5-20-2002; Ord. 1012-02, 12-16-2002; Ord. 1103-05, 1-24-2005; Ord. 1242-
07, 12-17-2007)
9-5A-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 274/426
A. Minimum Lot Size:
1. One-Family Dwellings, Lot Size:
a. Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected, and to be served by sanitary and water facilities, shall be located on a lot
having an area of not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, and a width at the established front lot line of not less than one
hundred thirty feet (130').
b. The minimum width of a lot at the front lot line of a lot fronting on a cul-de-sac shall be not less than ninety feet (90').
2. Nonresidential Uses: All nonresidential principal uses of buildings as permitted herein shall be located on a tract of land having an
area of not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet with a minimum width of one hundred thirty feet (130') at the front lot line.
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
3. Special Uses: Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions stipulated at the time a special use permit is
authorized, but in no case shall any such lot have an area of less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet and a width at the
established front lot line of one hundred thirty feet (130'), except in the case of lots that were platted prior to March 10, 1958. (Ord.
977-02, 2-18-2002)
4. Lots In Depth: Notwithstanding the foregoing, the minimum lot size for lots in depth shall be fifty thousand (50,000) square feet. (Ord.
843-98, 9-14-1998)
B. Yard Areas: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such
building structures or enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty feet (30') measured between that part of the building nearest the front property line and
the front property line, except for lots on a cul-de-sac terminus where the distance shall not be less than fifty feet (50'). Note: In the
case of irregularly shaped buildings, the area in front of that part of the building facade farthest from the front property line is also to
be considered as part of the front yard.
2. Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the main building of not less than twenty feet (20'), except where a side yard adjoins to a
street the minimum width of such yard shall be not less than thirty feet (30').
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
4. Lot In Depth: Notwithstanding the foregoing, for a lot in depth, a minimum setback of fifty feet (50') shall be required from all property
lines and from the edge of any contiguous access area abutting the lot as measured from the easement line of said access area. For
a front lot within a lot in depth subdivision, the setbacks shall be as required in subsections B1, B2, and B3 of this section, except that
the yard adjacent to the contiguous access area shall be fifty feet (50') as measured from the easement line of said access area.
(Ord. 843-98, 9-14-1998)
5. Special Uses: Notwithstanding the foregoing, lots with a special use shall have a front yard of not less than two hundred feet (200'),
side yards of not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') and a rear yard of not less than one hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 1021-03, 4-
21-2003)
C. Maximum Lot Coverage: Not more than fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area may be occupied by buildings and structures, including
accessory buildings.
D. Building Height: No principal building shall exceed a height of thirty five feet (35') or two and one-half (21/2) stories, whichever is lower.
No accessory building or use shall exceed a height of twenty feet (20').
E. Floor Area Per Dwelling: For each one-story dwelling located in the R-1 one-family residence district, there shall be provided a minimum
of one thousand seven hundred (1,700) square feet of floor area, and for dwellings having more than one story there shall be provided a
minimum of two thousand two hundred (2,200) square feet of total floor area. Dwellings of more than one story shall have a minimum
ground floor area of not less than one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-5A-5: OFF STREET PARKING:
Automobile parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-5A-6: LOT IN DEPTH SUBDIVISIONS:
A. Number Of Lots: No more than three (3) lots in depth or five (5) total lots may be served by a private road. Approval of the further
subdivision of an existing lot in depth where the number of lots exceeds these limits may be approved by the village board if it is
determined that such an additional subdivision will not have an adverse impact on surrounding properties and existing developments.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 275/426
B. Ingress/Egress Easement: All lots in depth shall have access to a public street by a private road located in a permanent ingress/egress
easement. Said easement shall not be counted as part of the lot in depth for purposes of the minimum lot area requirement. The private
road shall be built in conformance with the applicable standards for private roads set forth in the subdivision control ordinance of the
village, and shall be located so as to have minimal impact on adjacent properties and existing vegetation. No buildings or structures
shall be placed or constructed within the boundary lines of the easement.
C. Front Lot Ingress/Egress: A front lot within a lot in depth subdivision shall gain access to the public street from the contiguous private
road; provided, however, that upon recommendation of the plan commission, the village board may waive such requirement if it finds
that because of topography of the area, existing development or significant vegetation of the property, or other unique circumstances,
such requirements would result in a hardship and waiver of the requirement would not produce adverse effects on adjacent properties.
D. Adjacent Subdivisions: Two (2) adjacent lot in depth subdivisions, each of which consists of one front lot and one lot in depth, may share
a single private roadway located in either subdivision or partly on both. (Ord. 843-98, 9-14-1998)
ARTICLE B. R-2 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
9-5B-1: PURPOSE:
The R-2 district is established to encourage the orderly transition of land from agricultural to low density residential use to provide areas
well suited as to location and topography, to meet the market demands for large lots; and to prohibit any uses which are incompatible. The
principal use of land is for one-family dwellings on large lots where minimum community services may be appropriate. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-
1987)
9-5B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted:
One-family detached dwellings.
Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and operated.
Signs, as permitted in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-5B-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with the provisions of chapter 14 of this title:
Cemeteries, including crematories and mausoleums in conjunction therewith.
Churches, rectories, seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious institutions, including dormitories and other accessory
uses required for operation.
Daycare homes, provided:
A. The daycare activities shall be accessory to an owner occupied single-family residential structure.
B. The applicant shall obtain a license from the state of Illinois department of children and family services ("DCFS") authorizing the
conduct of the daycare home on the subject realty, unless DCFS does not require such a license. A copy of the license, and each
renewal thereof, shall be provided to the village. Should such license expire or be revoked, the special use permit shall
automatically expire.
C. The conduct of daycare services shall be limited to Monday through Friday, inclusive, of each week.
D. The conduct of daycare services shall be limited to the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. through seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. each
day.
E. The conduct of daycare services shall be subject to all business license regulations and fees imposed now or in the future by the
village.
F. The applicant shall maintain liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), or such other amount as DCFS
may require. A copy of the insurance policy and any renewals thereof or changes thereto shall be provided to the village.
G. No daycare home shall be located within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of another daycare home, as measured in a
straight line, from all property lines.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 276/426
H. The issuance of the special use permit shall not be in conflict with any other village ordinance.
I. The special use permit shall be valid for a period of three (3) years from the date of issuance. At the end of the third year, the
special use permit shall automatically expire and the applicant shall be required to apply for a new special use permit.
J. Should the applicant move from the subject realty, the special use shall automatically expire.
Display homes, which shall refer to a home built for the purpose of temporary demonstration of quality of construction, options and
amenities available to buyers and for the purpose of sale after completion of construction, and not for the purpose of providing a
model or prototype for substantially similar homes within the subdivision or otherwise in violation of the village's antimonotony
regulations, provided, however:
A. That such special use permit shall be granted for a period not to exceed two (2) years in duration, unless such period is extended
by the mayor and board of trustees for such time as it shall determine, up to a maximum of two (2) additional years, which
extension the mayor and board of trustees may grant without further public hearing;
B. That no display homes shall be occupied for residential living purposes during the term of the special use permit;
C. That the applicant shall provide such necessary off street parking facilities on the display home site, in accordance with the
provisions of this title, so as to eliminate traffic obstruction on the public right of way, subject to review by the plan commission and
approval by the village board. In no event shall any such off street parking facility contain less than two (2) spaces;
D. That a special use permit to operate a display home shall not relieve the applicant from otherwise complying with all applicable
ordinances pertaining to construction and occupancy of residential dwellings including, but not limited to, building permits,
inspections and occupancy permits;
E. That the applicant shall not seek, or accept, any favorable real estate assessment or property tax treatment which may be
available under the revenue act of 1939, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/1 et seq., as amended, including, but not limited to,
section 205/20d-4, or any successor act thereto, with respect to the parcel upon which the display home is located.
Golf courses, including ancillary uses normally provided, such as restaurants, including the sale of alcoholic beverages, residential uses
for guests, managers and other employees, but not including commercially operated driving ranges or miniature golf courses; and
provided, that no club accessory building shall be located nearer than five hundred feet (500') to any dwelling on another zoning lot.
Addition of acceptable fill material in holes, pits, lowlands or to alter the grade from its existing state.
Home occupations (see section 9-3-4 of this title).
Horticultural uses, including the growing of grains, fruits, vegetables and flowers (but not other agricultural uses), provided:
A. The horticultural use is a temporary use and shall be maintained for only so long as the real estate cannot be used for its zoned
residential purpose; and
B. No farm equipment shall be operated on village rights of way except upon one day prior notice to the village police department.
Planned developments, under single ownership or control, in which incidental business or recreational facilities for the convenience of
the occupants may be furnished, provided the property proposed for development shall have a gross area of at least four (4) acres.
For such developments, the village board may vary the regulations herein, provided such variations are consistent with the general
purpose and intent of the ordinance and will result in better site planning and thus be of greater benefit to both the occupants of the
development and to the community.
Private recreational areas or camps, when not operated for profit.
Public service uses, including filtration plant, pumping station and water reservoir; sewage treatment plant; sanitary landfill; police and
fire stations; telephone exchanges, electric substations and other similar public service uses.
Public utility facilities.
Radio and television stations and towers.
Railroad rights of way and trackage, but not including reclassification yards, terminal facilities or maintenance facilities.
School bus shelters, provided:
A. The shelter is located on property owned by a private, not for profit homeowners' association.
B. The homeowners' association assumes all responsibility for maintaining the shelter.
C. The provisions of this title regarding minimum lot size and yard areas shall not apply; provided, that the applicant establishes to the
satisfaction of the plan commission that the shelter is located a sufficiently safe distance from all drives and roadways and does not
adversely affect adjacent property owners.
Schools, public, denominational or private, elementary and high, including playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto.
Swimming club, private (commercial).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 277/426
Swimming club, private (nonprofit).
Swimming pool, public.
Tennis courts, private, as accessory uses which shall be located in the rear yard and may be an obstruction in the required rear yard.
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 554-93, 1-11-1993; Ord. 838-98, 8-10-1998; Ord. 905-00, 7-10-2000; Ord. 983-02, 5-20-2002; Ord.
1125-05, 5-16-2005; Ord. 1242-07, 12-17-2007)
9-5B-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum Lot Size:
1. One-Family Dwellings, Lot Size:
a. Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected and to be served by public sanitary sewer facilities and public or private
water facilities shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, and a width at the
front lot line of not less than one hundred feet (100'). Private septic systems are prohibited for any lot less than forty thousand
(40,000) square feet.
b. The minimum width of a lot at the front lot line of a lot fronting on a cul-de-sac shall be not less than sixty feet (60').
2. Nonresidential Uses: All nonresidential principal uses of buildings as permitted herein shall be located on a tract of land having an
area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet with a minimum width of one hundred feet (100') at the front lot line.
3. Special Uses: Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions stipulated at the time a special use permit is
authorized, but in no case shall any such lot have an area of less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and a width at the
established front lot line of one hundred (100) square feet.
B. Yard Areas: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such
building structures or enlargement:
1. Front Yard: A front yard of not less than thirty feet (30') measured between that part of the building nearest the front property line and
the front property line, except for lots on a cul-de-sac terminus where the distance shall not be less than fifty feet (50'). Note: In the
case of irregularly shaped buildings, the area in front of that part of the building facade farthest from the front property line is also to
be considered as part of the front yard.
2. Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the main building of not less than fifteen feet (15'), except where a side yard adjoins a street
the minimum width of such yard shall be not less than thirty feet (30').
3. Rear Yard: A rear yard of not less than forty feet (40'). (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
4. Special Uses: Notwithstanding the foregoing, lots with a special use shall have a front yard of not less than two hundred feet (200'),
side yards of not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') and a rear yard of not less than one hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 1021-03, 4-
21-2003)
C. Maximum Lot Coverage: Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the lot area may be occupied by buildings and structures.
D. Building Height: No principal building shall exceed a height of thirty five feet (35') or two and one-half (21/2) stories, whichever is lower.
No accessory building or use shall exceed a height of twenty feet (20').
E. Floor Area Per Dwelling: For each one-story dwelling located in the R-2 one-family residence district there shall be provided a minimum
one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area, and for dwellings having more than one story there shall be provided a
minimum of one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet of total floor area. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-5B-5: OFF STREET PARKING:
Automobile parking facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
ARTICLE C. R-3 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT
9-5C-1: PURPOSE:
The R-3 district is established as a general residence district to provide for a wider variety of dwelling accommodations with a higher
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 278/426
density of dwelling units, to provide for multiple-family dwellings with adequate space for family living, and to provide for a transition
between nonresidential areas and one-family areas of lower density. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-5C-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted:
Any of the uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 one-family districts. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-5C-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the R-1 and R-2 one-family district.
Multiple-family dwellings and apartments.
Off street parking areas, provided there is a need for this facility in the interest of public necessity and convenience and that no appropriate
site is available in nearby business or manufacturing districts.
One-family row dwellings (party wall) with not more than six (6) dwellings in a row or building.
Planned developments under single ownership or control, in which incidental business or recreational facilities for the convenience of the
occupants may be furnished, provided the property proposed for development shall have a gross area of at least four (4) acres. For such
developments, the village board may vary the regulations herein, provided such variations are consistent with the general purpose and
intent of this title and will result in better site planning and thus be of greater benefit both to the occupants of the development and to the
community.
Private clubs or lodges, except those the chief activity of which is a service normally carried on as a business.
Public utility facilities.
Signs, as permitted in chapter 12 of this title.
Tennis courts, private, as accessory uses which shall be located in the rear yard and may be an obstruction in the required rear yard.
Two-family dwellings. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1242-07, 12-17-2007; Ord. 1465-13, 10-21-2013)
9-5C-4: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum Lot Sizes:
1. Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet and a width at the front lot line of not less than one hundred feet (100').
2. All two-family dwellings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet and a width at the front lot line of not less than one hundred feet (100').
3. Multiple Dwelling Units:
a. All structures or buildings containing two (2) but not more than four (4) dwelling units shall be located on a lot which provides a
minimum lot area per dwelling unit as follows:
Type Of Dwelling Unit
Land Area Per Dwelling
Unit In Square Feet
More than 4 bedrooms 4,000
4 bedrooms 3,000
3 bedrooms 2,700
2 bedrooms 2,400
1 bedroom and efficiency 2,100
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 279/426
b. Provided however, that in no case shall the minimum lot area be less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet with a width at the
front lot line of not less than one hundred feet (100').
c. At no time in calculating the dwelling unit density in the R-3 general residence district shall it be greater than four (4) dwelling units
per gross acre.
d. Existing residential buildings in the R-3 district may be altered to provide for not more than four (4) dwelling units, provided that no
existing residential building is altered in such a way as to conflict with or further conflict with the foregoing requirements.
4. All nonresidential principal uses permitted in this district shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet and a width at the building line of not less than one hundred feet (100').
5. Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no case shall any such lot
be less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
6. Private septic systems are prohibited in R-3 districts. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
B. Yard Areas: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained:
1. Front Yard: In the R-3 district, the minimum front yard requirements shall be not less than those itemized below:
a. For permitted uses, a front yard of not less than thirty feet (30') measured between that part of the building nearest the front
property line and the front property line, except for lots on a cul-de-sac terminus where the distance shall not be less than fifty feet
(50'). Note: In the case of irregularly shaped buildings, the area in front of that part of the building facade farthest from the front
property line is also to be considered as part of the front yard.
b. For special uses, a front yard of not less than two hundred feet (200').
2. Side Yards: In the R-3 district, the minimum side yard requirements shall be not less than those itemized below:
a. For permitted residential buildings, a side yard on each side of the building of not less than fifteen feet (15'), except where a side
yard adjoins a street, the minimum width of such yard shall be not less than thirty feet (30').
b. For permitted nonresidential buildings, a side yard on each side of each building of not less than fifteen feet (15') plus one foot (1')
for each two feet (2') by which the building height exceeds fifteen feet (15'), except where a side yard adjoins a street, the minimum
width of such yard shall be not less than one hundred fifty feet (150').
c. For special uses containing one building, the minimum width of all side yards shall be not less than one hundred fifty feet (150').
d. For special uses containing two (2) or more residential buildings, a side yard on each side of each building of fifteen feet (15'),
except where a side yard adjoins a street, the minimum width of such yard shall be not less than one hundred fifty feet (150').
e. For special uses containing two (2) or more nonresidential buildings, a side yard on each side of each building of not less than
fifteen feet (15') plus one foot (1') for each two feet (2') by which the building height exceeds fifteen feet (15'), except where a side
yard adjoins a street, the minimum width of such yard shall be not less than one hundred fifty feet (150').
3. Rear Yard: In the R-3 district, the minimum rear yard requirements shall be not less than those itemized below:
a. For permitted uses, a rear yard of not less than forty feet (40').
b. For special uses, a rear yard of not less than one hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 1021-03, 4-21-2003)
C. Maximum Lot Coverage: Not more than forty five percent (45%) of the lot area may be occupied by buildings and structures.
D. Building Height: No principal building shall exceed a height of thirty five feet (35') or two and one-half (21/2) stories, whichever is lower.
No accessory building or use shall exceed a height of twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-5C-5: OFF STREET PARKING:
Off street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required or permitted in chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
Chapter 6
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. GO GENERAL OFFICE DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 280/426
9-6A-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of the GO general office district are to: (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
A. Allow development of areas for office use on fairly large, open landscaped sites with every possible assurance that the residential quality
of the adjacent neighborhoods will be maintained.
B. Allow development of areas for office use on small sites as a special use, provided the scale and design of the development is
compatible with the residential character of the village.
C. Allow development of areas for large scale office use as a special use provided the scale and design of the development is compatible
with the residential character of the village. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-6A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted, provided they are operated entirely within a building, except for off street parking and loading facilities,
and provided access to a sewer and water has been obtained:
Accessory uses.
Administrative or executive offices.
Architectural and/or engineering offices.
Employment agencies.
Financial institutions.
Insurance offices, not to include drive-in facilities.
Libraries, art galleries and museums.
Medical offices, including, but not limited to, chiropodist, chiropractor, dentist, medical doctor, optician, optometrist, orthodontist and
osteopath, psychiatrist and psychologist.
Off street parking and loading facilities, as regulated in chapter 11 of this title.
Offices, including business, professional and governmental, but not including offices used for the display, sale, lease, delivery, processing,
storage, manufacturing, servicing or advertisement of merchandise, commodities or other chattel, except where such uses clearly are
accessory or incidental to and located in the same building as the permitted use.
Philanthropic and charitable institutions, but not including businesses sponsored by such institutions, except such as are accessory or
incidental to and located in the same building as such institution proper.
Photography studios.
Signs, as regulated in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-6A-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
Churches, rectories, seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious institutions, including dormitories and other similar accessory
uses required for operation.
Clubs and lodges, private.
Daycare center nursery school.
Medical facilities, including laboratories, clinics (limited to outpatient care) and dispensaries.
Parks, when publicly owned and operated.
Planned unit developments, as defined in chapter 15 of this title.
Professional and business schools, but not including those of an industrial character.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 281/426
Public service uses, including potable water facilities, filtration and treatment plants, pumping stations and water reservoirs, sewage
treatment plants, sanitary landfills, police and fire stations, telephone exchanges, electric substations and other similar public service uses.
Public utility facilities.
Other office type uses not specifically listed above, when found to have compatibility with established uses on adjoining property.
All uses listed as permitted uses for the GO general office district may be processed as a special use with the special use requirements set
forth in subsections 9-6A-5A and B of this article and the special use procedure, chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord.
1042-03, 9-22-2003; Ord. 1242-07, 12-17-2007; Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010; Ord. 1465-13, 10-21-2013)
9-6A-4: EXTERIOR LIGHTING RESTRICTED:
There shall be no changes from existing provisions of this title, except for the addition of the following: Exterior lighting shall be shielded
and directed away from the street or adjacent properties to avoid unnecessary and nuisance illumination to adjacent properties and must
be conducted so that direct and/or indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half
(1/2) foot-candle when measured ten feet (10') from the light source. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-6A-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size Requirements: The minimum lot sizes required and maximum lot size permitted in the GO general office district shall be as
follows: (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. 1995 Code; Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
Maximum
Lot Area
Permitted uses 1.5 acres 300 feet 3.0 acres
Special uses 1.0 acre 200 feet -
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. 1995 Code)
B. Yard Requirements: The minimum yard requirements in the GO general office district shall be as follows: (Ord. 1021-03, 4-21-2003;
amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
Front And
Corner Side Side Rear
Permitted uses 100 feet 100 feet 100 feet
Special uses 150 feet 150 feet 150 feet
1. Landscape Plan: Uses listed as special uses in section 9-6A-3 of this article, as well as uses listed as permitted uses in section 9-6A-
2 of this article, may be allowed as special uses as part of a unified plan with lot and yard requirements as specified in subsection A of
this section and this subsection B, provided the developer submits a landscape plan for review and recommendations to the village
board by the plan commission1 and the architectural review commission.
2. Setback Parking: No parking shall be permitted in the area required for front, side, or rear yards, except where such parking is
authorized by the village in a special use permit. (Ord. 1021-03, 4-21-2003)
C. Maximum Lot Coverage: Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the lot shall be covered by an impervious surface, including the principal
building and any accessory building or use including parking lots and structures, except that where decorative pavers are used, the
amount of impervious surface may be increased to fifty five percent (55%), provided the developer submits an overall design for review
and recommendations to the village board by the plan commission and the architectural review commission. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987;
amd. 1995 Code)
D. Building Height Limitations: In the GO general office district no principal building shall exceed a height of thirty five feet (35') or two and
one-half (21/2) stories, whichever is lower. These height restrictions shall not apply to steeples on churches. No accessory building or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 282/426
use shall exceed a height of twenty feet (20').
E. Floor Area Ratio:
1. The maximum floor area ratio in the GO general office district shall be as follows: (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. 1995 Code; Ord.
1314-10, 1-19-2010)
Permitted Use Special Use
1 story 0.15 0.20
Greater than 1 story 0.20 0.25
2. A site plan review is required for both permitted and special use development. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. 1995 Code)
9-6A-6: OFF STREET PARKING:
Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in chapter 11 of this title, except that where a special use
permit is granted, up to twenty five percent (25%) of the parking spaces required may be land banked in accordance with chapter 11 of this
title. Layout of the parking area shall be reviewed by the plan commission. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-6A-7: PRIVATE SYSTEMS PROHIBITED:
Private sewage disposal systems other than a septic tank system as approved by the Lake County health department, including, but not
limited to, land treatment and spray irrigation systems, are prohibited in the GO general office district. (Ord. 560-93, 5-10-1993; amd. Ord.
1314-10, 1-19-2010)
ARTICLE A1. ORD OFFICE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
9-6A1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the ORD office research and development district is to allow for the development of areas for office or similar uses on small
sites, provided that the scale and design of the development is compatible with the residential character of the village. (Ord. 808-97, 10-13-
1997; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
9-6A1-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted, provided they are operated entirely within a building, except for off street parking and loading facilities,
and provided access to publicly dedicated sanitary sewer has been obtained:
Accessory uses.
Financial institutions, credit unions and banks including indoor and outdoor automatic teller machines which are attached to the principal
building but excluding drive-in establishments.
Insurance office, not to include drive-in facilities.
Medical, veterinary and dental service offices including clinics.
Off street parking and loading facilities, as regulated in chapter 11 of this title.
Offices, including business, professional and governmental, but not including offices used for the display, sale, lease, delivery, processing,
storage, manufacturing, servicing or advertisement of merchandise, commodities or other property, except where such uses are clearly
accessory or incidental to and located in the same building as the permitted use.
Private tutoring/personalized educational services.
Professional, business and personal service offices.
Signs, as regulated in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 808-97, 10-13-1997; amd. Ord. 1462-13, 9-16-2013)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 283/426
9-6A1-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use but only when conducted entirely within an enclosed building, unless otherwise
specified:
Communications offices, but limited to:
Cable and other pay TV services.
Radio and television broadcasting on lots of no less than five (5) acres.
Telephone communication, including telemarketing operations.
Daycare centers - adult and child, including outdoor recreation equipment. All centers must meet state licensing requirements.
Drive-in establishments accessory to financial institutions, credit unions and banks.
Drive-through establishments accessory to financial institutions, credit unions and banks, as regulated in section 9-11-9, "Drive-Through
Facilities", of this title.
Drugstores and proprietary stores, but only when located in an office or clinic of a medical or dental practitioner.
Laboratories, but limited to optical, medical and dental.
Medical cannabis cultivation center.
Medical cannabis dispensary.
Planned unit developments as defined in chapter 15 of this title.
Public utility facilities.
Research, development and testing services.
All uses listed as permitted uses for the ORD office research and development district may be processed as a special use with the special
use yard requirements set forth in subsections 9-6A1-6A and 9-6A1-5C of this article and the special use procedure, chapter 14 of this title.
The village may require landscape material to be used in combination with berming and the caliper of the material to be larger than the
minimum standards set forth herein or in other applicable ordinances so as to provide immediate visual screening of the parking lot from
the adjacent roads or properties. (Ord. 808-97, 10-13-1997; amd. Ord. 1242-07, 12-17-2007; Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010; Ord. 1398-12, 6-18-
2012; Ord. 1509-14, 10-14-2014; Ord. 1529-15, 2-23-2015)
9-6A1-4: EXTERIOR LIGHTING RESTRICTIONS:
In addition to all other applicable requirements of this code, exterior lighting in the ORD office research and development district shall be
shielded and directed away from the street or adjacent properties to avoid unnecessary and nuisance illumination to adjacent properties
and shall be conducted so that direct and/or indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of
one-half (1/2) foot-candle (horizontal or vertical) at the lot line abutting, or across any public way from, any residence district. Further, no
direct glare (exposed light source) shall be visible when viewed from off site. All lighting plans for individual zoning lots shall be reviewed by
the architectural review commission and the board of trustees as a part of the certificate of approval process as set forth in this code. The
pole and light standards for all streetlights to be located in the street right of way shall be subject to review by the plan commission and
approval by the board of trustees. (Ord. 808-97, 10-13-1997; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
9-6A1-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size Requirements: The minimum lot size required in the ORD office research and development district is thirty thousand (30,000)
square feet.
B. Lot Width: The minimum lot width for the ORD office research and development district is seventy five feet (75') as measured at the
required front yard setback line. (Ord. 808-97, 10-13-1997; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
C. Yard Requirements: The minimum yard requirements in the ORD office research and development district shall be as follows: (Ord.
1021-03, 4-21-2003; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
From Any
Federal, State
Front And
Corner Side
Side Rear
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 284/426
Or County Road
Permitted uses 100 feet 50 feet 30 feet 50 feet
Special uses 150 feet 100 feet 30 feet 50 feet
(Ord. 1021-03, 4-21-2003)
D. Landscape Plan: Except as may be otherwise provided for and in addition to the requirements as may be found in this code, the
developer of a subdivision shall submit a landscape plan to the plan commission and board of trustees for review and approval as a part
of the subdivision review process. For the developer of an individual zoning lot, a landscape plan shall be submitted to the architectural
review commission and the board of trustees for review and approval as a part of the certificate of approval process as specified
elsewhere in this code.
E. Maximum Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage for all impervious surfaces on any individual lot shall be sixty percent (60%). All
other areas on any zoning lot in the district shall be landscaped and maintained as open space.
F. Building Height: The maximum building height shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories or forty feet (40') including rooftop equipment,
whichever is lower for principal structures and twenty feet (20') for an accessory building.
G. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) in the district for a structure shall be 0.25.
H. Site Plan Requirements: A site plan for all zoning lots in the district is required prior to their development. (Ord. 808-97, 10-13-1997)
9-6A1-6: OFF STREET PARKING:
The minimum design requirements for parking lots, in addition to those required in chapter 11 of this title, shall be as follows: (Ord. 808-97,
10-13-1997)
A. No parking shall be permitted in the area required for setbacks from any federal, state or county road or other front, side or rear yards,
except where such parking is authorized by the village in a special use permit. (Ord. 1021-03, 4-21-2003)
B. Parking lot rows containing fifteen (15) stalls or more shall be required to have mid row landscape islands at a frequency of one island
for each not to exceed ten (10) parking stalls. Landscape islands shall be a minimum width of nine feet (9') and a minimum length of
sixteen feet (16'). Each island shall contain one shade tree as specified by the village and shall be a minimum of a three inch (3") caliper
tree.
C. There shall be a landscape island or landscaped area at the end of every parking row. Said landscape island or landscaped area shall
be landscaped so as to screen the parking lot.
D. An eight foot (8') landscaped strip shall be required between all facades of any building on the zoning lot and any parking area or
circulation drive.
E. Masonry wheel stops or curbs shall be placed so as to prevent protrusion of vehicles into street rights of way, yards, and other areas
where parking is prohibited.
Layout of the parking area shall be reviewed by the architectural review commission and the board of trustees as a part of the certificate of
approval process as set forth in this code. (Ord. 808-97, 10-13-1997)
9-6A1-7: PRIVATE SYSTEMS PROHIBITED:
Private sewage disposal systems including, but not limited to, land treatment and spray irrigation systems are prohibited in the ORD office
research and development district. (Ord. 808-97, 10-13-1997; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
ARTICLE B. B RETAIL BUSINESS/COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 285/426
9-6B-1: PURPOSE:
The B retail business/commercial district is established to provide areas for a limited range of retail stores and personal service
establishments which are desirable to provide day to day and occasional shopping needs. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-
19-2010)
9-6B-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted principal uses of land or buildings as hereinafter enumerated, shall be permitted in the B retail business/commercial district only
in accordance with conditions specified. Only those uses specifically listed hereunder shall be considered permitted principal uses, and no
building or lot shall be devoted to any use other than a use permitted herewith with the exception of uses lawfully established prior to the
effective date of this title or uses authorized as a special use in this section. The following uses constitute the only permitted principal uses
in the B retail business/commercial district:
A. Retail uses:
Antique shops.
Apparel shops.
Art and school supply stores.
Art galleries and studios.
Automobile and boat sales shops, but not including exterior display or storage.
Bakery shops, including the baking and processing of food products when prepared for retail sales on the premises only.
Banquet facilities.
Bicycle sale and repair shop.
Book and stationery stores.
Brewpubs.
Building and home materials and supplies; provided that no outdoor storage of such products shall be permitted.
Camera and photography supply shops for retail sale.
Candy and ice cream shops.
Carpet, rug and other floorcovering shops.
Catalog offices for mail order stores.
China and glassware stores.
Coffee shops.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Computer and computer software stores.
Cookware shop and cooking school.
Department stores.
Drapery stores.
Drug and pharmaceutical stores.
Electrical equipment and fixture sales and repairs, but not including manufacture or assembly.
Florist shops.
Food stores, including, but not limited to, grocery stores, meat and fish markets, fruit and vegetable markets, and delicatessens.
Furniture stores.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 286/426
Furrier, when conducted for retail trade on the premises only.
Garden supply store, without exterior sales and storage.
Gift shops.
Greeting card shops.
Hardware stores.
Hobby and craft stores (not including video game parlors).
Household appliance stores, including repair, but not including manufacture or assembly.
Interior decorating shops, including upholstering services.
Jewelry and watch sales and repair shops.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Mixed uses; combination of economically compatible permitted uses.
Municipal parking lots.
Music stores, including the sale and service of stereo equipment, audio recordings, and sheet music.
Musical instrument sales and repair stores.
Office machine, service, and supply stores.
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, not including the assembly or manufacture of such articles.
Outdoor dining use that is ancillary to a primary restaurant use, and not adjacent to residentially zoned property.
Paint, glass and wallpaper stores.
Picture framing, retail only.
Plumbing supplies and fixture sales.
Radio, television, and consumer electronics stores.
Restaurants.
Shoe stores.
Sporting goods stores.
Toy stores.
Wine and martini bars.
Winetasting shops.
B. Service uses:
Accessory uses.
Banks and financial institutions.
Barber and beauty shops.
Blueprinting and photocopying establishments.
Dry cleaning and pressing establishments facilities for the cleaning and pressing of not more than one thousand seven hundred fifty
(1,750) pounds of dry goods per day, and when using perchloroethylene or other similar noninflammable solvents approved by the state
fire marshal.
Health clubs.
Health or day spas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 287/426
Laboratories; medical, dental and optical.
Lock and key services.
Medical offices, including, but not limited to, chiropodist, chiropractor, dentist, medical doctor, optician, optometrist, orthodontist,
osteopath, psychiatrist and psychologist.
Off street parking and loading facilities, as regulated in chapter 11 of this title.
Package handling services.
Private tutoring services.
Professional and general offices, including, but not limited to, accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services; engineering,
architectural, and surveying services; insurance carriers, agents, and brokers; legal services; real estate offices; security and commodity
brokers, dealers and exchanges; and tax preparation services.
Public offices, including, but not limited to, administration offices and post office.
Retail and custom tailor and dressmaking shops.
Shoe, clothing, hat, and leather repair shops.
Signs as regulated in chapter 12 of this title.
Travel agencies. (Ord. 1455-13, 6-24-2013)
9-6B-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
Ambulance service.
Automatic teller machines.
Automobile and boat sales shops, with outdoor display and storage.
Automobile service facilities, including oil change, brake and muffler repair and other similar services. The outside overnight storage of
vehicles is prohibited.
Automobile service station, with or without minimart, for the sale of petroleum products and permitted retail goods only, but excluding
automobile repair.
Billiard facilities.
Bowling alleys.
Building and home materials and supplies, including outdoor storage.
Car (passenger) rental and leasing.
Churches, rectories and parish houses.
Clubs and lodges (nonprofit), fraternal and religious institutions.
Daycare centers and nursery schools.
Drive-through facilities accessory to principal use, as regulated in section 9-11-9, "Drive-Through Facilities", of this title.
Entertainment uses, with or without alcohol service, and including movie theaters, concert or music halls.
Equipment rental shops.
Garden supply stores, with exterior sales and storage.
Hotels or motels.
Liquor stores, limited to package goods only.
Medical and dental clinics, limited to outpatient care only.
Outdoor dining use that is ancillary to a primary restaurant use, if adjacent to residentially zoned property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 288/426
Parks, when publicly owned and operated.
Personalized educational service facility, including drivers' education facilities.
Pet shops.
Planned developments, as defined in chapter 15 of this title.
Police and fire stations.
Public utility facilities.
Schools; music, dancing, business, martial arts studios.
Sign printing and lettering shops.
Sports training facilities.
Theaters (outdoor prohibited).
Tobacco shops, retail sales only.
Veterinary clinics.
Video or media rental shops.
All uses listed as permitted uses for the B retail business/commercial district may be processed as a special use with the special use yard
requirements set forth in subsections 9-6B-5A and B of this article and the special use procedure of chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 1455-13,
6-24-2013)
9-6B-4: CONDITIONS OF USE:
All uses permitted in this district shall be retail and service establishments dealing directly with consumers and shall be subject to the
following conditions:
A. The sale of foodstuffs, articles and services shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except when outside sale or display is
authorized as a special use.
B. There shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment products other than that which is clearly incidental and essential to the retail
business conducted on the same premises.
C. Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration or other similar causes.
D. Any exterior sign displayed shall pertain to a use conducted on the premises. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
E. Exterior lighting shall be shielded and directed away from the street or adjacent properties to avoid unnecessary and nuisance
illumination to adjacent properties and must be conducted so that direct and/or indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot
shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half (1/2) foot-candle when measured ten feet (10') from the light source. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-
1987; amd. Ord. 752-96, 1-8-1996)
F. For restaurant uses that may request outdoor seating, plans must be submitted to indicate areas for tables and seating capacity, areas
for refuse containers, lighting plans and any associated storage areas.
G. For restaurant uses that may request drive-up window(s) service, a traffic study must also be included in the special use application and
access lanes must meet applicable yard setback requirements. (Ord. 843-98, 9-14-1998)
9-6B-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Requirements: The minimum lot sizes required and maximum lot size permitted in the B retail business/commercial district shall be
as follows: (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 289/426
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
Maximum
Lot Area
Permitted uses 1.5 acres 300 feet 3.0 acres
Special uses 1.0 acre 200 feet -
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
B. Yard Requirements: The minimum yard requirements in the B retail business/commercial district shall be as follows: (Ord. 1021-03, 4-21-
2003; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
Front And
Corner Side Side Rear
Permitted uses 200 feet 200 feet 200 feet
Special uses 250 feet 250 feet 250 feet
1. Landscape Plan: Uses listed as special uses in section 9-6B-3 of this article, as well as uses listed as permitted uses in section 9-6B-
2 of this article, may be allowed as special uses as part of a unified plan with lot and yard requirements as specified in subsections A
and B of this section, provided the developer submits a landscape plan for review and recommendations to the village board by the
plan commission1 and the architectural review commission.
2. Setback Parking: No parking shall be permitted in the area required for front, side, or rear yards, except where such parking is
authorized by the village in a special use permit. (Ord. 1021-03, 4-21-2003)
C. Maximum Lot Coverage: No more than fifty percent (50%) of the lot shall be covered by an impervious surface, including the principal
building and any accessory building or use including parking lots and structures, except that where decorative pavers are used, the
amount of impervious surface may be increased to fifty five percent (55%), provided the developer submits an overall design for review
and recommendations to the village board by the plan commission and the architectural review commission. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
D. Building Height Limitations: In the B retail business/commercial district no principal building shall exceed a height of thirty five feet (35')
or two and one-half (21/2) stories, whichever is lower. These height restrictions shall not apply to steeples on churches. No accessory
building or use shall exceed a height of twenty feet (20').
E. Floor Area Ratio:
1. The maximum floor area ratio in the B retail business/commercial district shall be as follows: (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1314-
10, 1-19-2010)
Permitted Use Special Use
1 story 0.15 0.20
Greater than 1 story 0.20 0.25
2. A site plan review is required for both permitted and special use development. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-6B-6: OFF STREET PARKING:
Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in chapter 11 of this title, except that where a special use
permit is granted, up to twenty five percent (25%) of the parking spaces required may be land banked in accordance with chapter 11 of this
title. Layout of the parking area shall be reviewed by the plan commission. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-6B-7: PRIVATE SYSTEMS PROHIBITED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 290/426
Private sewage disposal systems other than a septic tank system as approved by the Lake County health department, including, but not
limited to, land treatment and spray irrigation systems, are prohibited in the B retail business/commercial district. (Ord. 560-93, 5-10-1993;
amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
Chapter 7
I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
9-7-1: PURPOSE:
The I industrial district is established to provide areas for industrial development of the highest quality, which can exist in harmony with
residential and business areas. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
9-7-2: MINIMUM AREA:
The minimum area for an I industrial district is ten (10) acres. The owner of a tract of undeveloped land or land cleared for redevelopment
which is designed for industrial development on the official land use plan may submit to the village plan commission1 for its review, a
preliminary plan for the use and development thereof for an I industrial district, regardless of the zoning district in which such tract is located
at the time said plan is filed. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
9-7-3: PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted in an industrial district:
A. Permitted uses:
Any use permitted in and meeting the performance standards of chapter 13 of this title, except retail and service business uses, and
except that there may be permitted the following accessory uses:
Accessory service uses which are necessary to the conduct of the principal use.
Medical clinics.
Offices accessory to the principal use on a zoning lot.
Research facilities.
Any other accessory use approved by the village board as part of the industrial district which the board finds to be compatible with the
plan and which will have no undue adverse effect upon surrounding properties. (Ord. 1312-10, 1-19-2010)
B. Special uses:
Funeral homes.
Personal wireless service (PWS) facilities. (Ord. 1312-10, 1-19-2010; amd. Ord. 1465-13, 10-21-2013)
9-7-4: CONDITIONS OF USE:
All permitted uses are subject to the following conditions:
A. All business, production, servicing and processing shall take place within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise specified.
B. Within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residence district, all storage shall be in completely enclosed buildings or structures and located
elsewhere in this district may be open to the sky but shall be enclosed by a solid wall or fence (including solid doors or gates thereto) at
least eight feet (8') high, but in no case lower in height than the enclosed storage and suitably landscaped.
C. However, open off street loading facilities and open off street parking of motor vehicles under one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity may
be unenclosed throughout the district, except for such screening of parking and loading facilities as may be required. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-
1987)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 291/426
9-7-5: PLAN COMMISSION FINDINGS:
The plan commission shall incorporate in its report to the village board findings that the proposed project will comply with each of the
following conditions:
A. Integrated Design: That the plan provides for an industrial district consisting of several buildings or groups of buildings of efficient and
harmonious design, together with properly arranged trafficways, parking and loading facilities and landscaping, so arranged as to create
an attractive project readily integrated with and having no undue adverse effect on adjoining or surrounding areas and developments.
B. Thoroughfares: That the industrial district shall abut a street on the official major street plan as a highway, primary or secondary
thoroughfare, or that direct access to such street is provided by means of an acceptable industrial service street. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-
1987)
9-7-6: DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
The following minimum design standards shall be observed and the owner or developer shall post with the village a surety bond or furnish
other kind of guarantee, satisfactory to the village board, assuring the installation at the expense of the owner or developer of
improvements specified in the following:
A. Right Of Way And Pavements: All interior streets shall have a right of way width of not less than eighty feet (80') and any cul-de-sac
terminus shall be generally circular in shape, with a minimum radius of forty six feet (46') to the centerline of the pavement, and with its
center on the cul-de-sac centerline.
B. Utilities: All necessary utilities shall be installed meeting village specifications and the subdivision regulations of the village.
C. Off Street Parking: Off street parking shall be installed as required in chapter 11 of this title, except that for employee parking, one space
shall be provided for each one and one-half (11/2) employees on the maximum shift. Customer or visitor parking, at least ten (10)
spaces shall be provided per plant. In particular circumstances where customer or visitor parking may reasonably be expected to
exceed ten (10) spaces, the village may require such additional spaces as shall be determined to be adequate to provide such parking.
D. Loading Facilities: Loading facilities shall be installed in accordance with chapter 11 of this title. Loading docks shall not be placed along
building fronts.
E. Plant Vehicle Storage: Such storage shall be sufficient to accommodate all plant vehicles off the street.
F. Lot Area: Lot area minimum of forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
G. Maximum Lot Coverage: The maximum area occupied by all buildings on any lot shall not exceed forty five percent (45%) of the total
area of the lot. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
H. Yard Requirements: No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered unless the following yards are provided and
maintained in connection with such building:
1. Front Yard: On every zoning lot a front yard of not less than two hundred fifty feet (250') in depth shall be provided. However, where
lots within the same block and comprising forty percent (40%) of the frontage on the same street are already developed on the
effective date hereof with front yards with an average depth of less than two hundred fifty feet (250'), then such average depth shall
be the required front yard depth for such frontage in said block.
2. Side Yards:
a. A side yard of two hundred fifty feet (250').
b. However, where lots have been duly recorded prior to the effective date hereof, and an industrial district lot does not exceed twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet in area, side yards shall be not less than ten feet (10').
3. Rear Yard:
a. On every zoning lot there shall be a rear yard of not less than two hundred fifty feet (250').
b. However, where lots have been duly recorded prior to the effective date hereof, and an industrial district lot does not exceed twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet in area, there shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1021-03, 4-21-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 292/426
I. Building Height Limit: The height of any structure shall not exceed three (3) stories, nor shall it exceed forty five feet (45'), except as
provided herein.
J. Distance Between Buildings: Distance between principal buildings, fifty feet (50'); distance between accessory structures, twenty feet
(20'). (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
K. Reserved. (Ord. 1021-03, 4-21-2003)
L. Landscaping Of Unsurfaced Areas: All unpaved areas shall be landscaped subject to village board approval. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
M. Greenbelts: The I industrial district area shall be enclosed on all sides adjacent to a residential district by a planted strip at least fifty feet
(50') wide. The plant material, subject to village board approval, shall have initially a height and density of not less than fifty percent
(50%) of the ultimately required height and density. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
N. Illumination: Exterior lighting fixtures shall be so installed as to reflect the light away from adjacent properties. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-7-7: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A. Submission Of Plan: Upon recommendation of the plan commission and approval of the village board that the proposed I industrial
district, as shown in the preliminary plan, appears to conform to the requirements herein and all other applicable requirements of this
title, the proponents shall submit a final development plan. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
B. Recommendation To Village Board Of Trustees: When the preliminary plan has been reviewed and comments incorporated, the plan
commission shall submit said plan with its report and recommendation to the village board. After village board approval of the
preliminary plan, a public hearing on both the plan and the proposed change in zoning district classification shall take place: 1) a public
notice shall be published as per standard village procedure, and 2) all preliminary plan documents shall be on file for public inspection in
the village clerk's office. When the final plan is found to be in compliance with the requirements herein, the plan commission shall submit
said plan with its report and recommendation to the village board.
C. Final Board Action: The village board may modify the plan consistent with the intent of this title and make such other changes as it may
deem appropriate prior to final approval.
D. Adjustments: After the final development plan has been approved by the village board and in the course of carrying out the plan, minor
adjustments in rearrangements of buildings, service areas and other features requested by the developers shall be reviewed by the plan
commission and recommendation submitted to the village board for approval. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
Chapter 8
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A. AG AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
9-8A-1: PURPOSE:
This district is created to provide areas for agricultural and certain related uses. The specific intent is to facilitate the proper use of lands
best suited to agriculture and related uses through preventing the admixture of urban and rural uses creating incompatibility and conflict.
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-8A-2: MINIMUM AREA:
The minimum area in this district shall be ten (10) contiguous acres. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-8A-3: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 293/426
Apiary.
Arboretum or botanical garden.
Cultivation of field and garden crops.
Dairy farming.
Flower, grass (or sod) and general farming.
Greenhouse, nonretail.
Orchard.
Single-family dwelling.
Truck farm. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-8A-4: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses are permitted as special uses upon obtaining a special use permit as authorized by chapter 14 of this title, as amended:
Camp, day or youth.
Cemetery, church or other place of worship.
Conservation club.
Convent, monastery.
Dairy products and processing.
Extraction of earth products.
Golf course.
Golf driving range (as part of a golf course).
Greenhouse, retail.
Kennels.
Mushroom production barn, commercial.
Nursery school.
Nursery, tree or shrub.
Public utility facilities.
Religious retreat.
Schools: university, college, theological seminary, junior college, high school, junior high school, elementary school.
Stable, commercial.
Stable, private.
Veterinary clinic, boarding animal variety veterinary clinic, nonboarding animal variety. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1242-07,
12-17-2007)
9-8A-5: TEMPORARY USES:
The following uses are permitted as temporary uses upon obtaining a temporary use permit from the village board of trustees:
Christmas tree sales.
Contractor's project office and equipment sheds.
Seasonal sale of farm produce.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 294/426
Summer theater.
Tent meeting or tent theater. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-8A-6: YARD AREAS:
No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained:
Front And
Corner Side Side Rear
Permitted uses 250 feet 250 feet 250 feet
Special uses 300 feet 300 feet 300 feet
(Ord. 1021-03, 4-21-2003)
9-8A-7: MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than two percent (2%) of the lot area may be occupied by buildings and structures. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-8A-8: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building or structure shall exceed a height of fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-8A-9: OFF STREET PARKING:
Off street parking and loading shall be provided as required or permitted by chapter 11 of this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
ARTICLE B. AB AGRICULTURAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
9-8B-1: PURPOSE:
This District is created to provide areas for agriculturally-related business uses that may be controlled to permit a compatible transition with
existing and future low density single-family residential neighborhoods characteristic of the Village. The specific intent is to facilitate the
proper use of lands that have rural historic agricultural significance while recognizing that there are other related uses which both support
agricultural and are suitable commercial uses found in rural, transitional agricultural-type areas. Uses allowed in the AB Agricultural
Business District represent those that are carefully controlled with agricultural uses while supportive of the broader commercial and low
density single-family residential goals of the community. (Ord. 584-93, 12-13-93)
9-8B-2: MINIMUM AREA:
A. The minimum area in this District shall be five (5) contiguous acres.
B. By recommendation of the Plan Commission and approval of the Village Board, parcels of land under the five (5) acre standard may
receive AB Agricultural Business District if it can be demonstrated that the property has particular historic, cultural or aesthetic
importance, while maintaining a minimum lot size of three (3) acres and meeting all applicable setback and bulk requirements. (Ord.
584-93, 12-13-93)
9-8B-3: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted:
Farm produce stand.
Historical building and landmark.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 295/426
Historical structures including historical agricultural structures established prior to the adoption of this Article.
Horticultural uses.
Single-family farm dwelling. (Ord. 584-93, 12-13-93)
9-8B-4: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
Accessory agricultural buildings, i.e., barns, silos, sheds, etc.
Accountant office (less than 1,500 square feet of floor area).
Antique shop.
Arboretum or botanical garden.
Architectural office (less than 1,500 square feet of floor area).
Art gallery.
Art supply shop.
Artist studio.
Attorney office (less than 1,500 square feet of floor area).
Barber shop.
Beauty salon.
Bicycle shop.
Boat, canoe, sail boats, other nonmotorized water recreation sporting goods-sales, rental and service.
Book shop.
Camera and photographic, sales, supplies, studio.
Camp, day or youth (minimum 15 acres).
Camping equipment and related sporting goods.
Candy and confectionery store.
Catalog sales office.
Cemetery, church or other place of worship.
Chamber of Commerce office.
Child care, day care centers.
Children day school, nursery.
China and glassware shop.
Cleaners (dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations only).
Coin, stamp collectors shop.
Conservation club.
Convent, monastery.
Country style foodstuff shop, bakery goods, cheese, sausage, taffy apples, gourmet foods and similar food items.
Cultivation of field and garden crops.
Dairy products shop.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 296/426
Drapery shop.
Dress makers shop.
Engineers office (less than 1,500 square feet of floor area).
Farm store.
Fences, existing prior to adoption of this Article or when used in conjunction with an existing agricultural use.
Florist.
Flower, grass (or sod) and general farming.
Furrier shop, including storage.
Garden supply store.
Gift shop.
Golf course.
Golf equipment and related sporting goods-sales and service.
Greenhouse, nonretail.
Greenhouse, retail.
Haberdashery.
Hardware shop (less than 20,000 square feet of floor area).
Health club.
Hearing aid store.
Hobby shop.
Home occupation.
Home office operation.
Household pet supplies store.
Insurance agency (less than 1,500 square feet of floor area).
Interior decorator shop, office or studio.
Jewelry shop.
Landscape architect office (less than 1,500 square feet of floor area).
Landscape contracting business and equipment yard.
Leather goods shop.
Libraries.
Locksmith shop.
Mail order house.
Mailbox and packaging service.
Millinery shops.
Museum.
Nursery, tree or shrub, retail or nonretail, with greenhouse buildings.
Orchard.
Picture framing studio.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 297/426
Public utility facilities.
Religious retreat (minimum 15 acres).
Saddles shop, leather goods, accessory sales, including clothing.
Schools, university, college, theological seminary, junior college, high school, junior high school, elementary school.
Shoe stores and repair service (less than 1,500 square feet of floor area).
Snowplowing service.
Tree trimming business.
Truck farm. (Ord. 584-93, 12-13-1993; amd. Ord. 1242-07, 12-17-2007; Ord. 1281-09, 3-16-2009; Ord. 1377-11, 10-17-2011)
9-8B-5: TEMPORARY USES:
The following uses are permitted as temporary uses upon obtaining a temporary use permit from the village board of trustees:
Christmas tree sales.
Contractor's project office and equipment sheds.
Petting zoo.
Seasonal sale of farm produce.
Summer theater.
Tent meeting/tent theater. (Ord. 584-93, 12-13-1993)
9-8B-6: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
The minimum lot sizes required in the AB agricultural business district shall be as follows:
Minimum Lot Area Lot Width
Permitted and special uses 5.0 acres 300 feet
(Ord. 584-93, 12-13-1993)
9-8B-7: YARD AREAS:
A. Yards Required: No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained:
Front And
Corner Side Side Rear
Permitted uses 250 feet 250 feet 250 feet
Special uses 300 feet 300 feet 300 feet
B. Accessory Structure Setback: Where an existing structure is located within a required yard and serves as an accessory structure to the
principal use of the property and provided said structure is less than or equal to three hundred (300) square feet in size and is a
minimum of ten feet (10') from the lot line, the village board may authorize the continued use of said structure in a special use permit.
C. Setback Parking: No parking shall be permitted in the area required for front, side, or rear yards except where such parking is authorized
by the village in a special use permit. (Ord. 1021-03, 4-21-2003)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 298/426
9-8B-8: MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than ten percent (10%) of the lot area may be occupied by buildings and enclosed structures. (Ord. 584-93, 12-13-1993)
9-8B-9: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall exceed a height of thirty five feet (35') or two and one-half (21/2) stories, whichever is less. These height restrictions shall
not apply to existing agricultural buildings provided said agricultural buildings shall not exceed fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 584-93, 12-13-1993)
9-8B-10: OFF STREET PARKING:
Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in chapter 11 of this title, except that where a special use
permit is granted, up to twenty five percent (25%) of the parking spaces required may be land banked in accordance with chapter 11 of this
title. (Ord. 584-93, 12-13-1993)
Chapter 9
OS OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
9-9-1: PURPOSE:
The OS open space district is intended to encourage the use of land for open space preservation and enhancement; to protect the public
health, safety, comfort and welfare and reduce the financial burdens imposed on the village and its individuals which may result from
improper use of lands which may be subjected to periodic flooding or erosion or areas with a potential for generating sedimentation; to
protect natural resources such as woodlands and wildlife areas, wetlands and marshes with which constitute water retention or recharge
areas; to preserve or provide for scenic vistas; and to provide for recreational activities and areas of educational value. It is intended to be
applied to publicly held lands, or those which have been voluntarily limited to such uses by special permit, covenant, easement or
dedication. (Ord. 1421-12, 11-19-2012)
9-9-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses are permitted uses:
Agricultural uses including farming but not permitting grazing and livestock raising.
Botanical, flower gardens, community gardens, and environmental features such as prairies and wetlands.
Facilities such as warming houses or restroom facilities that support open space uses.
Hiking and bicycle trails.
Open type public and private recreational facilities, such as public parks, playgrounds, gazebos, athletic fields, pavilions, picnic shelters,
forest preserves, golf courses, golf driving ranges, recreational lakes and other similar recreational uses subject to all other provisions of
this title.
Public utility rights of way.
Railroad rights of way and trackage.
Any other uses customarily accessory or incidental to the above uses. (Ord. 1421-12, 11-19-2012)
9-9-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use:
Open type uses, such as loading and unloading areas and parking lots.
Single-family residences on lots of record prior to the effective date hereof. (Ord. 1421-12, 11-19-2012)
9-9-4: CONDITIONS OF USE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 299/426
In the OS open space district, the following conditions of use shall pertain:
A. All permitted and special uses shall be subject to review and recommendation by the planning, building and zoning commission, and
approval by the village board, and to such conditions as may be stipulated to protect the public interest.
B. All stormwater functions must be permitted in compliance with Lake County stormwater management. (Ord. 1421-12, 11-19-2012)
Chapter 9A
AO ARCHITECTURAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
9-9A-1: PURPOSE OF DISTRICT:
The purpose of the AO architectural overlay district ("Overlay District") is:
A. To achieve sound and harmonious design of new buildings and sites developed in the overlay district.
B. To establish standards for new construction and development in the overlay district with respect to, but not limited to, buildings, streets,
sidewalks, streetscapes and landscapes.
C. To provide for an attractive working and shopping environment in the overlay district through sound land use planning and design
standards that is in keeping with the residential and rural character existing in the village.
D. To ensure harmonious relationships between uses, structures, architecture and any and all other site improvements in the overlay district
through continuity of design.
E. To provide for a high standard of architectural design in the overlay district which complements the high standard of architectural design
throughout the village.
F. To provide appropriate buffering and transition among varying uses. (Ord. 943-01, 6-18-2001)
9-9A-2: REGULATIONS ARE IN ADDITION TO UNDERLYING ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
The regulations imposed by this chapter are in addition to, and not in lieu of, the regulations imposed by any other zoning district
classification. Property zoned in the overlay district shall retain its underlying zoning district classification. In the event of any conflict
between any provision of this chapter and any provision of any other zoning district classification, the provision determined by the village to
be the most restrictive shall control. (Ord. 943-01, 6-18-2001)
9-9A-3: PICTORIAL EXHIBITS:
To assist in the interpretation of the regulations imposed by this chapter, there are included certain pictorial exhibits (figures 1_13 in this
section). In the event of any conflict between any regulatory language in this chapter and any pictorial exhibit, the regulatory language shall
control.
Figure 1: Residential Character For Buildings
Within The Overlay District
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 300/426
Figure 2: Buildings, Rather Than Parking,
Close To The Street
Figure 3: Building Height Measured To
Mean Point Of The Roof
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 301/426
Figure 4: Maximum Width Of A Plane = 40'
Figure 5: Prevailing Building Vocabulary
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 302/426
Figure 6: Articulated Front Entry
Figure 7: On-Street Parking Within Recessed Bays
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 303/426
Figure 8: Parking Lot Buffer
Figure 9: Sidewalk Connections
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 304/426
Figure 10: Use Of Pavers At Crosswalks
Figure 11: Typical Lighting Fixtures
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 305/426
Figure 12: Landscape Buffer Yard
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 306/426
Figure 13: Outdoor Seating Opportunity
Near Building Entrance
(Ord. 943-01, 6-18-2001)
9-9A-4: EXEMPTIONS FROM REGULATIONS:
Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this chapter to the contrary, the regulations imposed by this chapter shall not be applicable to
any agricultural use in the AG agricultural district or any single-family detached dwelling use in the R-1 one-family residence district. The
regulations imposed by this chapter shall be applicable to all other uses and zoning district classifications within the overlay district. (Ord.
943-01, 6-18-2001)
9-9A-5: ARCHITECTURAL/SITE STANDARDS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 307/426
A. Unified Design: All development shall be of a unified design concept. The unified design concept shall be of a residential character
consistent with the residential character of the village (see figure 1 in section 9-9A-3 of this chapter). Development shall transition from,
respect and complement the nature and character of adjacent parcels and uses.
B. Harmonious Composition: A homogenous sense of place shall be created while each use is afforded the ability to create its own identity
consistent with this chapter. Harmonious composition of several similar or complementary forms is encouraged.
C. Bulk Requirements: All setback and other bulk requirements shall be as set forth in the underlying zoning district of any property, except
as otherwise provided in this chapter.
D. Building Location: Buildings, rather than parking, shall be located adjacent to streets. On corner lots buildings shall be located adjacent
to the intersection of streets (see figure 2 in section 9-9A-3 of this chapter).
E. Building Orientation: The front elevations of buildings shall face streets, rather than side or rear elevations. Interior access roads may be
used to accomplish this requirement.
F. Building Height: The maximum height of a building shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') or two (2) stories, whichever is less, as measured
from the top of the foundation at the front entrance to the mean point of the roof (see figure 3 in section 9-9A-3 of this chapter). In the
event a building or structure is adjacent to two (2) or more roadways, the reference point for determining the height shall be taken from
the side of the building or structure closest to the lowest roadway. Chimneys and rooftop architectural appurtenances such as steeples,
spires, turrets, cupolas, etc., may extend ten feet (10') above the highest point of the roof.
G. Building Facades; Size: No plane on a facade of a building shall exceed forty feet (40') in width. Offsets from one plane to the other shall
not be less than ten percent (10%) of the width of the plane nearest the corresponding property line (see figure 4 in section 9-9A-3 of
this chapter). The maximum floor area of any building shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet, exclusive of the basement. Groups
of smaller detached structures are preferred to larger structures.
H. Building Colors: Building colors shall reflect natural earth tones or muted colors. Bright colors may only be used as minor accents.
I. Building Vocabulary: The prevailing building vocabulary in the village is residential dominated by single-family, pitched-roof buildings. New
buildings shall draw upon these design features (see figure 5 in section 9-9A-3 of this chapter).
J. Main Entry: The front/main entry of a building shall face the primary street or parking lot, with secondary entries to the side or rear. The
design of the main entry shall be articulated to reflect a sense of prominence (see figure 6 in section 9-9A-3 of this chapter).
K. Elevations: All elevations of any structure shall be treated with equal importance in design, incorporating design elements and features,
and in utilizing building materials.
L. Attached Residential Dwellings: Attached residential dwellings such as townhomes, villas, coach homes and the like shall not contain
more than two (2) dwelling units per building or structure.
M. Porches: Open porches, covered walkways and canopy projections shall be not less than six feet (6') in depth. A minimum of eight feet
(8') of clear space shall be provided from the sidewalk elevation to the lowest point of a canopy or covered porch or walkway.
N. Additional Entry: A visible entry from the rear and/or side parking area shall be provided, said door openings to be in compliance with
this code.
O. Windows; Doors: Windows and doors shall be provided in accordance with the following:
1. Windows shall be located on all elevations, in appropriate quantities given the size and scale of the elevation, and shall be properly
spaced and proportioned.
2. Window and door type, size, and detailing shall be residential in character and kept consistent around the building. Window wall
construction or utilization of large windows in commercial application that span from floor to ceiling are unacceptable.
3. Windows shall be proportioned vertically.
4. Display windows may be projected as bay windows.
5. The maximum width of an undivided pane of glass shall not exceed three feet (3').
6. The maximum area devoted to glass on a single facade shall not exceed thirty five percent (35%).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 308/426
7. The windowsill at the base of the facade shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18") above the finished floor elevation.
8. The maximum projection of a bay window shall be two feet (2').
9. Windows and doors shall display the correct use of divided lights.
10. Metal, vinyl, and plastic doors and window frames, sashes, and muntins are prohibited. Clad windows are acceptable. Window
frames, sashes, and muntins shall be constructed of wood or cladded wood.
11. Reflective or tinted glass is prohibited. Windows and doors shall be glazed in clear nonreflecting glass with a maximum daylight
reduction value of twenty percent (20%).
12. The use of traditional shutters, lintels, projecting sills or surrounds is encouraged to articulate window openings.
P. Roofs:
1. The pitch of the main roof shall not be less than a ratio of ten to twelve (10:12). A ratio of twelve to twelve (12:12) pitch is preferred.
Accent roofs with less pitch may be acceptable upon approval of the village.
2. Roof forms shall be well organized and demonstrate the same character on all sides of the building. Roof styles shall be gabled,
hipped, or a combination of the two (2). Other roof styles may be acceptable upon approval of the village.
3. Cedar shakes, asphalt shakes, architectural asphalt shingles, slate, or concrete simulated slate shall be used for roofing material.
Other similar materials may be acceptable upon approval of the village.
4. Rooftop mechanical equipment is discouraged, but if used, said equipment shall be fully screened from public view in the manner
approved by the village.
Q. Building Materials: The primary building material shall be brick or stone. Brick or stone shall be used on at least eighty percent (80%) of
each and every side of a building.
Accent materials may include wood, stucco, metal, EIFS, copper flashing or similar materials. Accent materials shall be used on not
more than twenty percent (20%) of any side of a building.
All wood clad areas shall be painted, stained or otherwise protected against the effects of weather.
R. Chimneys: Chimneys are encouraged. Chimneys shall be encased with an enclosure of masonry or stone and may be supported by a
foundation at grade when located on an exterior wall. Masonry detail is encouraged where chimneys are exposed to public view.
S. Franchise Design: Franchise or chain stores shall be required to design any building in accordance with the standards of the overlay
district. Franchise architecture that is trademarked or identified with a particular chain or corporation, is generic in nature, or is designed
to function as a sign is prohibited.
T. Accessory Structures: All attached and detached accessory buildings and structures shall conform to the standards of the overlay district.
U. Canopies: Canopies over drive-in or drive-through facilities, or over gasoline service station pumping islands shall be attached to, extend
from, and be an integral part of the roof structure of the principal building and shall conform to these guidelines in all respects, including
roof pitch and materials. (Ord. 943-01, 6-18-2001)
9-9A-6: STREETSCAPE/LANDSCAPE ELEMENTS:
A. Parking:
1. On street parking will only be considered on minor interior streets. If on street parking is permitted, parking stalls shall be located
within recessed bays apart from driving lanes (see section 9-9A-3, figure 7 of this article).
On street parking shall not be permitted on Midlothian, Fairfield, Old McHenry, Gilmer, Krueger, Milton and Schwerman Roads.
2. Off street parking facilities shall be developed in accordance with the off street parking requirements of the zoning ordinance. Off
street parking shall be located to the side or rear of buildings whenever possible. When parking must be located adjacent to the
street, a landscaped buffer shall be provided (see section 9-9A-3, figure 8 of this article).
The interior of parking lots shall be landscaped with shrubs, ornamental trees, and high branching deciduous trees throughout to
provide shade and soften their appearance. Not less than ten percent (10%) of the parking lot shall be devoted to pervious
landscaped area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 309/426
Not less than one landscaped island shall be provided every ten (10) parking spaces, or fraction thereof, within a parking lot, located
and spaced throughout the entire parking lot. (Ord. 943-01, 6-18-2001)
B. Pedestrian And Bicycle Access:
1. Convenient pedestrian and bicycle access shall be provided to the site and to adjacent properties within the overlay district. Within
the B retail business/commercial district sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the interior streets and between buildings and
parking (see section 9-9A-3, figure 9 of this article). (Ord. 943-01, 6-18-2001; amd. Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
2. Pedestrian crosswalks that promote safety and convenience are required. Bicycle racks shall be provided in safe, visible, convenient
and landscaped locations.
3. Site plans shall incorporate bicycle and pedestrian paths to provide access to and from adjacent sites and other areas of the village.
C. Pavement Width: Streets shall be designed in accordance with the village subdivision control ordinance. Roadway widths shall be kept
to a functional minimum to provide a comfortable scale for pedestrians.
D. Paving:
1. Asphalt or concrete shall be used in all publicly dedicated vehicular use areas. Pavers may be used on privately owned and
maintained vehicular use areas.
2. Concrete, stone, or granite pavers, or stamped asphalt or stamped concrete shall be used at all pedestrian crosswalks.
3. Sidewalks and paths shall be paved with concrete pavers, cobblestones, granite pavers, or other aggregate material to improve the
visual character of an area.
4. Pedestrian crossing areas shall be delineated by materials or textures that differ from the driving surface (see figure 10 in section 9-
9A-3 of this chapter).
E. Lighting:
1. Appropriately lit streets, parking areas, and open spaces are required to provide pedestrian and vehicular safety.
2. Street lighting along collector roads is prohibited unless otherwise approved by the village.
3. Cutoff fixtures shall be located below the mature height of trees within parking lot islands to prevent ambient glow.
4. Pedestrian-scale lighting shall be located along the walkways and adjacent to store entrances.
5. Lighting fixtures on buildings shall be compatible with the architecture of the buildings. Lighting fixtures attached to buildings shall be
screened by the building's architectural features to eliminate glare to adjacent properties. Light may be cast upon the building for
architectural effect.
6. Freestanding exterior lighting fixtures within the overlay district shall be "acorn" type lamps on cast-iron poles and bases (see figure
11 in section 9-9A-3 of this chapter). Exterior lighting standards shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height.
7. Lighting shall be constructed in accordance with the exterior lighting restrictions in the zoning district in which they are located.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all lighting shall respect surrounding residential uses and shall be constructed to retain the rural
character of the community.
F. Landscaping And Buffering:
1. Best efforts shall be utilized to avoid destroying or damaging significant trees, natural buffers and existing quality landscape features
when designing, locating, and/or grading for building improvements.
2. Shade trees shall be planted within landscape parkways and all perimeter yards. Deciduous and/or ornamental trees shall be
provided along the front and near the entrance of buildings.
3. Landscape buffers shall be provided along the street to substantially soften visibility of buildings and parking lots (see figure 12 in
section 9-9A-3 of this chapter). The buffer strip shall be landscaped with shade trees, evergreen trees, and shrubs, and may
incorporate berming, decorative fencing, masonry walls or hedge to achieve the desired levels of opacity.
4. Berming and landscaping shall be incorporated in transitional yards to provide a visual screen between dissimilar uses.
5. Landscape buffers shall be required along Krueger, Old McHenry, Fairfield, Midlothian, Schwerman, Milton, Gilmer and other arterial
roadways to substantially soften the view of buildings and parking lots. Such landscape buffers shall be installed to a minimum of
eight (8) to twelve feet (12') in height in accordance with the following opacity levels:
a. For office uses: minimum sixty five percent (65%) opacity.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 310/426
b. For retail and residential uses: minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity.
Along all other lot lines where non-R-1 residential uses abut R-1 single-family residential uses or where nonresidential uses abut
residential uses, a transitional yard buffer shall be installed to achieve one hundred percent (100%) opacity to a minimum of twelve
feet (12') in height, or such greater height as may be required by the village to accomplish the buffer intended by this section.
Opacity levels shall be achieved upon installation and shall be maintained on a year-round basis.
6. Parkway trees shall be installed in accordance with the Hawthorn Woods subdivision control ordinance.
Landscape plans shall be submitted as part of any proposed development within the overlay district in accordance with chapter 17 of
the Hawthorn Woods zoning ordinance.
Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with chapter 17 of the Hawthorn Woods zoning ordinance.
7. All landscaping shall be maintained in first-class condition.
G. Open Space/Natural Features:
1. Care shall be taken to protect and incorporate natural features of the site into the built environment.
2. Open spaces and "pocket" parks are required to provide relief from building mass and provide comfortable outdoor sitting places.
3. Open spaces shall be created as a focal point within the built environment.
4. Outdoor eating areas are required for all office uses.
5. At a minimum, open space shall be provided in accordance with the maximum lot coverage requirements in the zoning district in
which it is located.
6. A tree preservation plan shall be submitted as part of any proposed development within the overlay district in accordance with
chapter 17 of the Hawthorn Woods zoning ordinance.
H. Furniture; Structures; Planters:
1. Outdoor seating and waste receptacles shall be provided on all nonresidential zoning lots as appropriate (see figure 13 in section 9-
9A-3 of this chapter). Outdoor furniture elements and waste receptacles shall be consistent throughout and reflect the character of the
building environment.
2. Kiosks, pergolas, arbors, gazebos, and the like are required to establish a focal point within open spaces.
3. The use of freestanding planters, raised planter beds, planter boxes, and hanging planters is required. (Ord. 943-01, 6-18-2001)
9-9A-7: SIGNS:
A. General:
1. Signs shall be an integral part of the building and site design.
2. For single-tenant buildings, multiple signs on the same facade are prohibited.
3. For multi-tenant buildings, all signage on the same facade shall be consistent in color, size and elevation.
4. A unified sign plan shall be submitted for development within the overlay district for which development approval is sought.
5. Signs shall be regulated by the Hawthorn Woods zoning ordinance.
6. All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the Hawthorn Woods building code.
B. Types Permitted/Prohibited:
1. The following types of signs are permitted for retail uses:
a. Wall signs.
b. Projecting signs.
c. Monument signs.
2. The following types of signs are permitted for office/service/all other nonretail uses (except residential):
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 311/426
a. Monument signs identifying the name of the project or tenant.
3. The following types of signs are permitted for residential uses:
a. Monument signs identifying the name of the subdivision or project.
4. The following types of signs shall be prohibited:
a. Awning signs.
b. Billboard signs.
c. Canopy signs.
d. Changeable copy signs.
e. Electric signs.
f. Flashing signs.
g. Inflatable signs.
h. Internally illuminated signs.
i. Marquee signs.
j. Moving signs.
k. Neon signs.
l. Pole or pylon signs.
m. Portable signs.
n. Roof signs.
o. Streamers and pennants.
p. Wind-actuated signs.
C. Size/Area:
1. Signs shall complement the scale of the building.
2. Sign area shall relate to the building facade and/or street frontage.
3. Sign shall be orientated horizontally. Vertical signs may be allowed if they contribute to the overall architecture of the building.
4. The size and area of wall and ground signs shall be regulated by the Hawthorn Woods zoning ordinance, except as provided below:
a. Wall signs shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of the wall on which they are mounted or twenty four (24) square feet,
whichever is more.
b. Monument signs shall not exceed forty eight (48) square feet in size.
c. Projecting signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size.
D. Height:
1. The height of monument signs shall be controlled to relate to the human scale.
2. Wall signs and projecting signs shall not project above the eave line of a building.
3. Monument signs shall not exceed six feet (6') in height including the support structure.
4. No wall sign shall project higher than twenty feet (20') above the curb level, and in no case shall a sign project above the eave line.
E. Number:
1. The number of signs shall be kept to a functional minimum.
2. The maximum number of signs permitted on a zoning lot shall be regulated by the Hawthorn Woods zoning ordinance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 312/426
F. Placement:
1. Wall signs shall generally be placed near the main front entry where they do not obscure architectural features of the building.
2. Wall signs shall not project significantly from the facade of a building.
3. The placement of all wall and ground signs shall be regulated by the Hawthorn Woods zoning ordinance.
4. Regulatory signs shall be compatible with the character of the area. Regulatory signs shall be made of carved wood and mounted on
decorative wooden posts. Regulatory signs may be externally illuminated from the ground.
G. Composition:
1. Softer, subtler alternatives to prominent corporate logos are required.
2. Italicized, bold and plain text shall not be mixed.
3. The use of images, pictures and logos shall be avoided unless they are an integral element of the building's architecture.
4. The sign text shall consist of no more than two (2) font styles and sizes.
5. Continuous strings of text shall consist of only one font style and size.
H. Materials:
1. Sign materials shall be consistent or compatible with the original construction materials and architectural style of the building facade
on which they are to be displayed.
2. Matte, natural, brushed, patina-like or burnished surfaces are required.
3. Polished, glossy, shiny or reflective surfaces are prohibited.
4. Monument signs shall be brick or stone and may incorporate wood not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the sign area, however,
monument signs shall be supported across the base by brick or stone.
5. Natural materials such as wood, stone, brick or metals shall be used.
6. Plastic sign panels are prohibited.
I. Color/Theme:
1. The color and theme of a sign shall be architecturally compatible with the style, composition, materials, colors and details of the
building, and with other nearby signs.
2. A sign and any background shall together consist of no more than two (2) colors or shades of the same color. If two (2) colors are
used, at least one color shall match the predominant color of the building.
3. Permitted color combinations are:
a. Black on beige, ecru or natural limestone.
b. Earth tones on complementary earth tone background.
c. Beige, ecru on red brick background.
d. Forest green on beige, ecru or red brick background.
4. Bright "day-glow" type colors are prohibited.
5. Signs with individual channelized letters are prohibited.
J. Illumination:
1. Signs shall only be illuminated by external light sources.
2. Lighting devices shall be hidden or softened by architectural features or landscaping or integrated into the style of the building.
3. Soft halogen or incandescent lighting is preferred over bright or fluorescent lighting.
4. External illumination of signs shall be shielded and directed away from the street or adjacent properties. Maximum illumination shall
be one-half (1/2) foot-candle when measured ten feet (10') from the sign.
5. Monument signs shall only be externally illuminated from the ground. (Ord. 943-01, 6-18-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 313/426
9-9A-8: DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL REQUIRED; DEVIATIONS:
A. No person shall, construct, alter, remodel, move or reconstruct any building or structure on any property within the overlay district which
is subject to the provisions of this chapter, nor shall any person otherwise improve any property within the overlay district which is
subject to the provisions of this chapter, unless there has first been passed an ordinance by the corporate authorities granting
development approval.
B. The applicant shall file with the village:
1. All plans and specifications specifically required by the provisions of this chapter and those otherwise required by all other applicable
provisions of this code.
2. Such other plans, elevation drawings, material specifications and engineering drawings necessary to evidence compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
C. Upon submittal of a complete application, the matter shall be referred to the plan commission and architectural review commission for
review and recommendation at a public meeting. The plan commission and architectural review commission shall submit their
recommendation to the village board within ninety (90) days after the submission of such complete application.
D. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the plan commission and architectural review commission, the corporate authorities may
approve or deny such application.
E. As a condition to the approval of any development, the board of trustees may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, design, layout, height, density, construction, maintenance, aesthetics, operation and other elements of the
development as deemed necessary for the protection of the public and protection of the overlay district. In all cases in which
developments are approved, the board of trustees shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that
the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
F. The development may, in the sole discretion of the corporate authorities, deviate from strict conformance with the required density,
dimension, area, height, bulk, parking and other regulations for the overlay district, to the extent specified in the ordinance authorizing
the development so long as the development will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general
welfare. (Ord. 943-01, 6-18-2001)
Chapter 9B
PU/IB PUBLIC USE AND INSTITUTIONAL BUILDINGS DISTRICT
9-9B-1: PURPOSE:
The Public Use and Institutional Buildings District is intended to provide for attractive and well designed sites for public and institutional
buildings in an environment characterized by controlled ingress and egress to streets and providing the screening and landscaping
necessary to create a proper relationship with adjacent uses. This district also serves to create space for quasi-public amenities like art
galleries, schools and museums. (Ord. 1313-10, 1-19-2010)
9-9B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses may be permitted in a Public Use and Institutional Buildings District:
Museums and art galleries.
Off street parking and loading facilities, as regulated in chapter 11 of this title.
Public libraries.
Signs, as regulated in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 1313-10, 1-19-2010)
9-9B-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
Cemeteries, including crematories and mausoleums in conjunction therewith.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 314/426
Churches, or other houses of worship.
Daycare center when incidental to and located within a use or building as a part of a public or private school.
Public schools, elementary and high; and private schools having the same curriculum as ordinarily given in the public schools; provided,
that no rooms shall be regularly used for housing or sleeping purposes.
Religious institutions and not for profit organizations with sleeping quarters, whether temporary or permanent, and other incidental uses
such as rectories, seminaries, convents, monasteries or other accessory uses required or desired for operation.
Signs, electronic message, provided:
A. Four (4) or more distinct and separate uses are active on the subject property.
B. Existing signs for each of the uses shall be consolidated into one electronic message sign, except that directional signs shall not be
included in the consolidation requirement.
C. Consolidated electronic message sign shall conform with applicable regulations in chapter 12 of this title and specifically section 9-
12-8 of this title, except that:
1. Only one electronic message sign shall be permitted on the subject property;
2. Sign shall have a maximum of two (2) sides/faces; that is, no three-sided signs;
3. The sign face on each side shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet; however the electronic message sign portion of the sign face
shall not exceed twenty five (25) square feet; and
4. Height of the sign shall not exceed ten feet (10') from the finished grade to the top of the sign.
D. Consolidated electronic message sign shall have the following requirements:
1. Sign shall be a monument sign, but may be designed and installed with architectural features at the discretion of the Village
Board;
2. Sign shall conform with International Dark Sky Association illumination policies as determined when approved;
3. Sign's brightness level shall not exceed three thousand two hundred fifty (3,250) NITs. From dusk to dawn the brightness level
shall not exceed 812.5 NITs;
4. Sign messages shall not change more frequently than once every thirty (30) minutes. The change or transition shall be a full
screen replacement without fading, motion or other action techniques;
5. Sign shall not contain pictures, graphics or images;
6. Sign shall only contain lettering or written messages;
7. Sign color shall only be white or amber;
8. Sign messages shall not contain movement, flashing, animation, scrolling, or other attention-getting techniques; and
9. Sign lighting, brightness and color shall remain constant within a message and between messages. (Ord. 1313-10, 1-19-2010;
amd. Ord. 1760-17, 5-8-2017)
9-9B-4: EXTERIOR LIGHTING RESTRICTIONS:
In addition to all other applicable requirements of this Code, exterior lighting in the PU/IB Public Uses and Institutional Buildings District
shall be shielded and directed away from the street or adjacent properties to avoid unnecessary and nuisance illumination to adjacent
properties and shall be conducted so that direct and/or indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in
excess of one-half (1/2) foot-candle (horizontal or vertical) at the lot line abutting, or across any public way from, any residence district.
Further, no direct glare (exposed light source) shall be visible when viewed from off site. All lighting plans shall be reviewed by the
Planning, Building and Zoning Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees as a part of the certificate of approval process as set
forth in this Code. The pole and light standards for all streetlights to be located in the street right-of-way shall be subject to review by the
Planning, Building and Zoning Commission and the approval by the Board of Trustees to model with the "dark skies" standards. (Ord. 1313-
10, 1-19-2010)
9-9B-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 315/426
A. Lot Size Requirements: The minimum lot size required in the PU/IB Public Uses and Institutional Buildings District is eighty thousand
(80,000) square feet.
B. Lot Width: The minimum lot width for the PU/IB Public Uses and Institutional Buildings District is two hundred fifty feet (250') as
measured at the required front yard setback line.
C. Yard Requirements: The minimum yard requirements in the PU/IB Public Uses and Institutional Buildings District shall be as follows:
Front And
Corner Side Side Rear
Permitted uses 60 feet 25 feet 50 feet
Special uses 60 feet 25 feet 50 feet
D. Landscape Plan: Except as may be otherwise provided for and in addition to the requirements as may be found in this Code, the
developer shall submit a landscape plan to the Planning, Building and Zoning Commission and Board of Trustees for review and
approval as a part of the development review process.
E. Maximum Lot Coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of the lot shall be covered by an impervious surface, including the principal
building and any accessory building or use including parking lots and structures, except that where decorative pavers are used, the
amount of impervious surface may be increased to sixty five percent (65%), provided the developer submits an overall design for review
and recommendation by the Planning, Building and Zoning Commission and approval by the Board of Trustees.
F. Building Height: The maximum building height shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories or forty feet (40') including rooftop equipment,
whichever is lower for principal structures and twenty feet (20') for an accessory building.
G. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) in the district for a structure shall be 0.40.
H. Site Plan Requirements: A site plan review by the Planning, Building and Zoning Commission and approval by the Board of Trustees is
required for both permitted and special use development. (Ord. 1313-10, 1-19-2010)
Chapter 9C
M MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT OFFICE DISTRICT
9-9C-1: PURPOSE:
The municipal government office district is intended to provide for attractive and well designed sites for municipal government offices in an
environment characterized by controlled ingress and egress to streets and providing the screening and landscaping necessary to create a
proper relationship with adjacent uses. (Ord. 1313-10, 1-19-2010)
9-9C-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses may be permitted in a municipal government office district:
Municipal community centers.
Municipal government uses, including open space owned by the municipality.
Municipal recreation buildings.
Off street parking and loading facilities, as regulated in chapter 11 of this title.
Signs, as regulated in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 1313-10, 1-19-2010)
9-9C-3: SPECIAL USES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 316/426
The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
County, state and federal buildings and uses.
Personal wireless service (PWS) facilities. (Ord. 1313-10, 1-19-2010)
9-9C-4: EXTERIOR LIGHTING RESTRICTIONS:
In addition to all other applicable requirements of this code, exterior lighting in the M municipal government office district shall be shielded
and directed away from the street or adjacent properties to avoid unnecessary and nuisance illumination to adjacent properties and shall be
conducted so that direct and/or indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half (1/2)
foot-candle (horizontal or vertical) at the lot line abutting, or across any public way from, any residence district. Further, no direct glare
(exposed light source) shall be visible when viewed from off site. All lighting plans shall be reviewed by the planning, building and zoning
commission and approved by the board of trustees as a part of the certificate of approval process as set forth in this code. The pole and
light standards for all streetlights to be located in the street right of way shall be subject to review by the planning, building and zoning
commission and the approval by the board of trustees to model with the "dark skies" standards. (Ord. 1313-10, 1-19-2010)
9-9C-5: SITE AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Lot Size Requirements: The minimum lot size required in the M municipal government office district is forty thousand (40,000) square
feet.
B. Lot Width: The minimum lot width for the M municipal government office district is one hundred thirty feet (130') as measured at the
required front yard setback line.
C. Yard Requirements: The minimum yard requirements in the M municipal government office district shall be as follows:
Front And
Corner Side Side Rear
Permitted uses 30 feet 20 feet 50 feet
Special uses 30 feet 20 feet 50 feet
D. Landscape Plan: Except as may be otherwise provided for and in addition to the requirements as may be found in this code, the
developer shall submit a landscape plan to the planning, building and zoning commission and board of trustees for review and approval
as a part of the development review process.
E. Maximum Lot Coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of the lot shall be covered by an impervious surface, including the principal
building and any accessory building or use including parking lots and structures, except that where decorative pavers are used, the
amount of impervious surface may be increased to sixty five percent (65%), provided the developer submits an overall design for review
and recommendation by the planning, building and zoning commission and approval by the board of trustees.
F. Building Height: The maximum building height shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories or forty feet (40') including rooftop equipment,
whichever is lower for principal structures and twenty feet (20') for an accessory building.
G. Floor Area Ratio: The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) in the district for a structure shall be 0.40.
H. Site Plan Requirements: A site plan review by the planning, building and zoning commission and approval by the board of trustees is
required for both permitted and special use development. (Ord. 1313-10, 1-19-2010)
Chapter 10
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
9-10-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 317/426
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming buildings, structures and uses and to specify those
circumstances and conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses which adversely affect the maintenance,
development or use and taxable value of other property in the district in which they are located shall be gradually eliminated in accordance
with the authority granted by the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-10-2: CONTINUANCE OF USE:
A. Any lawfully established use of a building or land, on the effective date hereof or amendments hereto, that does not conform to the use
regulations for the district in which it is located shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued, except as
otherwise permitted herein.
B. Any legal, nonconforming building or structure may be continued in use, provided there is no physical change other than necessary
maintenance and repair, except as otherwise permitted herein.
C. Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date hereof or of amendments hereto may be completed
in accordance with the approved plans, provided construction is completed within fifteen (15) months of permit issuance. Such building
shall thereafter be deemed a lawfully established building. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-10-3: DISCONTINUANCE OF USE:
A. Whenever any nonconforming building or use is changed to or replaced by a building or use conforming to the provisions of this Title,
such nonconformance shall not thereafter be reinstated, even though the premises may have been originally designed and constructed
for the prior nonconformance.
B. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or structure or part thereof, has been discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive
months or whenever there is evident a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming use, such use shall not, after
being discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished, and the use of the premises thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of
the district.
C. Where no enclosed building is involved, discontinuance of a nonconforming use of land for a period of three (3) consecutive months
shall constitute abandonment and shall not thereafter be used in a nonconforming manner.
D. A nonconforming use not authorized by the provisions of the this Title in effect at the time the repealing ordinance becomes effective,
shall be discontinued and not reestablished, except when the provisions of the repealing ordinance find the use to be conforming to the
district in which it is then located. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-10-4: CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE:
A. The nonconforming use of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the
district in which it is located, may be changed to a use permitted in the same district as the nonconforming use in which the building or
structure is located.
B. No nonconforming use of a building or structure shall be changed to another nonconforming use when such nonconforming use is
located in a building or structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a permitted use.
C. The nonconforming use of land, not involving a building or structure, or in connection with which any building or structure thereon is
incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, shall not be changed to any other use, except to a use permitted in the district in
which the land is located. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-10-5: TERMINATION AND REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS:
Any structure all, or substantially all, of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the zone in which it is located, shall be
removed and its use thereafter cease, or shall be converted to a structure designed or intended for a use permitted in the zone in which it is
located in accordance with the following conditions and amortization schedules:
A. In all residential zones, any structure, all of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in a commercial or industrial zone,
shall be removed, or it shall be altered and converted to a structure designed for a use permitted in the zone in which it is located within
six (6) months after the termination of the respective amortization period, as set forth below.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 318/426
B. In all commercial zones, any structure, all, or substantially all, of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in residential or
industrial zones, shall be removed or shall be altered, remodeled or converted to a structural design for a use permitted in the zone in
which it is located within six (6) months after the termination of the respective amortization period, as set forth below.
C. In all industrial districts, any structure, all, or substantially all, of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in residential or
commercial zones, shall be removed or shall be altered and converted to a structure designed for a use permitted in the zone in which it
is located within six (6) months after the termination of the respective amortization period, as set forth below.
D. The following amortization schedules shall apply:
1. In cases where the actual cash value, as determined by the official County tax assessment and equalization rate is fifteen thousand
dollars ($15,000.00) or more, the following schedule shall be used in accordance with the types of construction herein specified:
a. Fire-Resistive or Mill Construction: Forty (40) years from the date of building permit or twenty (20) years from the effective date of
this Title, whichever last occurs.
b. Ordinary or Noncombustible Frame Construction: Thirty five (35) years from the date of building permit, or eighteen (18) years from
the effective date of this Title, whichever last occurs.
c. Wood Frame Construction: Thirty (30) years from the date of building permit, or fifteen (15) years from the effective date of this
Title, whichever last occurs.
2. In cases where the actual cash value, as determined by the official County tax assessment and equalization rate, if five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) or more but less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), the schedule shall be fifteen (15) years from the date
of the building permit or ten (10) years from the effective date of this Title, whichever last occurs.
3. In cases where the actual cash value, as determined by the official County tax assessment equalization rate, is less than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the schedule shall be five (5) years from the date of building permit, or three (3) years from the effective
date of this Title, whichever last occurs.
4. Any nonconforming use of building or structure having an assessed valuation not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) on the
effective date of this Title shall be removed after two (2) years.
5. Any nonconforming use of land where no enclosed building is involved or where the only buildings employed are accessory or
incidental to such use, or where such use is maintained in connection with a conforming building shall be removed after a period of
two (2) years.
6. Elimination of Nonconforming Uses:
a. In all residential zones, any use of a structure, all or substantially all, of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in a
residential zone, but is being used for a use permitted only in a commercial or an industrial zone, shall be terminated within five (5)
years of the effective date of this Title.
b. In all commercial zones, any use of a structure, all, or substantially all, of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in
a commercial zone, but is being used for a use permitted only in a residential or an industrial zone, shall be terminated within ten
(10) years of the effective date of this Title.
c. In all industrial districts, any use of a structure, all, or substantially all, of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in
an industrial district, but is being used for a use permitted only in a residential or a commercial district, shall be terminated within
fifteen (15) years of the effective date of this Title.
d. The nonconforming use of land shall be discontinued and cease three (3) years from the effective date of this Title in each of the
following cases:
(1) Where no structures are employed in connection with such use;
(2) When the only structures or other physical improvements are accessory or incidental to such use.
E. A nonconforming use of land which is accessory to the nonconforming use of the structure shall be discontinued on the same date the
nonconforming use of the structure is discontinued.
F. Improvements underground or substantially at ground level, which comprise all, or substantially all, of the improvements employed in a
nonconforming use of land, shall be deemed a nonconforming structure and shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-10-6: REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS:
A. Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural
repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 319/426
B. No structural alteration shall be made in a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
1. When the alteration is required by law.
2. When the alteration will actually result in eliminating the nonconforming use.
3. When a building in a residential district containing residential nonconforming uses may be altered in any way to improve livability,
provided no alterations shall be made which would increase the number of dwelling units or the bulk of the building. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-
87)
9-10-7: DAMAGE AND DESTRUCTION:
A. If a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty percent
(50%) or more of its replacement value at that time, the building or other structure can be rebuilt or used thereafter only for a conforming
use and in compliance with the provisions of the district in which it is located. In the event the damage or destruction is less than fifty
percent (50%) of its replacement value based upon prevailing costs, the building may then be restored to its original condition and the
occupancy or use of such building may be continued which existed at the time of such partial destruction.
B. In either event, restoration or repair of the building or other structure must be started within a period of six (6) months from the date of
damage or destruction and diligently prosecuted to completion. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-10-8: ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS:
A. A nonconforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the entire building is thereafter devoted to a conforming use, and is made
to conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located.
B. No building partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered in such a way as to permit the enlargement or expansion of the
space occupied by such nonconforming use.
C. No nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy any required usable open space or any land beyond
the boundaries of the zoning lot as it existed on the effective date of this Title or to displace any conforming use in the same building or
on the same parcel.
D. A building or structure which is nonconforming with respect to yards or any other element of bulk regulated herein shall not be altered or
expanded in any manner which would increase the degree or extent of its nonconforming with respect to the bulk regulations of the
district in which it is located. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-10-9: USE DISTRICT CHANGES:
Whenever the boundaries of a use district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one use district to another use district of a
different classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing therein. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-10-10: EXEMPTED BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
Whenever the lawfully existing building or other structure otherwise conforms to the use regulations herein but is nonconforming only in the
particular manner hereinafter specified, the building and use thereof shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections 9-10-4 and 9-10-5
of this Chapter.
A. In any residential district where a dwelling is nonconforming only as to the number of dwelling units it contains, provided no such building
shall be altered in any way so as to increase the number of dwelling units therein.
B. In any business or industrial district, where the use is less distant from a residential district than that specified in the regulations for the
district in which it is located.
C. In any district where an established building, structure or use is nonconforming with respect to the standards prescribed herein for any of
the following:
1. Yards _ front, side, rear or transitional;
2. Off-street parking or loading;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 320/426
3. Building height. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-10-11: CONVERSION TO SPECIAL USE:
Any nonconforming use may be made a special use by the granting of a special use permit, as authorized in Chapter 14 of this Title. (Ord.
381-87, 6-9-87)
Chapter 11
OFF STREET PARKING, LOADING AND DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY
STANDARDS
9-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate or prevent the congestion of the public streets, and so promote the safety and welfare of the
public by establishing minimum requirements for the off street parking and loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the
use to which property is put. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-11-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS, PARKING AND LOADING:
A. Scope Of Regulations: The off street parking and loading provisions of this title shall apply as follows:
1. Applicability: For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after the effective date of this title, accessory
parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of the district in which such buildings or uses are
located. However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this title, and provided that construction is
begun within one year of such effective date, and diligently prosecuted to completion, parking and loading facilities as required
hereinafter need not be provided.
2. Intensity Of Use Increased:
a. When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor
area, seating capacity or other unit of measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities, parking and loading
facilities are required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.
b. However, no building or structure lawfully erected or use lawfully established prior to the effective date of this title shall be required
to provide such additional parking or loading facilities unless and until the aggregate increase in units of measurement existing
upon the effective date of this title, in which event parking or loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for the total
increase.
3. Change Of Existing Use: Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or
loading facilities shall be provided as required for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was erected prior to the
effective date of this title, additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the
new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions of this title.
B. Existing Parking And Loading Facilities: Accessory off street parking or loading facilities which are located on the same lot as the
building or use served which were in existence on the effective date of this title or were provided voluntarily after such effective date
shall not hereafter be reduced below or if already less than, shall not further be reduced below the requirements of this title for a similar
new building or use.
C. Permissive Parking And Loading Facilities: Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off street
parking or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings; provided, that all regulations herein governing the location,
design, improvement and operation of such facilities are adhered to.
D. Damage Or Destruction: For any conforming or legally nonconforming building or use which is in existence on the effective date of this
title, which subsequent thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause, and which is reconstructed,
reestablished or repaired, off street parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or destruction
shall be restored or continued in operation. However, in no case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities
in excess of those required by this title for equivalent new uses or construction.
E. Control Of Off Site Parking Facilities: When required parking facilities are provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the
building or use served by such facilities is located, they shall be and remain in the same possession or ownership as the zoning lot
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 321/426
occupied by the building or use to which the parking facilities are accessory. No off site parking lot shall change ownership from that of
the zoning lot on which the building or use served by such facility is located. No such off site parking facilities shall be authorized and no
occupancy permit shall be issued where the plans call for parking facilities other than on the same zoning lot until and unless the Plan
Commission1 has reviewed the plans and heard the applicant and made findings that the common ownership or possession of the
zoning lot and the site of the parking facilities are reasonably certain to continue and that the off site parking facilities will be maintained
at all times during the life of the proposed use or building. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
F. Submission Of Plot Plan: Any application for a building permit or for an occupancy certificate shall include therewith a plot plan (drawn to
scale and fully dimensioned) showing any parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this title. (Ord. 1190-06, 11-20-
2006)
9-11-3: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS, PARKING:
A. Use Of Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities accessory to residential use and developed in any residential district in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter shall be used for the parking of passenger automobiles owned by occupants of the dwelling
structures to which such facilities are accessory or by guest of said occupants. Under no circumstances shall required parking facilities
accessory to residential structures be used for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, visitors or
customers of business or manufacturing establishments.
B. Joint Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities for different buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided
collectively in any zoning district in which separate parking facilities for each constituent use would be permitted; provided, that the total
number of spaces so located together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use.
C. Computation: When determination of the number of off street parking spaces required by this title results in a requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction shall be counted as one parking space.
D. Size: A required off street parking space shall be at least nine feet (9') in width and at least twenty feet (20') in length, exclusive of
access drives or aisles, ramps, columns of office or work areas. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet (7').
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
E. Access: Each required off street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe
and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. All off street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means
of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements. No non-residential driveway across
public property or curb cut shall exceed a width of thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 1824-18, 3-26-2018)
F. In Yards: Off street parking spaces may be located in any yard except required front yards, but shall not be closer than seven feet (7') to
the lot line.
G. In Parkways: No person shall park, deposit, leave or store any motor vehicle or tangible personal property of any type or description at
any time between the sidewalk line and curb line at any place within the Village.
H. Design And Maintenance:
1. Open And Enclosed Parking Spaces: Accessory parking spaces located on the same lot as occupied by the use served may be open
to the sky or enclosed in a building. Accessory parking spaces located in a residence district elsewhere than on the same lot occupied
by the use served shall be open to the sky except when otherwise allowed as a special use.
2. Surfacing: All open off street parking areas and driveways in residential areas may be improved with a compacted stone or some
comparable all weather dustless material not less than four inches (4") thick. All other parking lots and drives shall be constructed in
accordance with street specifications as outlined in the village subdivision ordinance2.
3. Screening And Landscaping: All open automobile parking areas containing more than five (5) parking spaces shall be effectively
screened on each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residence district or any institutional premises by a densely
planted compact hedge. Such required screening shall conform with the front and side yard setback requirements of the district in
which the parking is located.
4. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as
not to create a nuisance.
5. Signs: Accessory signs are permitted on parking areas.
6. Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with accessory off street parking
facilities provided in a residence district.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 322/426
I. Sale Of Gasoline Or Oil Prohibited: The sale of gasoline and motor oil in conjunction with accessory off street parking facilities is not
permitted in any residence district. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-11-4: LOCATION OF ACCESSORY OFF STREET PARKING FACILITIES:
The location of off street parking spaces in relation to the use served shall be as prescribed hereinafter. All distances specified shall be
walking distances between such parking spaces and a main entrance to the use served.
A. For uses in a residence district: Parking spaces accessory to dwellings shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served.
Spaces accessory to uses other than dwellings may be located on a lot adjacent to, or directly across a street or alley from, the zoning
lot occupied by the use served, but in no case at a distance in excess of three hundred feet (300') from such use.
B. For uses in business and industrial district: All required parking spaces shall be within one thousand feet (1,000') of the use served,
except for spaces accessory to dwelling units, which shall be within three hundred feet (300') of the use served. However, no parking
spaces accessory to a use in a business or industrial district shall be located in a residence district. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-11-5: SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Residential uses, as follows:
1. One-family dwellings and two-family dwellings: Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
2. Multiple-family dwellings (including apartment-hotels): Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for every dwelling unit. For lodging
rooms located in an apartment hotel, one parking space shall be provided for each lodging room.
3. Motels, inns and auto courts: One parking space shall be provided for each guest or sleeping room or suite, plus one additional space
for the owner or manager and employees.
4. Hotels: One parking space for each dwelling unit and one parking space for each lodging room shall be provided.
B. Retail and service uses, as follows: (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
1. Retail stores and banks: One parking space shall be provided for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. (Ord. 1398-12, 6-
18-2012)
2. Automobile service stations: One parking space shall be provided for each two (2) employees.
3. Automobile laundry: Twenty (20) stacking spaces shall be provided for each wash rack, plus one parking space for each four (4)
employees.
4. Bowling alleys: Three (3) parking spaces shall be provided for each alley, plus such additional spaces as may be required herein for
affiliated uses _ bars, restaurants and the like.
5. Establishments dispensing food or beverages for consumption on the premises: One parking space shall be provided for each three
hundred (300) square feet of floor area or one space for every three (3) seats and three (3) employees, whichever is greater.
6. Furniture and appliance stores, household equipment or furniture repair shops: One parking space shall be provided for each six
hundred (600) square feet of floor area.
7. Motor vehicle sales and machinery sales: One parking space shall be provided for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area.
8. Theaters (indoor): One parking space shall be provided for each five (5) seats.
9. Undertaking establishments, funeral parlors: Six (6) parking spaces shall be provided for each chapel or parlor, plus one parking
space for each funeral vehicle kept on the premises. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
10. Private tutoring/personalized educational service facility: One parking space shall be provided for each two hundred (200) square
feet of floor area. (Ord. 997-02, 8-19-2002)
C. Offices; business, professional and governmental: One parking space shall be provided for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor
area.
D. Medical or dental clinics: Five (5) parking spaces shall be provided for each doctor plus one space for each employee.
E. Wholesale establishments (but not including warehouses and storage buildings other than accessory): One parking space shall be
provided for each six hundred (600) square feet of floor area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 323/426
F. Manufacturing uses or any establishments engaged in production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repair of materials, goods or
products: One parking space shall be provided for each two (2) employees, plus one parking space for each vehicle used in the
enterprise.
G. Warehouses and storage buildings: One parking space shall be provided for each two (2) employees, plus one space for each vehicle
used in the conduct of the enterprise.
H. Community services uses:
1. Church, school, college and other institutional auditoriums: One parking space shall be provided for each three (3) auditorium seats.
Adequate space shall also be provided for buses used in connection with the activities of the institution, and all loading and unloading
of passengers shall take place upon the premises.
2. Health centers, government operated: Five (5) parking spaces shall be provided for each staff and visiting doctor.
3. Hospitals: One parking space shall be provided for each two (2) hospital beds, plus one parking space for each two (2) employees
(other than staff doctors), plus one parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
4. Libraries, art galleries and museums; public: One parking space shall be provided for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross
floor area.
5. Municipal or privately owned recreation buildings or community centers: One parking space shall be provided for each two (2)
employees, plus spaces adequate in number, as determined by the zoning administrator, to serve the visiting public.
6. Public utility and public service uses: One parking space shall be provided for each three (3) employees, plus spaces adequate in
number (as determined by the zoning administrator) to service the public.
7. School; nursery, elementary and high: One parking space shall be provided for each employee. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
I. Miscellaneous uses:
1. Medical cannabis dispensary and/or cultivation center: One parking space shall be provided for each six hundred (600) square feet of
floor area.
2. Private clubs and lodges (without sleeping facilities for guests): Parking spaces equal in number to ten percent (10%) of the capacity
in persons shall be provided.
3. Rest homes and nursing homes: One parking space shall be provided for each four (4) beds, plus one parking space for each two (2)
employees, (other than staff doctors), plus one parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
4. Sanatoriums, convalescent homes or institutions for the aged or for children: One parking space shall be provided for each four (4)
beds, plus one parking space for each two (2) employees (other than staff doctors), plus one parking space for each doctor assigned
to the staff.
5. Theaters; automobile drive-in: Reservoir parking space equal to ten percent (10%) of the vehicle capacity of such theaters shall be
provided.
6. Parking spaces: For the following uses, parking spaces shall be provided in adequate number (as determined by the zoning
administrator) to serve persons employed or residing on the premises as well as the visiting public:
a. Fraternal or religious institutions.
b. Rectories and parish houses.
c. Swimming pools. (Ord. 1529-15, 2-23-2015)
J. Mixed uses: When two (2) or more uses are located on the same zoning lot within the same building, parking spaces equal in number to
the sum of the separate requirements for each such use shall be provided. No parking spaces or portion thereof shall serve as a
required space for more than one use unless otherwise recommended by the plan commission and board of trustees.
K. Other Uses: For uses not listed heretofore in this schedule of parking requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis
as that required for the most similar listed uses, or as determined by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-11-6: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS, OFF STREET LOADING:
A. Location: All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two
(2) tons' capacity shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to any property in a residence district unless completely enclosed by building walls,
or a uniformly non-see through plant material or wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet (6') in height. No permitted or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 324/426
required loading berth shall be located in any required front or side yard. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within
twenty five feet (25') of the nearest point of intersection of any two (2) streets.
B. Size: Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth shall be at least ten feet (10') in width by at least twenty five feet (25') in
length, exclusive of aisles and maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14').
C. Access: Each required off street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a
manner which will least interfere with traffic movements. (Ord. 381, 6-9-1987)
D. Surfacing: All open off street loading berths and dumpster pads, and accessways from such loading berths and dumpster pads to the
public streets, shall be improved to a minimum structural number value of 3.5 and shall consist of the following: a bituminous aggregate
mixture (BAM) base course not less than seven inches (7") thick; a bituminous concrete binder course not less than two inches (2")
thick; and a bituminous concrete surface course not less than two inches (2") thick. All other parking lots and drives shall be constructed
in accordance with street specifications as outlined in the village subdivision control ordinance3. (Ord. 733-95, 5-8-1995)
E. Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided
in any residence or business districts.
F. Space Requirements: Space allocated to any off street loading berth shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space
requirements for any off street parking facilities or portions thereof.
G. Special Uses: For special uses other than prescribed for hereinafter, loading berths adequate in number and size to serve such uses as
determined by the zoning administrator shall be provided.
H. Buildings With Less Than Minimum Floor Space: Uses for which off street loading facilities are required herein but which are located in
buildings of less floor area than the minimum prescribed for such required facilities shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities
off any adjacent alley, service drive or open space on the same lot which is accessible by motor vehicle. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-11-7: LAND BANKING FOR ADDITIONAL PARKING:
Up to twenty five percent (25%) of the parking spaces required by this title and designated for parking on the site plan may be left unpaved,
but shall be reserved for parking in the future, subject to approval of the village board after review and recommendation by the plan
commission, the area shall be covered with appropriate ground or other landscaping material. At any time, the village may require that the
"land banked" spaces be paved for parking if the plan commission makes a reasonable determination that additional parking is needed.
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-11-8: SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
For the uses listed in the following table, off street loading berths shall be provided on the basis of gross floor area of buildings or portions
thereof devoted to such uses in the amounts shown herein. (See the following pages for the schedule of loading requirements.) (Ord. 381-
87, 6-9-1987)
SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Use
Gross Floor
Area in
Square Feet
Required
Number
and
Minimum
Horizontal
Dimensions
of Berths
a.
Hospitals, sanitariums and other institutional uses. 10,000 to
200,000
1 -(12 ft. x
30 ft.)
b.
Hotels, clubs and lodges, except as set forth in item (e) below. For each
additional
200,000
or fraction
thereof
1 additional
(12 ft. x 30
ft.)
c.
Hotels, clubs and lodges, when containing any of the following: Retail shops, convention
halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls or business or professional offices (other than accessory).
10,000 to
20,000
1 -(12 ft. x
30 ft.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 325/426
20,000 to
150,000
1 -(12 ft. x
60 ft.)
For each
additional
150,000
or fraction
thereof
1 additional
(12 ft. x 50
ft.)
d.
Retail stores. 5,000 to
10,000
1 -(12 ft. x
30 ft.)
e.
Establishments dispensing food or beverages for consumption on the premises. 10,000 to
25,000
2 - (12 ft. x
30 ft. ea.)
25,000 to
40,000
2 - (12 ft. x
60 ft. ea.)
f. Motor vehicle and machinery sales. 40,000 to
100,000
3 - (12 ft. x
60 ft. ea.)
g.
Wholesale establishments (but not including warehouse and storage buildings other than
accessory).
For each
additional
200,000
or fraction
thereof
1 additional
(12 ft. x 60
ft.)
h.
Auditorium, convention halls, exhibition halls, sport arenas, stadiums. 10,000 to
20,000
1 - (12 ft. x
30 ft.)
20,000 to
100,000
2 - (12 ft. x
30 ft. ea.)
i. Bowling alleys. For each
additional
100,000
or fraction
thereof
1 -
additional
(12 ft. x 60
ft.)
j. Banks and offices--business, professional and governmental. 10,000 to
100,000
1 - (12 ft. x
30 ft.)
For each
additional
100,000
or fraction
thereof
(12 ft. x 30
ft.)
For each
additional
500,000
or fraction
thereof
1 additional
(12 ft. x 30
ft.)
k.
Manufacturing uses or any establishments engaged in production, processing, cleaning,
servicing, testing or repair of goods, materials or products.
5,000 to
10,000
1 -(12 ft. x
30 ft.)
10,000 to
40,000
1 - (12 ft. x
60 ft.)
40,000 to
100,000
2 - (12 ft. x
60 ft. ea.)
l. Warehouses and storage buildings. For each
additional
100,000
or fraction
thereof
1 -
additional
(12 ft. x 30
ft.)
m.
Theaters. 8,000 to
25,000
1 - (12 ft. x
30 ft.)
For each
additional
50,000
or fraction
thereof
1 additional
(12 ft. x 30
ft.)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 326/426
n.
Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors. 8,000 to
100,000
1 -(12 ft. x
30 ft.)
For each
additional
100,000
or fraction
thereof.
1 additional
(12 ft. x 30
ft.)
9-11-9: DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES:
A. Definitions:
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: The use of buildings, structures, or parts thereof, to provide or dispense products or services, either
wholly or in part, through an attendant or window or automated machine, to persons in motorized vehicles that are in a designated
stacking space. A drive-through facility may be allowed only as a special use, and only accessory to a principal use. A drive-through
facility does not include a vehicle washing facility external to a building, a vacuum cleaning station accessory to a vehicle washing
facility, or an automobile/gasoline service station.
STACKING SPACE: A space specifically designated as a waiting area for vehicles patronizing a drive-through establishment.
B. Minimum Stacking Space Requirements:
1. All uses which include a drive-up window or which are characterized by patrons waiting in their vehicles to receive services or
products shall provide on site stacking spaces in order to alleviate traffic congestion.
2. Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet (9') wide, as measured from the outermost point of any service window or
automated service device to the edge of the driveway, and twenty feet (20') in length.
3. All stacking areas shall be separate from other vehicular and pedestrian circulation aisles and parking spaces. It is recommended that
stacking lanes be separated through the use of landscaped islands bounded by concrete curbing.
4. The number of stacking spaces required shall be determined by the following schedule:
a. Financial institutions: A minimum of five (5) stacking spaces per teller or customer service window, including the vehicle being
served.
b. Restaurant: A minimum of three (3) spaces, including the vehicle being served, as measured from the drive-through window.
c. Other uses with drive-through windows or similar characteristics: For uses not provided herein, the village shall determine the
appropriate number of stacking spaces based on information provided by the developer or owner of the proposed use, or through
consultation with consultants or other communities containing uses similar to the one proposed, or through a combination of these
methods.
C. Shopping Centers: Drive-through facilities adjacent to or integrated in a shopping center or cluster of commercial facilities shall use the
common access with other business establishments in that center.
D. Drive-Through Aisles:
1. Each drive-through entrance/exit shall be located so that, when in use, they do not obstruct ingress or egress to the site and do not
obstruct access to required parking or loading spaces.
2. Each entrance to an aisle and the direction of traffic flow shall be clearly designated by signs and pavement markings.
3. Area for drive-through aisles shall be separated with landscaping from the circulation routes necessary for ingress or egress from the
property, or access to a parking space.
4. The location of each drive-through aisle shall be determined by the village.
5. The setbacks for drive-through facilities shall be consistent with the setbacks of the zoning district in which it is located unless
otherwise modified as a part of the special use permit.
E. Landscaping Of The Drive-Through Aisle Or Aisles Is Required:
1. A five foot (5') wide planter between the drive-through aisle and the parking area that includes shade trees consistent with those used
in the parking area.
2. A minimum three foot (3') tall, maximum four foot (4') tall planter with low shrubs that screens the drive-through aisles from the
adjacent public right of way and neighboring properties shall be used to minimize the visual impact of any permitted sign. At no time
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 327/426
shall this landscape barrier be pruned in a manner that allows the vehicle headlights from the drive-through lane to be visible from
abutting street right of way or from neighboring properties. Plantings should also be designed to discourage potential safety issues.
F. Pedestrian Access And Crossings: Pedestrian walkways should not intersect the drive-through drive aisles, but where they do the
walkways shall have clear visibility and shall be delineated by pavement markings or special paving including, but not limited to, different
colors, different paving types or different textured paving.
G. Hours Of Operation: Hours of operation for the drive-through service shall be six o'clock (6:00) A.M. _ ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., unless
modified as a part of the special use approval.
H. Signs: Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 12 of this title.
I. Parking: The provision of drive-through service facilities shall not justify a reduction in the number of required off street parking spaces for
the accompanying use.
J. Noise: Any drive-through speaker system shall emit no more than fifty (50) decibels and at no time shall any speaker system be audible
above daytime ambient noise levels beyond the property lines of the site. The speaker system shall not be located any closer than the
setback yard requirements of the zoning district in which it is located unless otherwise modified as a part of the special use permit
approval. (Ord. 1398-12, 6-18-2012)
Chapter 12
SIGNS
9-12-1: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
The regulations set forth herein are established in order to promote and protect public health, safety, comfort, prosperity and welfare and in
order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
A. To enhance the economy, business and industry in the Village by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective use and display of
signs.
B. To enhance the physical appearance of the Village.
C. To protect the general public from damage and injury which might be caused by faulty and uncontrolled construction and use of signs
within the Village.
D. To protect the public use of streets and highway by reducing sign and advertising distractions that may increase traffic accidents.
E. To protect the physical and mental well being of the general public by recognizing and encouraging a sense of aesthetic appreciation for
the visual environment.
F. To preserve the value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply:
SIGN: Any identification, description, display, illustration, device or structure illuminated or nonilluminated which is placed out of doors or in
a building in view of the general public, a public right-of-way or private property under different ownership than the property on which the
sign is located and which directs or attracts attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation by
means including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, colors, motion, illumination or noise emission.
SIGN, ADDRESS IDENTIFICATION: A sign containing only the address and name of the occupant or business establishment.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: Any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold, offered or
manufactured elsewhere than upon the premises where such is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, ALTERATIONS: Any change to a sign or sign structure. The washing or cleaning of a sign or sign structure without a change to the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 328/426
sign or parts of the sign or sign structure shall not be deemed to be alterations. The manual changing of letters or numbers in a changeable
copy type sign for purposes of price and product changes shall not be deemed to be alterations.
SIGN, AREA: The entire area within a single continuous square or rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of such sign and in no case
passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements
lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
SIGN, AWNING: A sign painted or otherwise applied to the surface of an awning.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: A structure or freestanding signboard which advertises goods or services not connected or available on the premises
on which the sign is located. (See definition of sign, advertising.)
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service or entertainment
conducted, sold, offered or manufactured upon the premises where such sign is located or to where it is affixed.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: An approved sign wherein provisions are made so that temporary letters or numbers may be changed
manually.
SIGN, ELECTRIC: Any sign containing electric wiring which has characters, letters, figures, designs, faces backgrounds or outlines
illuminated by incandescent or fluorescent lamps or luminous tubes as part of the sign proper.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE: Any sign designed where a portion of the sign area uses changing lights to form a message or messages
in text and/or image form where the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by
electronic processes. Time/temperature signs are not considered electronic message signs. Video display signs are not considered
electronic message signs.
SIGN, FACIA: Any sign attached flush to a building and no part of which extends longer than the horizontal face of the building.
SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times
when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this title, any revolving illuminated sign shall be considered a flashing sign. Signs which
designate time or temperature shall not be considered flashing signs.
SIGN, GROUND: A sign mounted on freestanding pylons, pipes, piers, posts or other self-supporting structures not attached to a building.
Ground sign refers to pole and monument signs.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures or outlines illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes or any other
means of internal or external illumination.
SIGN, MARQUEE: Any sign which is attached to a marquee. A marquee is a permanent roofed structure attached to a building and
supported by the building or on column supports from grade or a combination of both.
SIGN, MONUMENT: A sign the entire lower edge of which is placed directly upon the ground or within twelve inches (12") of the ground
and comprised, at a minimum, of brick and/or stone from the base up to the sign face.
SIGN, MOVING: Any sign which rotates or moves or gives the visual impression of rotation or any motion, including electronic traveling
message signs.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING: Any sign which is not allowed under the provisions of this Code, but which, when first constructed, may have
been legally allowed by the Village.
SIGN, POLE: A sign which is raised above ground level by more than twelve inches (12") and affixed to a pole, posts or pylons.
SIGN, POLITICAL: Temporary sign referencing candidate, party or issue and displayed prior to an election.
SIGN, PORTABLE: Any sign that is not permanently affixed to a building or a conventional sign structure. A sign designed to be moved
from place to place.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign other than a wall sign suspended from or supported by a building or structure or sign structure and
projecting out therefrom.
SIGN, PUBLIC: A sign of a noncommercial nature such as legal notices, identification, informational or direction signs erected or required
by a governmental body or authorized for a public purpose by any law, ordinance or statute.
SIGN, REVOLVING: A sign or any part of a sign which rotates in any manner.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected, constructed and maintained upon or over the roof or top of the wall, wall tower or turret of any building with
the principal support on the roof structure. Roof signs are not permitted in any zoning district.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign or attention-attracting device for use for an event that is to be in existence for a limited period of time or any
other sign which is authorized pursuant to section 9-12-6 of this chapter.
SIGN, VIDEO DISPLAY: Any sign, or portion of a sign, that displays an electronic video, whether pre-recorded or streaming.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 329/426
SIGN, WALL: Any sign attached, applied to, posted or painted on the exterior wall of any building. Signs on awnings, marquees and
canopies shall be considered to be wall signs under the terms of this section and subject to the regulations therefor where applicable.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign located on, in or behind a window for purposes of viewing from outside the premises.
SIGN, WINDOW IDENTIFICATION: A window sign which is intended to identify a relatively permanent element of a business including, but
not limited to, the name, logo, symbol or other identification for the business or type of business, products or services offered.
SIGN, WINDOW PROMOTIONAL: A nonilluminated window sign which is intended to direct attention to a special sale or offering of goods
or services.
UNIFIED SIGN PLAN: A sign plan authorized pursuant to subsection 9-12-8F of this chapter. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1760-17,
5-8-2017)
9-12-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct, alter, rebuild, enlarge, erect, extend, place or relocate a sign without first filing with the
Village Clerk a written application and obtaining a permit therefor from the Village Board. Such application shall be in duplicate and shall
contain all such information and drawings as may be required by the Plan Commission1 or the Architectural Review Commission, but at
least the names of the property owners, the name of the person in charge of the sign and drawings of the sign or structure showing
type, size, location and method of attachment. The Plan Commission or Architectural Review Commission may require that all plans be
drawn by a registered architect or structural engineer. The fee for such permit shall be established by the Village Board of Trustees. The
application shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission or the Architectural Review Commission, which shall make recommendations to
the Village Board.
B. Construction Standards:
1. Compliance With Building Code: All signs shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Village Building
Code2.
2. Glass Parts: All glass parts shall be of safety glass material.
3. Clearance From High Voltage Lines: Signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all
conductors in accordance with the National Electrical Code. However, in no case shall a sign be installed closer than four feet (4')
horizontally or vertically from any conductor or public utility wire.
C. Lighting And Color:
1. Exterior Lighting: Exterior lighting shall be shielded and directed away from the street or adjacent properties to avoid unnecessary
and nuisance illumination to adjacent properties and must be conducted so that direct and/or indirect illumination from the source of
light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half (1/2) foot-candle when measured ten feet (10') from the sign itself.
2. Color: Bright "day-glow" type colors are prohibited.
D. Sign Maintenance:
1. Painting Signs: The permittee of any sign or other sign structure shall, at least once every two (2) years, paint all parts and supports
thereof, unless the same are galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust or rotting.
2. Repairing Signs: The repainting and replacing of parts of signs shall be deemed to be an alteration.
3. Unsafe Signs:
a. If the building inspector shall find that any sign is unsafe or insecure or is a menace to the public, he shall give written notice to the
person to whom the sign permit had been issued. If they fail to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards herein
set forth within ten (10) days after such notice, such sign shall be removed or altered to comply, by the building inspector, at the
expense of the sign permit issuee or owner of the property upon which it is located. The building inspector may cause any sign that
is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
b. The building inspector shall be responsible for inspecting the condition of signs and for investigating complaints issued regarding
signs.
E. Obsolete Signs:
1. Any obsolete sign that does not advertise an existing business or a product shall be taken down and removed by owner, agent or
person within ten (10) days after written notification from the building inspector. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the time
specified, the building inspector shall cause removal of such sign, and any expense incidental thereto shall be paid by the owner of
the property to which such sign is attached.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 330/426
2. At the termination of a business or commercial enterprise, all signs pertaining thereto shall be removed from public view within thirty
(30) days of such termination.
3. Obsolete for sale, for rent and garage sale signs shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or permittee within two (2)
days of being notified by the building inspector. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified, the building
inspector shall cause removal of such sign, and any expense incidental thereto shall be paid by the owner or agent of the property or
sign and any penalty fee as established under this title.
F. Nonconforming Signs:
1. Existing signs in conflict with this title shall be classed as nonconforming and shall not be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended or
relocated. Preventive maintenance of signs may be deemed to be an alteration.
2. All signs which are nonconforming shall be removed or made to conform with this title in accordance with the following schedule,
upon thirty (30) days' written notice.
a. Signs which exceed the maximum number permitted under this section: One year.
b. Signs in excess of the maximum size permitted pursuant to this section: Two (2) years.
c. Signs which fail to meet the minimum setback requirements of this section: Five (5) years.
d. The Village Board may authorize, pursuant to the special use procedures of chapter 14 of this title, an extension of time for
nonconforming signs which have not been fully depreciated for accounting purposes; such an extension may be for a period of time
which equals the remainder of the time necessary to depreciate fully the sign, but in no case shall the extension exceed five (5)
years from the date of notice of noncompliance.
3. Nonconforming signs will not be permitted to remain for use of a new business. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. 1995 Code)
9-12-4: PROHIBITED SIGNS AND CONDITIONS:
A. No sign may be painted, pasted or similarly posted directly on the surface of any wall, roof or fence. Nor shall any sign be permitted to
be placed on any wall, fence or standard facing the interior side yard of any adjoining lot located in a residential district, except as
provided for in section 9-12-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1824-18, 3-26-2018)
B. Signs shall not be erected on the roof of any building or structure.
C. No sign shall be attached to a tree or utility pole.
D. No sign shall block any required accessway or window.
E. Advertising signs and outdoor billboards advertising products or matters not related to the occupancy and use of the premises shall not
be permitted except as a temporary sign subject to the provisions of section 9-12-6 of this chapter.
F. Portable or mobile signs are prohibited except as a temporary sign subject to the provisions of section 9-12-6 of this chapter.
G. No electric, internally illuminated, flashing or revolving signs shall be permitted, except that electric and internally illuminated signs may
be approved by the Village Board after a review by the Architectural Review Commission as part of a "unified sign plan" as authorized in
subsection 9-12-8F of this chapter. Devices denoting the time, temperature and other similar information shall not be considered as
electric, internally illuminated or flashing for purposes of this title.
H. Flags other than one United States of America and one corporate, one Village and State flag are prohibited except as a temporary sign
subject to provisions of section 9-12-6 of this chapter.
I. No sign, streamer, banner, flag, pennant or other attention- attracting device supported by rope or wires or in any other manner shall
encroach upon, over or across any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or park, except as a temporary sign subject to the provisions
of section 9-12-6 of this chapter.
J. No fluttering or wind-actuated sign, bunting, banners, streamers, pennants or flags shall be erected or maintained except as a temporary
sign subject to the provisions of section 9-12-6 of this chapter.
K. Beacons and inflatable blimps, figures or similar attention-attracting devices are prohibited.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 331/426
L. In order to obtain and secure reasonable traffic safety, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any fluttering, undulating,
swinging, rotating or otherwise moving or flashing sign or any moving or flashing attention-attracting device, marquee, canopy or awning
in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision or as to distract the attention of the driver of any vehicle by reason of the position,
shape or color thereof. Pursuant to the foregoing, no sign, other attention-attracting device, marquee, canopy or awning shall be erected
or maintained in such a manner as to be likely to interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device. Accordingly, no sign, other advertising structure, marquee, canopy or awning shall make use of the words, "stop", "go",
"look", "slow" and "danger" or any similar word, phrase, symbol or character. Signs which may be in conflict with public traffic signals
shall not be permitted.
M. Pole signs, except for flags and except where authorized as part of a "unified sign plan" are prohibited. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd.
1995 Code)
N. Electronic message signs, except as authorized in section 9-9B-3 of this title. (Ord. 1760-17, 5-8-2017)
9-12-5: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs are permitted for the following uses and purposes without a permit; provided, that all conditions and restrictions of this
section and of section 9-12-4 of this chapter, are satisfied:
A. Address Identification Signs And Nameplates: Address identification signs and nameplates, subject to the following:
1. The total sign area shall not exceed one square foot.
2. The sign shall include only the address and name of the occupant or business establishment.
3. The sign must be flat against the building.
4. The sign shall not be internally illuminated or include external lights as a specific part of the sign.
B. For Sale, For Rent, Garage Sale Signs: For sale, for rent and garage sale signs, subject to the following:
1. There shall be not more than one such sign per zoning lot, except that on a corner lot two (2) signs, one facing each street, shall be
permitted.
2. No single sign face shall exceed six (6) square feet.
3. Not more than two (2) sign faces are permitted per sign.
4. No ground sign shall be located higher than seven feet (7') above established grade.
5. No sign shall project beyond the property line.
6. No sign shall be internally illuminated or include external lights as a specific part of the sign.
7. For sale and for rent signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the sale or lease has been accomplished. Labels or
messages indicating that the property has been sold or leased are permitted; however, the total for sale or for rent sign and sold or
leased designation shall be removed within seven (7) days after the sold or leased designation has been added.
8. Garage sale signs may be displayed only on the day of the garage sale.
C. Traffic And Parking Signs: Traffic and parking signs, subject to the following:
1. Signs designating parking area entrances or exits are limited to one sign for each exit or entrance and one sign indicating conditions
of use.
2. No single sign face shall exceed six (6) square feet.
3. Not more than two (2) sign faces are permitted per sign.
4. The sign shall include only directional or parking information and shall be of a noncommercial nature.
5. The maximum height above established grade shall not exceed seven feet (7').
6. No sign shall project beyond the property line.
D. Memorial Signs: Memorial signs, subject to the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 332/426
1. The sign shall include only the date of construction and name of the building.
2. The sign shall be inlaid so as to be an integral part of the structure, cut into stone or masonry or be a permanently affixed plaque of
bronze or aluminum.
3. The sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
E. Signs For Public And Quasi-Public Buildings: Except as provided for in chapter 9B, "PU/IB Public Use And Institutional Buildings
District", of this title, church bulletins and signs for public or quasi-public buildings, and civic organizations, subject to the following:
1. Area And Number: There shall be not more than one such sign per zoning lot or lots having a single use, except that on a corner lot,
two (2) signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted. No sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area nor be closer than eight
feet (8') to any other lot.
2. Height: No sign shall project higher than one story or ten feet (10') above curb level. (Ord. 1760-17, 5-8-2017)
F. Public Signs: Signs of a noncommercial nature and erected in the public interest by or on the order of a public official, such as safety
signs, legal notices, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest and other similar signs.
G. Flags: Flags, symbols, State, Village, fraternal, religious or civic organization. If the pole is over twenty feet (20') in height, structural
information on base or foundation shall be recorded with the Building Department.
H. Public Information Signs: Signs indicating restrooms, telephones or similar sign for public information when not exceeding two (2) square
feet of size. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
I. No Trespassing, Video Surveillance And No Dumping Signs: No trespassing, video surveillance and no dumping signs, subject to the
following:
1. Maximum of one sign, per type, per yard area (front, side and rear).
2. Maximum of two (2) square feet in area for each sign.
3. Minimum three feet (3') from the property lot line.
4. Maximum four feet (4') from grade to the top of the sign.
5. Cannot be located on or affixed to a garden fence or dog run. (Ord. 1824-18, 3-26-2018)
J. Holiday Decorations: Decorations on private property clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with national, local or
religious holidays; provided, they shall be displayed for a period of not more than forty five (45) days for each holiday.
K. Window Promotional Signs: Window promotional signs shall be permitted on the interior to a glass show window and shall be in addition
to all other authorized signs; provided, that not more than ten percent (10%) of the window area shall be covered by such sign or signs.
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
L. Political Signs:
1. Residential zoning: Such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
2. Nonresidential zoning: Such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. In addition, such signs shall be removed within fourteen
(14) days after an election or referendum. (Ord. 1356-10, 11-15-2010)
9-12-6: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
A sign (unilluminated), not authorized as a permanent sign and not exempt from the requirements of this section pursuant to section 9-12-5
of this chapter, shall be permitted for the length of time established by this section, and shall thereafter be removed unless such permit is
extended by the Village Board. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
The Chief Operating Officer, in accordance with the provisions hereof and subject to the standards herein established, is authorized to
issue permits for the erection and maintenance of temporary signs. However, it shall be required that before anyone erects a temporary
sign or temporary signs they shall register with the Chief Operating Officer and shall deposit a refundable sum of money as provided by the
Village Board and published in a schedule of fees. No deposit will be refunded until after the temporary sign or temporary signs have been
removed by the applicant within the specified time schedule. Failure to remove a temporary sign within the required time limits may result in
the funds not being refunded, subject to the provisions of subsection 9-12-3E, "Obsolete Signs", of this chapter. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987;
amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 333/426
A. Permitted Sign Types:
1. Nonprojecting wall signs.
2. Monument signs.
3. Streamers, banners, flags, pennants and similar signs, but not beacons or inflatable signs such as blimps, figures or similar devices.
4. Portable signs.
B. Number:
1. Not to exceed two (2) signs per zoning lot, except that "construction signs" shall not exceed one per site.
2. Ground signs shall not include more than two (2) sign faces per sign structure.
C. Time Limitations:
1. Temporary Signs: Except as provided in subsections C2 and C3 of this section, permits for temporary signs shall be issued for a
period no longer than thirty (30) days. No more than four (4) permits for temporary signs shall be issued to any business, property
owner or other establishment in any calendar year.
2. Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the real property upon which the sign is located shall
be removed within seven (7) days after the sale or lease has been accomplished, but in all cases the sign must be removed within
one hundred twenty (120) days.
3. Construction Signs: In connection with the construction or remodeling of a building or other structure, a sign which identifies the name
of the developers, contractors, engineers and architects on a site being developed or the structure being built or remodeled, the sign
must be removed within two (2) weeks after completion of the project.
4. Extensions: The Village Board of Trustees may grant a onetime extension. Requests for additional time extensions shall follow the
provisions for variations under chapter 16 of this title.
D. Area And Height:
1. No temporary sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet per sign face.
2. The top of the sign shall not exceed the roofline of nearby buildings. "Rooflines" shall mean the tallest point of the roof.
E. Illumination: Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
F. Permitted Location:
1. Temporary Business Signs: Subject to the same regulations as "business signs".
2. Other Permitted Temporary Signs: On private property with the consent of the owner. Entire signs shall be located wholly within the
property lines.
3. Sight Interference: No sign may interfere with the sightlines at an intersection with a public right-of-way or internal circulation. (Ord.
381-87, 6-9-1987)
G. Electronic Message Signs:
1. No temporary sign, except real estate signs and construction signs, shall be permitted on a property or properties that have an
electronic message sign. (Ord. 1824-18, 3-26-2018)
9-12-7: SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
In all residential districts, the following classes of signs are permitted in accordance with the regulations set forth herein:
A. Exempt Signs: Exempt signs, see section 9-12-5 of this chapter.
B. Temporary Signs: Temporary signs, see section 9-12-6 of this chapter; provided, that the sign is not illuminated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 334/426
C. Address Identification Sign: A house sign is required for each dwelling and shall not be less than three inches (3") high, and shall
otherwise comply with the regulations in subsection 9-12-5A of this chapter, except that it may be internally illuminated.
D. Nameplate and Identification Signs: Nameplates and identification signs, subject to the following restrictions in addition to requirements
set forth in Section 9-12-5 of this Chapter.
1. One and Two Family: For one- and two-family dwellings, there may be only one nameplate, not exceeding one square foot in area,
for each dwelling unit indicating the name and address of the occupant.
2. Multiple-Family: A single identification sign may be displayed for multiple-family dwellings, apartment hotels and for buildings other
than dwellings. Only the name and address of the building and the name of the management thereof may be contained on the sign.
The size of the sign shall not exceed nine (9) square feet. The sign shall not project higher than seven feet (7') above grade at sign
location. The sign must be reviewed by the Architectural Review Commission and approved by the Village Board.
E. Neighborhood Identification Sign: A sign, masonry wall, landscaping or other similar material and feature may be combined to form a
display for neighborhood or subdivision identification subject to the following:
1. The legend of such sign or display shall consist only of the neighborhood or subdivision name and identification of the Village.
2. Such sign or entrance feature shall not interfere with required sight distances for both vehicular and pedestrian access.
3. The sign and a guaranteed continuous maintenance program must be reviewed by the Architectural Review Commission and be
approved by the Village Board before a permit is granted.
4. The total area of one sign face shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87; 1995 Code)
9-12-8: SIGNS IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
In all business and industrial districts, the following signs are permitted, subject to the requirements set forth herein:
A. Exempt signs.
B. Temporary signs.
C. Wall Signs:
1. On side or sides facing public street. Every business shall be permitted wall signage, including facia, awning and permanent window
signs, on not more than two (2) sides. The gross area of the signage on one side shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the area of
the wall, including doors and windows, on which the sign or signs is placed. On the second side, the gross area of the signage shall
not exceed five percent (5%) of the area of the wall, including doors and windows, the gross area of the wall signage for a single use
or for any individual sign face shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet.
2. Multiple Tenant Buildings: For a multiple tenant building where tenants do not have exterior wall space, there shall be no more than
two (2) signs. One sign will be for the name of the building and the second sign will be to designate the directory of all occupants of
the building. The directory shall be limited to one square foot in area for each tenant in the building. The combined signage for the two
(2) signs shall not exceed the size limitations established in the previous subsection 9-12-8C1 of this Chapter.
3. The area of awning, facia, marquee and projecting signs shall be included when computing the total gross area of the signage.
4. Projection: Facia signs shall not project more than twelve inches (12") from the building. The bottom edge of an awning or marquee
sign must be at least ten feet (10') above the finished grade of the underlying sidewalk, driveway or ground. Other signs projecting
from the building may be permitted as a special use, only if part of a "unified sign" plan.
5. Height: No sign shall project higher than twenty feet (20') above curb level, and in no case shall a sign project above the roof line.
6. Illumination: Signs shall be shaded whenever necessary to avoid casting bright light upon property located in any residential district
and shall be subject to the performance standards of Chapter 13 of this Title and subsection 9-12-3C of this Title.
D. Ground Signs: For each zoning lot that includes a principal detached building where a setback is provided from all property lines, there
shall be permitted one ground sign per street frontage, subject to the following:
1. Size: The gross area of each face of a ground sign shall not exceed the following:
a. For zoning lots with three hundred feet (300') or less of frontage and where the building setback from the property line along the
subject street frontage is fifty feet (50') or less, no ground sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet per sign face.
b. For zoning lots with three hundred feet (300') or less of frontage along a street and where the building setback from the property
line along the subject street frontage is more than fifty feet (50'), the maximum size of any one sign face shall not exceed one
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 335/426
square foot per fifteen feet (15') of lot frontage or one square foot per three feet (3') of building setback, whichever is greater, to a
maximum size for any one sign face of fifty (50) square feet.
c. For zoning lots with more than three hundred feet (300') of frontage and where the building setback from the property line along the
subject street frontage is fifty feet (50') or less, the maximum size of any one sign face shall not exceed one square foot per fifteen
feet (15') of frontage along the subject street, to a maximum size for any one sign face of forty (40) square feet. A second ground
sign shall be permitted where the lot frontage exceed one thousand feet (1,000'), subject to a maximum size for any one face of
forty (40) square feet.
d. For zoning lots with more than three hundred feet (300') of frontage and where the building setback from the property line along the
subject street frontage is more than fifty feet (50'), the maximum size of any one sign face shall not exceed one square foot per
fifteen feet of lot frontage plus one square foot per three feet (3') of building setback in excess of fifty feet (50'), to a maximum size
for any one sign face of one hundred (100) square feet. A second ground sign shall be permitted where the lot frontage exceeds
one thousand feet (1,000'), subject to a maximum size for any one sign face of fifty (50) square feet.
CONTROL
GROUND SIGN
SIZE CALCULATION
MAXIMUM SIZE
PER SIGN FACE
Lot
Frontage
Building
Setback
300 ft.
or less
50 ft.
or less
1 sq. ft. per 3 feet
building setback
16 sq . ft.
300 ft.
or less
+50 ft. 1 sq. ft. per 15
ft. lot frontage or 1
sq. ft. per 3 ft. of
building setback, whichever
is greater
50 sq . ft.
+300 ft. 50 ft.
or less
1 sq. ft. per 15
15 ft. lot frontage
40 sq . ft.
+1,000 ft. 50 ft.
or less
2 signs permitted;
1 sq. ft. per 15 ft.
lot frontage
40 sq . ft.
+300 ft. +50 ft. 1 sq. ft. per 15 ft.
lot frontage plus 1
sq. ft. per 3 ft. of
building setback in
excess of 50 ft.
100 sq . ft.
+1,000 ft. +50 ft. 1 sq. ft. per 15 ft.
lot frontage plus 1 sq.
ft. per 3 ft. of building
setback in excess of 50 ft.
100 sq . ft.
2. Ground Signs: No more than two (2) sign faces are permitted per ground sign.
3. Height: The height of a ground sign shall not exceed twenty feet (20') from the finished grade of the lot to the top of the sign.
4. Illumination: Signs shall be shaded whenever necessary to avoid casting bright light upon property located in any residential district
and shall be subject to the performance standards of Chapter 13 and subsection 9-12-3C of this Title.
5. Location: All ground signs including their sign structures and all other parts shall be set back from all public rights of way and
residential zones by at least five feet (5') plus one foot (1'), plus one foot (1') for every ten (10) square feet of sign face.
6. Clocks And Other Devices: Clocks and other attention attracting devices located on pylons, standard or other separate supports shall
be considered ground signs and are subject to the regulations of this section.
7. Interference With Sightlines: No ground sign shall interfere with sightlines for driveway intersections with a street or internal
circulation. The top edge of a monument sign located near an intersection or entrance shall be less than forty two inches (42") in
height. The bottom edge of a pole sign authorized as part of a unified sign plan and located near an intersection or entrance shall be
greater than nine feet (9') in height.
E. Signs Accessory To Automobile Service Stations: The village board may permit the following signs necessary to automobile service
stations as a special use, subject to review and recommendation by the architectural review commission:
1. Racks for the orderly display of cans of engine oil for convenience in dispensing said oil, may be located on or at the ends of pump
islands (limit of 2 to each island).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 336/426
2. Two (2) open portable tire racks (not more than 7 feet in height, including signs, and 6 feet in length) on casters for the purpose of
displaying new tire casings, shall be permitted for each gasoline or tire service station.
3. Items for sale on the premises may be openly displayed within ten feet (10') of the principal building. Products may be displayed
under pump island canopies between pumps within the area of the pump island base.
4. A sign may be painted on the inside and outside front door face of the closed tire rack, but shall not be painted on the sides or rear.
F. Unified Sign Plan: The village board may permit an integrated business or industrial development in single ownership and management
under unified control, to increase the size of ground sign or wall signs; provided, that the total square feet of signage does not exceed
the total square feet of signage otherwise allowed under this title by more than twenty percent (20%), and further provided, that a unified
sign plan is submitted to the architectural review commission. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. 1995 Code)
G. Signs For Medical Cannabis Dispensaries And Cultivation Centers:
1. Signage shall be permitted for a medical cannabis cultivation center only when collocated with a medical cannabis dispensary.
2. All signage for the medical cannabis dispensary and medical cannabis cultivation center, if collocated, shall be limited in total to one
flat wall sign not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area, and one identifying sign, which can only include the medical cannabis facility
address, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area; such signs shall not be directly illuminated. Electronic message boards and
temporary signs are not permitted in connection with a dispensary.
3. Signs shall be neutral in color and shall not be neon or internally illuminated.
4. Signs shall not include any realistic or stylized graphical representation of the cannabis plant or its parts or any realistic or stylized
graphical representation of drug paraphernalia; or include reference to commonly known graphics, including a rainbow bear or peace
symbol or wording to that effect.
5. Signs shall not include any wording that would identify the property as a medical marijuana dispensary or use clinical, botanical or
slang terms for cannabis, cannabis consumption, cannabis intoxication or drug paraphernalia including, but not limited to, "cannabis",
"marijuana", "weed", "pot", "420", "4/20", "4:20", "joint", "Mary Jane", "ganja", "hash", "herb", "doobie", "bong", "blunt", "bowl", "zoned",
"sloshed", "burnt", "stoned", "green day", "reefer", "smoke", "toke", "wacky tobaccy/baccy", "spliff", "roach", "skunk", etc., or current
terminology in use not listed here.
6. No visual display inside the medical cannabis facility shall be visible from outside the medical cannabis facility; any sign and/or visual
display inside the medical cannabis facility fronting a window or exterior door shall be placed a minimum of twenty four inches (24")
away from said window or exterior door.
7. A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near all dispensary entrances and shall include the following language: "Only
Cardholders, Designated Caregivers, And Staff May Enter These Premises. Persons Under The Age Of 18 Are Prohibited From
Entering". The required text shall be no larger than one inch (1") in height.
8. Signage on delivery trucks entering the property shall comply with subsections G2 and G3 of this section.
9. All signage shall comply with architectural overlay district, section 9-9A-7, "Signs", of this title; the stricter of the requirements shall
apply when there is a conflict between this chapter and the architectural overlay district section of this code.
10. When sign provisions in another village zoning district or subsection of this chapter are more restrictive than the provisions of this
subsection G, the stricter provision shall apply. (Ord. 1529-15, 2-23-2015)
9-12-9: SIGNS ON PROPERTY ADJACENT TO U.S. ROUTE 12 AND OTHER U.S. HIGHWAYS DESIGNATED AS
FEDERAL AID PROGRAM HIGHWAYS:
A. Applicability: The regulations imposed by this section are applicable to all signs located on property adjacent to U.S. Route 12 and other
U.S. highways designated as federal aid program highways. The regulations imposed by this section are in addition to, and not in lieu
of, the regulations imposed by any other section of this title. In the event of any conflict between any provision of this section and any
other provision of this code, the provision determined by the village to be the most restrictive shall control.
B. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them, as follows:
EAVE: The lowest edge of the roof.
ELEVATION: The vertical distance of the top of a particular item to the ground.
FASCIA: A broad, flat, unbroken building surface under the roofline upon which sign letters may be mounted.
HEIGHT: The vertical dimensions of a particular item.
RIDGE: The peak of the roof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 337/426
C. Colors And Theme:
1. The color and theme of a sign shall be architecturally compatible with the style, composition, materials, colors and details of the
building, and with other nearby signs.
2. A sign and any background shall together consist of no more than two (2) colors or shades of the same color. If two (2) colors are
used, at least one color shall match the color of the most significant facade feature(s) or the predominant color of the facade or
supporting structure to which the sign relates.
3. The color of text shall not so closely match the facade or background color so as to be unreadable.
4. Permitted color combinations are:
a. Black on beige, ecru or natural limestone background.
b. Earth tones on complimentary earth tone background.
c. Beige or ecru on red brick background.
d. Forest green on beige, ecru or red brick background.
e. Burnished gold on forest green background.
5. Primary, white and "day-glo" colors are prohibited.
D. Materials:
1. Sign materials shall be consistent or compatible with the original construction materials and architectural style of the building facade
on which they are to be displayed.
2. Matte, natural, brushed, patina like or burnished surfaces are required.
3. Polished, glossy, shiny or reflective surfaces are prohibited.
4. Monument signs shall be brick or stone and may incorporate wood not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the sign area, however,
monument signs shall be supported across the base by brick or stone.
5. Natural materials such as wood, stone, brick, masonry or metals shall be used.
6. Plastic or glass sign surfaces or letters are prohibited.
E. Lighting:
1. Signs shall only be illuminated by external light sources. Backlighting for mounted letters is required.
2. Lighting devices shall be hidden or softened by or integrated into architectural features or landscaping.
3. Natural (soft halogen or incandescent) lighting shall be utilized.
4. Protruding overhead lights or lamps are prohibited.
5. Lighting devices for antique, historical or other similar unique architectural themes shall be integrated stylistically into facades.
6. Lighting shall be focused and only so bright as to effectively illuminate the sign surface encompassing the extreme limits of the text.
7. Monument signs shall only be externally illuminated from the ground.
8. Internal illumination is prohibited.
F. Composition:
1. Softer, subtler alternative to prominent corporate logos are required.
2. Italicized, bold and plain text shall not be mixed.
3. The use of images, pictures and logos shall be avoided unless they are an integral element of the building's architecture and color
scheme, in which case they shall be simplified in appearance.
4. The sign text shall consist of no more than two (2) font styles or sizes.
5. Solid lettering is required. Highlighted or accented lettering is prohibited.
6. Longer text strings are preferred over text stacking.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 338/426
7. Continuous text strings shall consist of only one size, font or style.
G. Integration Of Signage With Facade Or Supporting Structure:
1. For facades containing raised or recessed horizontal features, lettering shall harmoniously relate to said features, preferably
integrated into recessed surfaces.
2. In single tenant buildings, multiple signs on the same facade are prohibited.
3. In multitenant buildings, all signage on the same facade shall be consistent in color, size and elevation.
H. Freestanding Sign Supporting Structures; Landscaping:
1. Monument signs shall be utilized.
2. Monument signs shall emphasize horizontal rather than vertical massing.
3. Monument signs shall contain visible indentations or see through spaces of appropriate dimensions at appropriate intervals to avoid
overt massing.
4. Landscaping shall be provided around the base of all monument signs at a surface area ratio of one to one (1:1) or greater, based on
expected plant growth at maturity.
I. Prohibited Signs:
1. Pole signs.
2. Wind actuated signs or other similar attention getting devices (including pennants, buntings, streamers, banners, propellers, and
spinners).
3. Animated signs.
4. Electronic signs.
5. Beacons/lasers/holographic signs or other similar attention getting devices.
6. Signs containing obscene/pornographic images or text.
7. Flags (except American, municipal or county flags in accordance with local ordinance).
8. Changeable copy signs.
9. Portable or movable signs.
10. Signs painted on or affixed to benches, fences, utility poles, trees, or other similar structures.
11. Roof signs (including signs protruding over the vertical surface or a mansard roof).
12. Signs in the right of way.
13. Strings of lights.
14. Inflatable signs (including blimps, balloons and figures).
15. Billboards.
16. Off site advertising signs.
17. Signs relating to abandoned or closed businesses.
18. Signs that, by their position, working illumination, size, shape or color, obstruct, impair, obscure or interfere with motorist's vision,
mimic any traffic control sign, signal or device, or otherwise present a traffic hazard.
J. Bulk Regulations:
1. The ratio of [height of sign:height of fascia] shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) (in cases when the fascia section upon which the
sign in mounted incorporates a peaked projection, the height of the peaked projection shall be measured as 1/2 the vertical distance
between the base and the ridge of the peaked projection).
2. The ratio of [height of sign:height of building] shall not exceed eight percent (8%) when the facade section upon which the sign is
mounted contains a primarily horizontal roofline.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 339/426
3. The ratio of [height of sign:height of building] shall not exceed thirteen percent (13%) when the facade section upon which the sign is
mounted contains a primarily peaked roofline (in such cases, the peaked roofline shall be measured as 1/2 the vertical distance
between the eaves and the ridge of the peaked roofline).
4. The ratio of [height of sign:building setback to street] shall not exceed 1.5%.
5. The ratio of [elevation of sign:elevation of eaves] shall not exceed seventy five percent (75%).
6. The ratio of [elevation of sign:elevation of roofline] shall not exceed seventy five percent (75%) when the facade section upon which
the sign is mounted contains a primarily horizontal roofline.
7. The ratio of [elevation of sign:elevation of roofline] shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) when the facade section upon which the sign
is mounted contains a primarily peaked roofline (in such cases, the peaked roofline shall be measured as 1/2 the vertical distance
between the eaves and the ridge of the peaked roofline).
8. The ratio of [total sign area:total facade area] shall not exceed two percent (2%).
9. The ratio of [total sign length:total facade length] shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%).
10. The ratio of [tenant sign length:tenant store length] shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%).
K. Route 12 Corridor Sign Guidelines: The "Route 12 Corridor Planning Council Sign Guidelines for Corridor Development", prepared by
the Lake County Department of Planning, Building and Development shall be used to assist in the interpretation of the regulations
imposed by this section. Said guidelines shall have no regulatory effect. (Ord. 998-02, 8-19-2002)
9-12-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code for each offense,
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each and every day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1824-
18, 3-26-2018)
Chapter 13
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
9-13-1: JURISDICTION:
Any use hereafter established in any zoning district in the Village shall be used and maintained in such a manner as to comply with
applicable performance standards as hereinafter set forth governing noise, smoke, particulate matter, toxic and noxious matter, odors, fire
and explosive hazards, vibration, radiation, or glare or heat, for the district in which such use shall be located; and no use already
established on the effective date of this Title shall be so altered or modified as to conflict, with or further conflict with applicable performance
standards for the district in which such use is located. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-13-2: NOISE:
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards
shall include, but not be limited to, the requirements as outlined in the publication entitled State of Illinois Noise Pollution Control
Regulations, current publication, as amended. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-13-3: VIBRATION:
A. Excessive Vibrations Prohibited:
1. In any district, no activity or operation shall cause or create earthborne vibrations in excess of the displacement values given below.
2. Measurements shall be made at or beyond the adjacent lot line or the nearest residence district boundary line, as described below:
Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument or complement of instruments capable of simultaneously measuring in
three (3) mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum vector shall be less than the vibration displacement permitted. For the
purpose of this Title, steady state vibrations are vibrations which are continuous, or vibration in discrete impulses more frequent than
one hundred (100) per minute. Discrete impulses which do not exceed one hundred (100) per minute shall be considered impact
vibrations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 340/426
B. Maximum Permitted Displacements: The maximum permitted displacements shall be determined in each district by the following
formula:
D = K
f
D = displacement in inches
K = a constant to be determined by reference to the following tables
f = the frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground expressed in cycles per second.
C. Maximum Earth Displacement: The maximum earth displacement permitted at the points described below shall be determined by use of
the formula in the preceding subsection B and the appropriate K constant shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Values of K to be used in Vibration Formula
Location K
In any neighboring lot --
Steady state 0.008
Impulsive 0.015
Less than 8 pulses
per 24-hour period
0.037
In any residence district --
Steady state 0.003
Impulsive 0.006
Less than 8 pulses
per 24-hour period
0.015
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-13-4: SMOKE AND PARTICULATE MATTER:
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards
shall include but not be limited to the requirements as outlined in the publication entitled State of Illinois Smoke and Particulate Matter,
adopted by the Illinois Air Pollution Control Board, current publication as amended. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-13-5: TOXIC MATTER:
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards
shall include, but not be limited to, the requirements as outlined in the publication entitled State of Illinois Toxic Matter, adopted by the
Illinois Air Pollution Control Board, current publication as amended. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-13-6: ODOROUS MATTER:
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards
shall include the publication entitled State of Illinois Odorous Matter, adopted by the Illinois Air Pollution Control Board, current publication
as amended. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-13-7: FIRE AND EXPLOSION:
Fire and explosive hazards shall be controlled, as follows:
A. Activities involving the storage or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation are not permitted in the Village.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 341/426
B. Material or products which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases under ordinary weather temperatures shall not be permitted
in any district, with the exception of the following, which are permitted:
Flammable liquids and oils stored, sold and used in conjunction with the operations of any automobile service station and customarily
required or used in such operation. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-13-8: GLARE:
A. In any district, any operation or activity producing glare at night shall be conducted so that direct and/or indirect illumination from the
source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half (1/2) foot-candle when measured in the residence district.
B. Flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled or shielded so as not to cause a nuisance across lot lines. When street lighting
produces illumination in excess of one foot-candle at any point in the residence district, the contribution by light sources from within any
nonresidential use measured at the same point shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the street lighting. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-13-9: RADIATION HAZARDS:
A. Release Outside Property Lines: In any district, the release of radio-active materials or the emission of ionizing radiation outside of
property lines shall be in accordance with the standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Such
standards shall include, but not be limited to, the requirements as outlined in the rules and regulations of the State of Illinois, Rules and
Regulations for Prevention of Radiation Hazards, adopted April 18, 1961, amended May 15, 1967.
B. Unsealed Radioactive Materials: In any district, unsealed radioactive materials shall not be manufactured, utilized, or stored except when
such materials are stored in a fireproof container at or below ground level. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-13-10: WATER POLLUTION:
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Such standards
shall include, but not be limited to, the requirements as outlined in the publication entitled, Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois, dated
March 7, 1972 (Division of Water Pollution Control). (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
Chapter 14
SPECIAL USES
9-14-1: PURPOSE:
The development and execution of this title is based upon the division of the village into districts, within any one of which the use of land
and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings or structures, as related to the land, are essentially uniform. It is recognized, however,
that there are special uses which, because of their unique character cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts
without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring lands and upon the public need for the particular use or
the particular location. Such special uses fall into the following categories:
A. Uses operated by a public agency or publicly regulated utilities, or uses traditionally affected with a public interest.
B. Uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that the operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact
upon neighboring property or public facilities. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-14-2: AUTHORITY:
Special uses shall be authorized or denied by the village board in accordance with the provisions of this title applicable to amendments of
this title and the regulations and conditions set forth in this title for special uses. No application for a special use shall be acted upon by the
village board until after:
A. A written report is prepared and forwarded to the village board by the plan commission in a manner prescribed herein for amendments to
this title; and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 342/426
B. A public hearing has been held by the plan commission after due notice by publication as prescribed herein, for amendments, and the
findings and recommendations of the plan commission1 have been reported to the village board. At the time of the filing of an
application for any special use, the applicant shall furnish to the village clerk a complete list containing the names and addresses of
those persons to whom were sent the tax bills for the general taxes for the last preceding year on all property located within two
hundred fifty feet (250') in each direction of the location for which the special use is requested; provided, the number of feet occupied by
all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be excluded in computing the two hundred fifty feet (250') requirement. The
plan commission shall hear no special use application unless the applicant furnishes such information. The village clerk shall, not more
than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing at which the special use is to be considered, send written notice
to the persons whose names appear on the list furnished by the applicant. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
C. Notwithstanding any provision contained in this title to the contrary, to hear applications for and thereafter submit reports of findings and
recommendations thereon to the village board with respect to the following special uses:
1. Decorative fences.
2. Dog runs.
3. Satellite earth stations.
4. Earthen berms.
5. Signs.
6. Temporary sales trailers.
7. Medical cannabis dispensary and/or cultivation center, subject to the following conditions:
a. Compliance With Act: All medical cannabis dispensary and cultivation center establishments shall comply with the compassionate
use of medical cannabis pilot program act (public act 098-0122) and any rules adopted in accordance thereto.
b. Multiple Use Property: Medical cannabis dispensaries and cultivation centers shall not be established in multiple use or tenant
property or on a property that shares parking with other uses, and shall be established in a stand alone building on a minimum of
two (2) acres.
c. Parking: Client parking shall be located in an area which is visible from a public road or a private road that is accessible to the
public. It cannot be screened from the roadway with vegetation, fencing or other obstructions.
d. Lighting/Video Surveillance: Parking areas shall be well lit and monitored by video surveillance equipment whose live images can
be viewed by dispensary staff, continually recorded and accessible to local law enforcement officials via the internet.
e. Buffering From Other Uses:
(1) Other Facilities: A medical cannabis facility shall be a minimum of one thousand feet (1,000') from all other medical cannabis
facilities measured from the parcel boundaries.
(2) Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center: No medical cannabis cultivation center shall be located, established, maintained, or
operated on any lot that has a property line within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the property line of the following:
(A) A church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship.
(B) A public or private nursery, elementary, or secondary school.
(C) A daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day childcare facility or childcare facility, licensed by the Illinois
department of children and family services.
(D) A public park, playground, playing field, aquatic center, municipal building, community center, community housing facility,
forest preserve, or a parcel where children's programming occurs.
(E) A residential zoned property.
(3) Medical Cannabis Dispensary: No medical cannabis dispensary shall be located, established, maintained, or operated on any
lot that has a property line within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property line of the following:
(A) A church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship.
(B) A public or private nursery, elementary, or secondary school.
(C) A daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day childcare facility or childcare facility, licensed by the Illinois
department of children and family services.
(4) Measurement: For the purposes of this use, distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the lot on which the medical cannabis facility is located to the
nearest point on a property line of the use.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 343/426
f. Public Viewing: No medical cannabis facility shall be maintained or operated in a manner that causes, creates or allows the public
viewing of medical cannabis, medical cannabis infused products or cannabis paraphernalia from any sidewalk, public or private
right of way or any property other than the lot on which the facility is located. No portion of the exterior of the facility shall utilize or
contain any flashing lights, searchlights or spotlights or any similar lighting system. No medical cannabis facility shall present the
appearance of a medical center or a head shop.
g. Compliance With Statute/Act: Medical cannabis dispensaries that display or sell drug paraphernalia shall do so in compliance with
the Illinois drug paraphernalia control act and the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act (public act 098-0122).
h. Packaging: Medical cannabis and cannabis infused products shall be distributed in a sealed, tamper evident medical cannabis
container. Any additional packaging, such as bags or boxes, shall be opaque with no text or graphics identifying the contents of
packages, and shall be sealed and not available to quick access.
i. Age Limit: It shall be unlawful for any medical cannabis facility to allow any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age on
the premises. Facilities shall not employ anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years. Access shall be limited exclusively to facility
staff, cardholders, designated caregivers, delivery personnel, maintenance personnel and local and state officials.
j. Hours: Medical cannabis facilities shall operate between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
k. Drive-Through: A medical cannabis facility shall not have a drive-through service.
l. Surveillance:
(1) The medical cannabis facility shall be an enclosed locked facility and shall provide and maintain adequate security on the
premises, including lighting, video surveillance and alarms reasonably designed to ensure the safety of persons and to protect
the premises from theft.
(2) The medical cannabis facility parking area, client entrance, sales area, backroom, storage areas and delivery bay and entrance
shall be monitored by video surveillance equipment whose live images can be viewed by dispensary staff, continually recorded
and accessible to local law enforcement officials via the internet.
(3) A sign shall be posted in a prominent location which includes the following language:
This Area Is Under Live/Recorded Video Surveillance To Aid In The Prosecution Of Any Crimes Committed Against This
Facility Or Its Patrons.
(4) The village shall review the adequacy of lighting, security and video surveillance installations with assistance from appropriate
local law enforcement officials.
(5) Deliveries shall occur within a secure enclosed delivery bay; no delivery shall be visible from the exterior of the building.
m. Conduct On Site:
(1) Loitering is prohibited on the medical cannabis facility property.
(2) It shall be prohibited to smoke cannabis or consume cannabis infused products in the medical cannabis facility or anywhere on
the property occupied by the facility. A sign, at least 8.5 inches by eleven inches (11"), shall be posted inside the facility building
in a conspicuous place and visible to a client and shall include the following language:
Smoking, Eating, Drinking Or Other Forms Of Consumption Of Cannabis Products Is Prohibited On Dispensary Or Cultivation
Center Property Or In Vehicles On The Property.
(3) The transfer of cannabis to unauthorized person(s) shall be prohibited.
(4) Picnic tables, benches and/or lounging furniture shall be prohibited on the medical cannabis facility property.
All applications shall be processed and hearings conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 9-14-4 of this chapter.
For purposes of this section, the term "plan commission", when used in section 9-14-4 of this chapter shall be deemed to mean
the architectural review commission. (Ord. 1529-15, 2-23-2015)
9-14-3: INITIATION:
An application for a special use may be made by any person, or by an office, department, board, bureau or commission requesting or
intending to request a building permit or occupancy certificate. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-14-4: PROCESSING:
A. An application for a special use, in such form and accompanied by such information as shall be established from time to time by the plan
commission shall be filed with the village clerk and thereafter processed in the manner prescribed heretofore for applications and
amendments.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 344/426
B. The plan commission shall hold the public hearing and forward its recommendations in the form of a written report, to the village board
within thirty (30) days following the date of public hearing on each application unless it is withdrawn by the petitioner.
1. That the proposed use at that particular location requested is necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility which is in the
interest of public convenience and will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood or community; and
2. That such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, morals or general welfare
of persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property values or improvement in the vicinity; and
3. That the proposed use will comply with the regulations and conditions specified in this title for such use, and with the stipulations and
conditions made a part of the authorization granted by the village board of trustees.
C. In the case of a written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners
of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately
adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed
to be altered, is filed with the clerk of the municipality, the special use shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3)
of all of the trustees of the village. Any proposed special use which fails to receive the approval of a majority of the plan commission
members, and is so reported, shall not be passed by the village board except by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the trustees of
the village. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-14-5: DECISIONS:
The village board, upon report of the plan commission and without further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed special use in
accordance with applicable statutes of the state or may refer it back to the plan commission for further consideration. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-
1987)
Chapter 15
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
9-15-1: PURPOSE:
This Chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
A. To encourage the most orderly development of properties through advance planning and thus assure adequate standards for the
development of residential neighborhoods;
B. To provide regulations to encourage a variety of dwelling types;
C. To assure adequate open space;
D. To protect residential areas from undue traffic congestion;
E. To protect residential areas from the intrusion of business, industrial and other land uses that may create an adverse effect upon the
living environment;
and thus promote the general welfare of the community. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-15-2: BASIC PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
The basic provisions and requirements concerning planned unit development are as follows: the subdivision, development and use of land
containing ten (10) or more acres as an integral unit, combining more than one primary land use and which may provide for one-family
residential, multiple-family residential, education, business, commercial, industrial, recreational, park and common use areas may be
described as planned unit development.
A. In its establishment and authorization as a special use, in addition to the foregoing provisions, the following procedures, requirements,
restrictions, standards and conditions shall be observed.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 345/426
B. The planned unit development may be excluded from the provisions of the subdivision regulations1 and of this Title to the extent
specified in the final authorization of the planned unit development. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-15-3: PROCEDURES:
A. Pre-Application Conference: A pre-application conference shall be held with the Plan Commission. At such conference, the applicant
shall provide information as to the location of the proposed planned development, the uses, and approximate area of use for each use
category; a list of any and all exceptions to the subdivision regulations and this Title, and any other information necessary to clearly
explain the planned development to the Plan Commission.
B. The Plan Commission shall review and consider the proposed plan as to its compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan and the goals
and policies for planning of the Village and advise the applicant on the information, documents, exhibits, drawings and any limitations on
the proposal that should be included in the application to the Village for a special use permit for planned development. (Ord. 381-87, 6-
9-87)
9-15-4: PRELIMINARY PLAN:
The applicant shall request the special use permit, by letter addressed to the Village Board, to be placed on the agenda of the meeting of
the Plan Commission for a preliminary discussion of the proposed planned development, and the Plan Commission shall consider the
proposed planned development at such meeting, which may be continued from time to time. The applicant shall present such exhibits and
written information as may be necessary to fully acquaint the Plan Commission with the proposed development which shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following:
A. The map or maps which shall be included as part of the application shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100'),
or if the area of the site is more than two hundred (200) acres, two hundred feet to the inch (1" = 200'). The following information shall
be shown:
1. Boundary Survey: A boundary line survey of the subject site which shall be prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor.
2. Topography: The existing topographic character of the land with contours shown at intervals no greater than five feet (5'). Topographic
data shall refer to the USGS North American Datum - Mean Sea Level Elevation.
3. Site Analysis: A detailed site analysis of the property in question, which shall show the following information:
a. Physical Factors Information:
(1) Existing land uses both on the site and immediately adjacent to it;
(2) Scenic views;
(3) Wooded areas;
(4) Soil problem areas based upon a soil survey of the site to include a report from the Soil Conservation Service. Additional soil
information may be requested by the Plan Commission and/or the Village Engineer;
(5) Portions of the site in any flood plain and/or flood plain fringe areas;
(6) Streams, drainage ditches, culverts and standing water;
(7) Isolated preservable trees six inches (6") or more in diameter at one foot (1') above ground level;
(8) General directions of the storm water runoff across the property.
b. Public utilities information, which shall show the location and size of any existing sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water lines
both on the site and in easements and rights-of-way immediately adjacent to the site - gas, electric and telephone.
c. Other Information:
(1) Existing County and/or Municipal zoning on all parts of the site;
(2) Municipal corporate boundaries across and adjacent to the subject site;
(3) Utility easements across and adjacent to the subject site.
4. Land Use Plan: A proposed land use plan which shall be drawn upon a print of the topographic map for the site. The proposed land
use plan shall contain the following information:
a. Identification and Description:
(1) Name of the planned unit development;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 346/426
(2) Location of the subject site by section, town and range or by other approved legal description;
(3) Name and address of the site planner and/or engineer;
(4) Name and address of the owner and/or trust beneficiary or developer;
(5) Scale, northpoint and date.
b. Design features information, which shall show:
(1) Right-of-way alignments, widths and names of all streets. Such street names shall not duplicate the name of any street
heretofore used in the Village or its environs unless such street is an extension of or is in line with an already named street in
which event that name shall be used;
(2) The location of all multi-family or single-family attached buildings and structures;
(3) Off-street parking and service areas;
(4) All areas to be dedicated as common open space and all sites to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for parks, playgrounds,
school sites, public buildings, and similar public and quasi-public uses;
(5) The pedestrian circulation system, and parkway belt system or bicycle circulation system;
(6) All other information necessary to clearly show the proposed elements of the planned unit development.
5. Utility Plan: A proposed utility plan which shall be drawn on a print of the proposed land use plan. The proposed utility plan shall show
the approximate location and dimensions of all sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water lines for all proposed land uses, drainage
ditches, culverts and water retention areas, as well as any utility easements. The utility plan shall be accompanied by a statement
from the village engineer attesting to the capability of existing sewer systems to service the proposed development.
B. The written statement which shall be included as part of the application for approval of the preliminary plan shall contain the following
information:
1. A statistical tabulation of the acreage amounts of all of the land uses proposed in the preliminary plan.
2. The type and number of dwelling units for any proposed residential land uses.
3. The stages in which the project will be built and the approximate dates when construction of each stage can be expected to begin
and to end.
C. Other information may be requested if the plan commission finds that the planned unit development may create special problems for
traffic, parking, landscaping and/or economic feasibility. Such information may include, but not be limited to, any of the following:
1. An off street parking and loading plan.
2. A traffic study indicating the volume of traffic to be generated by the planned unit development or this phase of it and proposing any
special engineering design features and/or traffic regulation devices needed to ensure the proper safety of traffic circulation to,
through and around the planned unit development or this phase of it.
3. Economic impact: A tax impact study detailing the impact which the planned unit development or this phase of it will have upon all
taxing bodies. In addition, the expected number of students to be generated by any residential portion of it shall also be quantified.
4. A landscaping planting plan, indicating the height, size, location, quantities and variety of stock to be planted.
D. The procedure for approval of the preliminary plan shall be as follows:
1. The village board may refer the preliminary plan to the plan commission. The village board shall instruct the appropriate village
departments and consultants to collaborate with the plan commission in reviewing the preliminary plan for the planned unit
development for its compliance with these regulations and other ordinances of the village. Such collaboration may include meetings at
which the developer shall meet with the village officials and consultants in order that the plan commission may have prior to its public
hearing the informal recommendations of its experts.
2. The plan commission shall notify the applicant as to the time and place of the public hearing at which the applicant shall present his
preliminary plan. The plan commission shall cause notice of such public hearing to be published in a manner approved by the village
attorney for the plan commission for all special use permits and as required by statute. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
3. The plan commission and the village board may utilize the services of the professional village consultants in arriving at
recommendations or decisions. The applicant shall pay the village the cost incurred for the services rendered by its consultants in
accordance with the village's form of draw down deposit agreement, as required by subsection 9-16-10C of this title. The consultants
shall bill for their services at the same hourly rate which they normally charge municipal clients. The village consultants shall include,
but not be limited to, the persons who provide the village with advice in the fields of engineering, law, planning, traffic, design and
finance. (Ord. 1167-06, 5-15-2006; amd. Ord. 1352-10, 11-15-2010)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 347/426
E. The plan commission shall proceed as quickly as possible in its review of the preliminary plan. Within no more than thirty (30) days after
the final adjournment of the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall:
1. Approve or disapprove the preliminary plan and shall submit its written recommendation, which may include the recommendations of
the Village Engineer, Village Planner and/or Village Attorney, to the Board of Trustees, with a copy being sent to the applicant; or
2. Advise the applicant in writing if the Plan Commission finds that changes, additions, or corrections are required in the preliminary
plan. The applicant shall re-submit ten (10) copies of the revised preliminary plan for consideration of the Plan Commission at a
continuation of or a new public hearing. The applicant shall do so without paying an additional filing fee. The Plan Commission shall
submit its recommendations of the Village Engineer, Village Planner and/or Village Attorney, with a copy also being sent to the
applicant.
F. The Village Board of Trustees shall accept or reject the preliminary plan within forty five (45) days after its next regular meeting following
the receipt of the written recommendations of the Plan Commission. The applicant and the Village Board of Trustees may mutually
agree to extend the forty five (45) day period.
1. If the preliminary plan is disapproved, the Village Board may state in writing the reasons for the disapproval, and such writing, if
prepared, shall be filed with the Village Clerk and a copy shall be sent to the applicant.
2. If the preliminary plan is approved, the Village Board shall authorize the applicant to submit a final development plan for the planned
unit development.
3. Within one year following the approval of the preliminary development plan, the applicant shall file with the Plan Commission, a final
development plan completing in final form all information required as noted in this Section. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-15-5: FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A. Within one year following the approval of the preliminary development plan, the applicant shall file with the Plan Commission a final
development plan containing in final form the information required in the preliminary plan. The final development plan shall also include
the following:
1. A final land use plan, suitable for recording with the County Recorder of Deeds. The purpose of the final development plan is to
designate the land subdivided into lots as well as the division of other lands not so treated, into common open areas and building
areas and to designate and limit the specific internal uses of each building or structure, as well as of the land in general.
2. An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate development within the planned development.
3. If subdivided lands are included in the planned development, a subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting
all the requirements of a normal subdivision plat, to the extent that compliance with the subdivision regulations of the Village shall be
required.
4. An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use area, including common open space.
5. Designation of the location of all buildings to be constructed, and a designation of the uses for which each building is designed.
6. Certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of land, and recording the document.
7. Tabulations of each separate unsubdivided use area, including land area and number of dwelling units per gross acre.
8. Landscaping plan.
9. Utilities and drainage plan.
10. Final agreements, bylaws, provisions or covenants which govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned
development and any of its common open area or other common facilities.
11. Final development and construction schedule.
12. Final architectural plans.
13. Final engineering drawings.
B. The final development plan shall be approved as follows:
1. The Plan Commission shall review the final development plan within thirty five (35) days of its submission and shall recommend
approval if it is in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan. The Plan Commission shall certify to the Board of
Trustees that the final development plan is in conformity with the previously approved preliminary development plan.
2. If the Plan Commission finds that the final plan is substantially changed from the approved preliminary plan, the Plan Commission
shall recommend to the Village Board that a new public hearing be held in conformance with the procedures for approval of the
preliminary plan.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 348/426
3. The Board of Trustees, after receipt of the recommendation of the Plan Commission, shall itself review the final development plan
and shall, if it is in conformity with the preliminary development plan, authorize issuance of special use permits. If the final
development plan is held not to be in conformity with the preliminary development plan, the Village Board shall inform the applicant
with regard to the specific areas found to be not in compliance. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-15-6: CHANGES AND MODIFICATIONS AFTER FINAL PLAN APPROVAL:
A. After the approval of the final plan, the use of land and the construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or structures within the
planned unit development will be governed by the approved final plan, rather than by any other provisions of this Title.
B. No changes may be made in the approved final plan except upon application to the appropriate agency according to the following
procedures:
1. During the construction of the planned unit development, the procedure shall be as follows:
a. Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of buildings and structures and in the location of streets and ways of public access
and in the size and location of open space, may be authorized by the Plan Commission as required by engineering or other
circumstances not foreseen at the time that the final plat was approved.
b. All changes in land uses, any rearrangement of lots, blocks, and building tracts, any major changes in the provisions for common
open space and all other changes in approved final plan must be made by the Village Board of Trustees, under the procedures
authorized by this Title for the amendment to the Zoning Map.
c. Any changes which are approved for the final plat must be recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the final plat. If
changes are allowed in a final site plan a new site plan reflecting such changes shall be filed with the Village.
2. After the completion of the construction of the planned unit development, the procedure shall be as follows:
a. Any minor extensions, alterations, or modifications of existing buildings or structures may be recommended by the Plan
Commission if they are consistent with the purpose and intent of the final plat.
b. Any building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final plat unless
an amendment to the final plat is approved following the procedures for the amendment of Zoning Map.
c. All other changes in the final plan must be made by the Village Board of Trustees, under the procedure authorized by this Title for
the amendment of the Zoning Map. No changes may be made in the final plan unless they are required for the continued
successful functioning of the planned unit development, or unless they are required by changes in conditions that have occurred
since the final plan was approved or by changes in the development policy of the Village. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-15-7: STANDARDS:
No planned unit development shall be authorized unless the Plan Commission shall find and recommend, in addition to those standards
established herein for special uses, that the following standards will be met:
A. General:
1. The uses permitted by such exceptions as may be requested or recommended are necessary or desirable and appropriate to the
purpose of the development.
2. The uses permitted in such development are not of such nature or so located as to exercise an undue detrimental influence or effect
upon the surrounding neighborhood.
3. That any industrial park areas established in the planned unit development conform to all requirement therefor as set forth elsewhere
in this Title.
4. That all minimum requirements pertaining to commercial, residential, institutional, or other uses established in the planned unit
development shall be subject to the requirements for each individual classification as established elsewhere in this Title, except as
may be specifically varied in the ordinance granting and establishing a planned unit development use.
5. When private streets and common driveways are made a part of the planned unit development or private common open space or
recreation facilities are provided, the applicant shall submit, as part of the application, the method and arrangement whereby these
private facilities shall be operated and maintained. Such arrangements for operating and maintaining private facilities shall be subject
to the approval of the Village Board.
B. Residential:
1. Residential density for a planned unit development shall not be greater than the recommended density, as shown in this Title for the
Village, nor shall any lot to be used for residential purposes be less in area or dimension than that required by the district regulations
applicable to the district in which the planned unit development is located, except that the Plan Commission may recommend and the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 349/426
Village Board may grant a reduction in such lot area and dimension, but not more than fifteen percent (15%) when the planned unit
development provides common open space equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the gross area of the planned unit
development.
2. Business uses may be included as part of a planned residential development when the Plan Commission finds that such business
uses are beneficial to the overall planned unit development and will not be injurious to adjacent or neighboring properties. Such
business uses shall not be greater in area than ten percent (10%) of the planned unit development.
3. The open areas provided in the part of the planned development containing only residential structures shall be preserved over the life
of the planned unit development for use only by the residents of the planned development.
4. For that part of a planned development devoted to residential uses, the Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board of
Trustees may approve, access to a dwelling by a driveway or pedestrian walk easement, and spacing between buildings of lesser
widths or depths than required by district regulation for the district in which the planned development is located, provided:
a. That adequate provisions are made which perpetuate during the period of the special use, access easements and off-street parking
spaces for use by the residents of the dwelling served;
b. The spacing between buildings shall be approved by the Plan Commission and shall be consistent with the application of
recognized site planning principles for securing a unified development, and due consideration is given to the openness normally
afforded by intervening streets.
c. The yards for principal buildings along the periphery of the development shall be not less in width or depth than required for
permitted uses in the district regulations applicable to the districts in which the planned development is located; and the plan is
developed to afford adequate protection to neighboring properties as recommended by the Village Board of Trustees.
C. Cluster Subdivision: In any one-family cluster subdivision, the Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board may authorize
the following exceptions to the regulations of the district in which the cluster subdivision is permitted as a special use:
1. A reduction of the lot area by not more than five percent (5%) and in no case shall the lot area be less than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet.
2. A reduction of the lot width to:
100 feet in the R-1 District
90 feet in the R-2 District
3. Lot Area:
a. That in the part of the planned development containing only residential uses, the minimum lot area per dwelling unit may be not
more than five percent (5%) less than that required for permitted uses in the district regulations applicable to the district in which the
planned development is located.
b. Reduction of such lot area be recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Village Board only where there is
contained within the planned development permanent open area, the area and location of which shall meet with the approval of the
Commission, and that such open space shall not be less than that which would pertain if developed on individual lots.
c. Such open areas shall be preserved over the life of the planned development, for use only by the residents of the planned
development or dedicated to the Village for school, park, playground or other public uses.
4. That in a planned development devoted to residential use, the Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board may
approve, access to a dwelling by a driveway or pedestrian walk easement; however, off-street parking facilities for such dwellings
shall be located not more than two hundred feet (200') from the dwelling served; yards of lesser widths or depths than required for
permitted uses in the district regulations applicable to the district in which the planned development is located; provided:
a. That protective covenants are recorded which perpetuate access easements and off-street parking spaces for use by the residents
of the dwellings served;
b. That spacing between buildings shall be consistent with the application of recognized site planning principles for securing a unified
development and due consideration is given to the openness normally afforded by intervening streets and alleys;
c. Spacing between principal buildings within a part of a planned development shall be equivalent to such spacing as would be
required between buildings by district regulations for the district in which it is located.
5. That in a planned business development, the following additional requirements are hereby specified:
a. All buildings shall be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from all streets bounding the site;
b. Required off-street parking space shall be provided in the ratio of not less than ten (10) parking spaces for every one thousand
(1,000) square feet of gross floor area;
c. All walks within the planned development shall be paved with a hard surfaced material meeting the specifications of the Village
Engineer;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 350/426
d. Any part of the planned development not used for buildings, loading and accessways, shall be attractively landscaped with grass,
trees, shrubs or pedestrian walkways, according to a landscape plan, as approved by the Plan Commission;
e. The buildings in the planned development shall be planned and designed as a unified and single project.
D. Variations of Minimum Requirements:
1. Wherever the applicant proposes to provide and set out, by platting, deed, dedication, restriction or covenant, and land or space
separate from one-family or multi-family residential districts to be used for parks, playgrounds, commons, greenways or open areas,
the Plan Commission may consider and recommend to the Village Board and the Village Board may vary the applicable minimum
requirements of the subdivision regulations and this Title which may include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
a. Rear year
b. Side yard
c. Lot area
d. Bulk
e. Intensity of use
f. Street width
g. Sidewalks
h. Public utilities
i. Off-street parking
2. Business:
a. Business uses shall be as prescribed by the Plan Commission.
b. All business and storage of materials shall be conducted or stored within a completely enclosed building.
c. Not more than thirty percent (30%) of the lot area shall be covered by buildings or structures.
d. At least ten percent (10%) of the lot shall be provided for landscape and open space purposes.
e. No building shall be more than thirty five feet (35') in height.
f. No dwelling shall be permitted in a planned business development.
g. Off street parking shall be provided and maintained on the same lot based upon three (3) square feet of parking space for each
square foot of gross floor area unless the plan commission recommends and the village board requires additional off street parking
space.
h. Service and loading and unloading facilities shall be provided as recommended and approved by the plan commission.
i. No building shall be located nearer than fifty feet (50') to any street line.
j. Business developments shall be adequately screened by fencing or landscaping or both along the boundaries of adjacent
residential, public open space, schools, churches or other similar uses. The screen planting shall be prepared by a landscape
architect and shall meet the approval of the plan commission.
k. Outside lighting shall be so designed and placed so as to not be disturbing to adjacent residential areas. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
l. Signs shall comply with the regulation of the B retail business/commercial uses permitted in this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd.
Ord. 1314-10, 1-19-2010)
3. Industrial:
a. The standards for industrial areas in a planned unit development shall conform to the applicable standards in this title for industrial
areas.
b. At least twenty percent (20%) of the industrial land use areas shall be reserved for landscape and open space purposes.
E. Conditions And Guarantees: Prior to granting any special uses, the plan commission may recommend, and the village board shall
stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special use
as deemed necessary for the protection and requirements specified herein or as may be from time to time required. In all cases in which
special uses are granted, the village board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the
conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 351/426
F. Effect Of Denial Of A Special Use: After a public hearing, no application for a special use which has been denied wholly or in part by the
village board shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds of substantial
new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the plan commission and the village board.
G. Termination Of Special Use Permit: If work on the proposed development has not begun within twenty four (24) months from the date of
the authorization, the special use permit shall become null and void and all rights thereunder shall lapse. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
Chapter 16
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
9-16-1: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION:
The administration of this Title is hereby vested in the following:
A. The Zoning Administrator (Section 9-16-2 of this Chapter).
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals (Title 2, Chapter 3 of this Code).
C. The Plan Commission (Title 2, Chapter 2 of this Code).
D. The Architectural Review Commission (Title 2, Chapter 6 of this Code). (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-16-2: ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER:
The Building Inspector, as Zoning Administrator, shall be in charge of the administration and enforcement of this Title. The Building
Inspector shall:
A. Receive applications required, issue permits and furnish certificates, all in his judgment and discretion.
B. Examine premises for which permits have been issued, and make necessary inspections to determine compliance.
C. When requested by the President of the Board of Trustees, or when the interest of the Village so requires, make investigations and
render written reports.
D. Issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
E. Adopt rules and procedures consistent with this Title.
F. Keep careful and comprehensive records of applicants, permits, certificates, inspections, reports, notices, orders and all localized actions
of the Board of Trustees and shall file the same permanently by street address.
G. Keep all such records open to public inspection, at reasonable hours, but not for removal from his office.
H. Report to the President of the Board of Trustees, at least once each month, as to permits and certificates issued and orders
promulgated.
I. Request and receive the assistance and cooperation of the Police Department, the Village Attorney, and of Village officials.
J. Inform the legal department of all violations and all other matters requiring prosecution of legal action.
K. Be entitled to rely upon any opinion of the legal department as to the interpretation of this Title, or the legal application of this Title to any
factual situation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 352/426
L. Discharge such other duties as may be placed upon him by this Title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-16-3: ZONING CERTIFICATES:
A. No permit, as required by the building regulations of the Village1, shall be issued by the Village Clerk for the construction of a building,
structure or land improvement or an alteration or enlargement of an existing building, structure or land improvement and the uses
thereof, until the building inspector certifies in such permit that the application for a permit with accompanying plans and specifications
conforms with the regulations of this title.
B. When a permit is not required by the building regulations of the village for an improvement and the use thereof requiring conformance
with the regulations of this title, an application for a zoning certificate shall be filed with the building inspector. A zoning certificate shall
be issued only when the application shows conformance with the regulations of this title.
C. All applications for building permits or zoning certificates shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate drawn to scale showing the actual
dimensions of the lot or lots to be built upon, the size of the building or structure to be erected or structurally altered, its location on the
lot or lots and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these regulations. A careful record of such
applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the building inspector. The building inspector shall, in writing, approve or disapprove
all building permits or zoning certificates within thirty (30) days after submission thereof; failure to act shall be deemed approval thereof.
(Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-16-4: OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES2:
A. No building or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date hereof, and no addition to a previous existing building shall be
occupied, and no land vacant on the effective date hereof shall be used for any purpose, until an occupancy certificate has been issued
by the building inspector. No change in a use in any district shall be made until an occupancy certificate has been issued by the building
inspector. Every occupancy certificate shall state that the use or occupancy complies with all the provisions of this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-
9-1987)
B. Applications for occupancy certificates shall be made in accordance with subsection 8-2-7B of this code. (Ord. 1190-06, 11-20-2006)
C. No occupancy certificate for a building or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date of this title, shall be issued until
construction has been completed and the premises have been inspected and certified by the building inspector to be in full and
complete compliance with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning certificate was based. No addition to a previously existing
building shall be occupied, and no new use of a building in any district shall be established until the premises have been inspected and
certified by the building inspector to be in full compliance with all the applicable standards of the zoning district in which it is located.
Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate may be issued to be valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months
from its date during the completion of any addition or during partial occupancy of the premises. An occupancy certificate shall be issued,
or written notice shall be given to the applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued, not later than fourteen (14) days
after the building inspector is notified in writing that the building or premises is ready for occupancy. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-16-5: CERTIFICATES FOR CONTINUED OCCUPANCY OF NONCONFORMING USES:
Certificates for the continued occupancy of nonconforming uses existing on the effective date hereof, or made nonconforming by this title,
shall state that the use is a nonconforming one and does not conform with the provisions of this title. The building inspector shall notify the
owners of the property being used as a nonconforming use and shall furnish said owner with a certificate of occupancy for such
nonconforming use. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-16-6: APPEALS TO ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
A. Authority: The zoning board of appeals3 shall hear appeals from an administrative order, requirement or determination under this title,
made by the zoning administrator, and make its recommendation to the village board.
B. Initiation And Processing:
1. An appeal may be taken to the zoning board of appeals by any person, or by an office, department, board, bureau or commission,
aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination under this Title.
2. The appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Board of Appeals by a general rule by filing with the Village
Clerk and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. Such appeal shall be taken on forms provided
by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 353/426
3. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of
Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property. In this event, the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application and on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken, and on due causes shown.
4. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the
appeal within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Board of Appeals may recommend the
reversal or affirmation, wholly or partly, or may recommend the modification of the order, requirement, decision or determination as in
its opinion ought to be made in the situation and to that end all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
C. Decisions: All decisions of the Village Board, after hearing by and recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals from an
administrative order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Inspector, shall in all instances be final administrative
determinations and shall be subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
9-16-7: VARIATIONS:
A. Authority: The Village Board of Trustees shall decide the provisions of this Title in harmony with its general purpose and intent, and shall
vary them only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth where the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have made a finding of fact based
upon the standards hereinafter prescribed that there are practical difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of the regulations of this Title.
B. Initiation: An application for a variation may be made by any person, firm or corporation, or by any office, department, board, bureau or
commission requesting or intending to request application for a building permit, zoning certificate or occupancy certificate.
C. Processing:
1. An application for a variation shall be filed with the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall forward such application to the Zoning Board
of Appeals for processing in accordance with applicable statutes of the State of Illinois and the provisions of this Title.
2. No variation shall be recommended by the Zoning Board of Appeals except after a public hearing before the Zoning Board of
Appeals, of which there shall be a notice of time and place of the hearing published at least once, not more than thirty (30) nor less
than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within Hawthorn Woods. At the time of
the filing of an application for any variation, the applicant shall furnish to the Village Clerk a complete list containing the names and
addresses of those persons to whom were sent the tax bills for the general taxes for the last preceding year on all property located
within two hundred fifty feet (250') in each direction of the location for which the variation is requested; provided, the number of feet
occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be excluded in computing the two hundred fifty foot (250')
requirement. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear no variation application unless the applicant furnishes such information. The
Village Clerk shall, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing at which the variation is to be
considered, send written notice to the persons whose names appear on the list furnished by the applicant.
D. Decisions: All recommendations and findings of the Zoning Board of Appeals on variations arrived at after the hearing shall be
accompanied by findings of facts specifying the reason or reasons for recommending the approval or disapproval of the variation, and
the decision of the Village Board shall be final and subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable statutes of the State.
E. Standards:
1. The Board of Trustees of the Village shall not vary the provisions of this Title as authorized in this Section, unless it shall have made
findings based on the evidence presented to it and the Zoning Board of Appeals in the following cases:
a. That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the
regulations governing the district in which it is located;
b. That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; or
c. That the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
2. A variation shall be permitted only if the evidence, in the judgment of the Village Board, sustains each of the three (3) conditions
enumerated above.
3. For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the Board of Trustees, in making this determination whenever there are
practical difficulties or particular hardships, shall also take into consideration the extent to which the following facts, favorable to the
applicant, have been established by the evidence:
a. That the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved will bring a particular
hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 354/426
b. That the conditions upon which the petition for variation is based would not be applicable generally to other property within the
same zoned classification;
c. That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property;
d. That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property;
e. That the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or unduly injurious to other property or improvements
in the neighborhood in which the property is located; or,
f. That the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the
danger of fire, or otherwise endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
4. The Village Board may require such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to
comply with the standards set forth in this Section to reduce or minimize the effect of such variation upon other property in the
neighborhood, and to implement the general purpose and intent of this Title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-87)
F. Authorized Variation: Variations from the regulations of this Title shall be granted by the Village Board in accordance with the standards
set out in this Section, and may be granted in the following instances:
1. To permit up to a twenty percent (20%) reduction in the front, side or rear yard required by this Title;
2. To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of insufficient area or width of the lot or lots but in no
event shall the respective area and width of the lot be less than ninety percent (90%) of the required area and width. The percentage
set forth in this subsection is not to be reduced by any other percentage for minimum lot width and area set forth in this Title;
3. To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as required facilities for two (2) or more uses, provided the substantial uses of
such facility by each does not take place at approximately the same hours of the same days of the week;
4. To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities required by not more than one parking space or loading space, or
twenty percent (20%) of the applicable regulations, whichever number is greater;
5. To increase by not more than twenty percent (20%) the gross area of any sign;
6. To increase by not more than ten percent (10%) the maximum gross floor area of any use so limited by the applicable regulations;
7. To extend the period of time a nonconforming use may continue or remain;
8. To exceed any of the authorized variations allowed under this section, when a lot of record or a zoning lot, vacant or legally used on
the effective date of this title, is by reason of the exercise of the right of eminent domain by any authorized governmental body or by
reason of a conveyance under threat of an eminent domain proceeding reduced in size so that the remainder of said lot does not
conform with one or more of the regulations of the district in which said lot of record or zoning lot or structure is located.
G. Other Variations: Variations in excess of those listed above may be granted by the village board, but only after a public hearing as set
forth herein for an authorized variation, and a report from the zoning board of appeals recommending the variation. The concurring vote
of four (4) members of the village board shall be necessary to grant a variation. (Ord. 620-94, 12-12-1994)
9-16-8: PLAN COMMISSION DUTIES:
The plan commission of the village4, which has been duly established, is the plan commission referred to in this title, and shall have the
following duties under this title:
A. To hear all applications for amendments and special uses and thereafter submit reports of findings and recommendations thereon to the
village board in the manner prescribed in this section for amendments and special uses;
B. To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the provisions of this title, and to make reports of its recommendations to the
village board not less frequently than once each year; and
C. To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under this title. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
9-16-9: AMENDMENTS:
A. Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under the authority of this title may be amended from time to time by
ordinance in accordance with applicable statutes of this state. An amendment shall be granted or denied by the village board of trustees
only after public hearing before the plan commission and a report of its findings and recommendations has been submitted to the village
board of trustees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 355/426
B. Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the village board, by the plan commission, the zoning board of appeals,
other governmental bodies, or by any resident of or owner of property within the jurisdictional limits of this title.
C. Processing: An application for an amendment shall be filed with the village clerk and thereafter introduced to the village board of
trustees. Such application shall be forwarded from the village board to the plan commission, with a request to hold a public hearing.
Notice shall be given of the time and place of the hearing, not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, by
publishing a notice thereof at least once in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the village. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987)
D. Posting Of Notice: Any applicant requesting a change in zoning classification shall have prepared and affixed to the subject property one
or more signs on the property to which the zoning matter relates announcing that a zoning change is proposed, and directions to contact
village hall for further information. The number of signs to be posted shall be left to the discretion of the zoning administrator. In the case
of a corner lot, the sign shall be posted facing such corner. In the event that the village, or any agency thereof, is the applicant, such
sign(s) may be placed in the street right of way adjacent to the subject property. Such sign(s) shall be set in place not more than thirty
(30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the public hearing. Each sign shall be no less than two feet by three feet
(2' x 3') in size, or larger if determined by the zoning administrator, shall be set back no farther than five feet (5') from the right of way
line and shall feature lettering which is reasonably legible from the center of the street. The zoning administrator shall determine the
legibility of such lettering, and such determination shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1363-11, 4-18-2011)
9-16-10: SCHEDULE OF FEES5:
A. The village board shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses for zoning certificates, occupancy certificates, appeals,
application for amendments or special uses, and other matters pertaining to this title. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office
of the village clerk and may be altered or amended by the village board.
B. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. (Ord. 381-
87, 6-9-1987)
C. In addition to the fees, charges and expenses referenced above, prior to the review of any application for zoning variation, zoning
amendment, certificate of approval or special use permit, the applicant shall be obliged to and shall submit a draw down deposit
agreement in the form approved by the village to cover fees and costs attributable to the applicant. A sample of said agreement is set
forth in section 11-1-2 of this code. (Ord. 1167-06, 5-15-2006; amd. Ord. 1352-10, 11-15-2010)
9-16-11: VIOLATION, PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title
shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist after notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 381-87, 6-9-1987; amd. 1995 Code)
Chapter 17
TREE PRESERVATION AND LANDSCAPING
9-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
CALIPER: The diameter of a nursery grown tree or tree used for transplanting measured four inches (4") above grade for tree sizes four
inches (4") and less in size and twelve inches (12") above grade for trees over four inches (4") in size.
DBH (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT): A measurement of the diameter of a tree taken four and one-half feet (41/2') above grade.
SITE PLAN: A scaled map in plain view showing the boundaries of a site along with existing conditions of topography, vegetation, soils,
wetlands and flood plains, if applicable, along with existing structures and/or proposed structures and improvements.
TREE PRESERVATION PLAN: A scaled map which combines a tree survey and site plan together with text identified trees to be preserved
and the relative protection measures along with trees to be removed and plans for tree replacement.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village prior to removal of any protected tree, subject to requirements of this Chapter.
TREE SURVEY: A scaled map showing in plain view the location of trees identified by size, species and condition, usually prepared by a
registered land surveyor. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 356/426
9-17-2: PURPOSE:
The natural character of the Village and its environs consist of gently rolling and undulating fields interspersed with numerous wetlands and
upland forest groves. In a portion of the community there also exists remnant riparian and lake margin forests which to a large extent have
been disturbed over the years resulting in successional plant growth such as common box elder and European buckthorn competing with
willows, ash, and soft maples. Coincidentally, box elder and buckthorn are two (2) species often found invading vacant fields and mature
forest. The focus of this Chapter is on the wooded and created environments of the Village and its environs so as to minimize disturbance
and to enhance the natural character of the Village as it develops and changes pursuant to the Village Comprehensive Plan. Through
careful planning and creative design numerous benefits as stated below will be achieved:
A. Preservation in as far as practical, the existing natural vegetation of the region;
B. Preservation to the greatest degree practical of significant trees located around the periphery of properties and to a limited reasonable
extent the preservation of trees located internal to properties;
C. Preservation and creation of natural landscapes;
D. Aid in the stabilization of soil by the prevention of soil erosion and sedimentation;
E. Reduction of storm water runoff and the cost associated therewith and replenishment of ground water supplies;
F. Aid in the generation of oxygen and the removal of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere;
G. Provision of a visual and acoustical buffer between differing land uses;
H. Provision of protection against severe weather;
I. Aid in the control of drainage and restoration of denuded soil subsequent to construction or grading;
J. Provision of a habitat and food source for birds, which will assist in the control of insects;
K. Protection of property values;
L. Conservation and enhancement of the Village's physical and aesthetic environment, especially its natural and semi-rural atmosphere;
M. Prevention of the existence of trees which pose a threat, danger or nuisance to the public or to the property in the Village;
N. Provision of a transition of natural vegetation between differing uses;
O. Minimization of the harmful impact of noise, dust, motor headlight glare or other artificial light intrusions, and other objectionable
activities or impacts conducted or created by adjoining or nearby uses;
P. General protection and enhancement of the quality of life and general welfare of the Village; and
Q. Minimization of change to the natural topographic contour of the land. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997)
9-17-3: TREE PRESERVATION:
A. General Restriction On Removal Of Trees: It shall be unlawful for any person, unless otherwise permitted by the terms of this Chapter, to
remove, move, cut down or destroy or effectively destroy through damage any tree designated as a protected tree, without the prior
issuance of a tree removal permit by the Village.
B. Construction Requiring Tree Removal Permit: No work involving grading, building or other construction including septic field and
driveway installation that requires a building permit may be undertaken, and no Village permit required in connection with such work
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 357/426
shall be issued unless a tree survey and tree preservation plan have been filed with the approved by the Village.
C. Subdivision Requiring Tree Survey And Preservation Plan: No property within the Village or within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the
Village's corporate limits may be subdivided unless a tree survey and a tree preservation plan have been filed with and approved by the
Village.
D. Trimming Of Obstructive Trees, Shrubs And Bushes: Any tree, shrub or bush planted on private property which overhangs any sidewalk,
street, or other public place in the Village in such a way so as to impede or interfere with the safe movement of traffic and travel on such
place shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises or agent thereof on which such tree, shrub or bush grows or stands so that the
obstruction shall cease.
E. Removal Of Dangerous Trees And Limbs Thereof: Any tree or limb of a tree that has become likely to fall on or across any public way or
place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands with Village approval. The Village may trim
any such tree or shrub, or remove the same or any limb thereof, so that the danger or potential thereof shall cease to exist.
F. No Attachment Of Wire Or Rope To Trees, Shrubs And Bushes: It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any wire or rope to any trees
in any public street, parkway, or other public place, except with the permission of the Village. Any person or company given the right to
maintain poles and wires in the right-of-way of any public street or any other public place located in the Village shall, in the absence of
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees, in such places so far
as may be possible, and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the Village, so that no
injury shall be done to either the poles and wires or the trees, shrubs or bushes by their contact. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997)
9-17-4: TREE REMOVAL PERMITS:
A. Permit Required: Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter, any person requiring a tree removal permit shall submit a
written application to the village. All such applications shall be accompanied by the submission of both a tree survey and a tree
preservation plan to the village.
B. Applications For Tree Removal Permit: All applications for a tree removal permit shall contain the following:
1. Location of the property, including street address and legal description;
2. Applicant's name, address and telephone number;
3. The quantity, species, dbh and description of physical condition of all trees for which the applicant seeks a tree removal permit.
C. The Tree Survey: A tree survey prepared by a registered Illinois land surveyor working in cooperation with a qualified arborist, urban
forester or landscape architect shall include the following:
1. A list of all trees on the subject property (the "tree list") having a dbh of six inches (6") or greater. Such list shall include information
regarding the size, species (both common and botanical name) of each tree and a description of each tree's health and condition.
2. A site plan or survey clearly showing the location of all trees with a dbh of six inches (6") or greater on the entire property as well as
the property within the minimum required yards or setbacks of the property adjacent to the subject property. In the instance of a
proposed change in zoning or a proposed subdivision, the yards or setbacks shall be those applicable to the proposed zoning or
subdivision. Such site plan shall be capable of cross reference with the tree list prepared by the subject property. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-
1997)
3. Upon written request from the property owner, the chief operating officer may reduce the tree survey area required pursuant to the
above when it is established that major blocks of trees will not be impacted by the proposed development plans. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-
1997; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
D. Tree Preservation Plan: The tree preservation plan shall be prepared by a qualified landscape architect or urban forester accurately
drawn to scale and submitted to the village together with twenty (20) copies of the application and tree survey. The tree preservation
plan shall contain the following information:
1. The designation on the tree survey of those proposed to be moved or destroyed and a description of the condition (i.e., forked,
diseased, dead) of the trees.
2. A note within the plan specifications that all trees proposed to be moved or destroyed shall be clearly marked in the field.
3. The designation on the tree survey of those trees which might be damaged or destroyed by construction activity. The following criteria
shall apply when determining whether a tree will be or has been destroyed or damaged:
a. Operation of construction equipment within the drip line of a tree.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 358/426
b. Storage of material and/or parking of construction equipment within the drip line of a tree.
c. Excavation of earth by cut or fill; however, tunneling will be permitted.
d. Alteration of grades around the perimeter of a tree which results in a directional change to surface water which, in the opinion of the
village engineer, will adversely affect the tree.
e. Removal of existing natural ground cover, typical of forested environments, without compensation and replacement with similar
ground cover; i.e., leaf litter may be replaced with shredded hardwood mulch.
4. A description of the measure that will be taken to protect the trees during construction, including:
a. Snow fencing staked and placed securely along the drip line of the tree(s).
b. Trees with canopy extending into the construction zone shall be pruned, fertilized and watered as deemed necessary given field
conditions.
c. No limestone product or other building material shall be placed within the drip line of any tree which extends into a construction
zone and is designated for protection.
5. A description of the proposed method of tree removal.
6. The location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings, paved areas, utility lines, and utility and access easements on and
adjacent to the subject property.
7. The topography of subject property at one foot (1') contour intervals and existing floodplain areas, wetlands and surface drainage
patterns.
8. A landscape and grading plan that clearly shows the location, species and size of all existing and proposed trees consistent with the
requirements of subsection C of this section. The landscape plan shall also show on the same sheet or plan the existing and
proposed contours at one foot (1') contour intervals.
9. The number, location and planting list of trees required by this chapter and the subdivision control ordinance if applicable. The list
shall identify trees proposed for use as a street tree and those trees proposed to satisfy replacement tree requirements if applicable.
10. The ratio of deciduous to nondeciduous trees that will be located on the subject property upon completion of the project.
11. A statement of qualification of the person preparing the tree preservation plan. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997)
12. Such other data and/or information as the chief operating officer, village planner/landscape architect and the village engineer may
reasonably deem necessary to permit full and fair consideration of the application. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-
2009)
E. Village Consideration Of Tree Removal Permit Applications: The following shall apply to village consideration of all applications for a tree
removal permit: (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997)
1. The following applications for the tree removal permit shall be decided by the chief operating officer and his/her designee: (Ord. 802-
97, 8-11-1997; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
a. The application is for only one tree and no other application for tree removal has been filed for the subject property within the
previous twelve (12) months and the tree is less than sixteen inches (16") dbh; or
b. The application is for a tree or trees that are dead, diseased or disfigured due to natural causes such as wind, insects, viruses and
lightning. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997)
2. The chief operating officer or designee may authorize removal of any tree found to be hazardous to public health and safety. (Ord.
802-97, 8-11-1997; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
3. Any other application for a tree removal permit shall be decided by the village board of trustees following the review by and the
recommendation of the plan commission or any other commission or committee charged with such responsibility by the village board
of trustees. The plan commission shall review the application, tree survey and tree preservation plan and evaluate the impact upon
the preservation and protection of trees in the village, and make such recommendations to the village board as it deems necessary to
fulfill the purposes of this chapter. The plan commission may recommend denial, approval or approval of the application subject to
conditions determined to be necessary to protect the public welfare, achieve the purposes of this chapter, prevent the undue
destruction of trees, and encourage tree replacement and the planting of additional trees.
F. Criteria For Village Consideration Of Tree Preservation Plans: When considering an application for a tree removal permit, the village
board, the plan commission or any other commission or committee charged with such responsibility by the village board, shall consider
the tree preservation plan based on, but not necessarily limited to, the following criteria:
1. The general design of the proposed landscape planting layout.
2. Planting specifications, such as the appropriateness of the species and cultivates to the area.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 359/426
3. The ratio of deciduous to nondeciduous trees.
4. General environmental considerations such as floodplain and wetland issues.
5. The extent of preservation of forested land in its natural state and the reasonableness of efforts by the applicant or any other person
to retain existing trees on the subject property.
6. The appropriateness and adequacy of techniques for the preservation and protection of existing trees during construction.
7. The extent to which the existing trees contribute to the aesthetic, economic and environmental integrity of the surrounding area.
8. The nature of the existing and intended use of the property and surrounding property, and the economic feasibility of using or
developing the property if the existing trees are preserved.
G. Conditions Attached To A Tree Removal Permit: Approval of a tree removal permit and approval of a tree preservation plan may be
conditional upon the applicant's agreement to do any or all of the following as reasonably determined by the village:
1. Relocate trees which would otherwise be destroyed to another location upon the site.
2. Plant replacement trees elsewhere on the site in accordance with the tree replacement schedule contained in subsection 9-17-5C of
this chapter.
3. The posting of a performance bond, equal to the value of the work proposed in the tree preservation plan.
H. Exemptions - Tree Removal Permit Requirements: The tree removal permit and replacement requirements set forth in this chapter shall
not apply to:
1. Trees that have become, or immediately threaten to become, a hazard to persons or property.
2. Commercial nurseries or orchards.
3. Properties for which a specific landscaping or tree preservation plan has, prior to the effective date of this chapter, been approved by
the village pursuant to the terms of an annexation agreement, special use permit or other agreement or ordinance.
4. Single-family homes or lots of record of less than two (2) acres as of the effective date of this chapter and where less than five (5)
trees of twelve inches (12") or more dbh or less than ten (10) trees of six inches (6") or more dbh exist on the property. The property
owner shall provide a list of trees on the property for verification by the village prior to exemption of the tree removal permit
requirement.
5. Any property with no trees with a dbh of six inches (6") or more in the construction area as verified by the village engineer. The
"construction area" shall mean that portion of the site on which grading, construction or compaction of the soil will or is likely to occur
including septic field area and driveways.
6. The removal of trees that are not protected trees.
I. Exemptions From Tree Survey And Tree Preservation Plan Submission Requirements: Single-family or lots of record shall be exempted
from having to provide a tree survey and tree preservation plan. Applicants shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter, unless
otherwise provided herein.
J. Neighbor Notification: Whenever a protected tree is located within fifty feet (50') of an applicant's property line and is proposed for
removal the applicant shall notify the owner of contiguous property of the intention to remove said tree. Such notice shall be given at
least fifteen (15) days prior to removal of the tree. A certified return address receipt or affidavit signed by the applicant stating he has
informed the neighbor of his intent to remove said tree shall be deemed appropriate notice in satisfying this requirement. Application
involving trees located further within the property shall not be required to notify adjacent property owners unless as part of a normal
zoning or subdivision review process. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997)
9-17-5: PROTECTED TREES, REPLACEMENT TREE SPECIES AND REPLACEMENT TREE SCHEDULE:
A. Protected Trees: For the purposes of this chapter, the following trees having a dbh larger than six inches (6") are designated as
"protected trees":
Common Name
Scientific Name
Cherry, black Prunus seotina
Coffee tree Gynocadus dioicus
Fir, douglas Pseudotsuga species
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 360/426
Fir, white Abies concolor
Hackberry, common Celtis occidentalis
Hemlock Tsuga canadensis
Hickory, shagbark Carya ovata
Linden Tilia species
Locust, thornless honey and cultivars Gleditsia triacanthos
Maple (excluding silver maple
similar softwood species)
Acer species
Oak Quercus species
Pine Pinus species
Spruce Picea species
(Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997; amd. Ord. 1374-11, 9-19-2011)
B. Replacement Tree Species:
1. Replacement Shade/Canopy Trees:
a. The following tree species are designated as replacement shade/canopy trees for the purposes of this chapter:
Trees known to achieve a height of forty five feet (45') or greater at maturity and have been found adaptable to climate conditions
consistent with those of Hawthorn Woods. This condition being hardiness zone 4 (winter temperatures -30 to -20 degrees
Fahrenheit) as established by the United States department of agriculture.
b. Trees which are not acceptable for use as replacement are as follows:
Common Name
Scientific Name
Box elder Acer negundo
Silver maple Acer saccharinum
Tree of heaven Ailanthus altissima
Female ginkgo tree Ginkgo biloba - female
Thorned honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos
Lombardy poplar Populus nigra
Black cottonwood Populus trichocarpa
Siberian elm Ulmus pumila
c. Replacement shade/canopy trees shall have a minimum caliper of three inches (3").
2. Equivalent Replacement Ornamental Understory Trees:
a. For the purposes of this chapter the following tree species are designated as equivalent replacement ornamental understory trees:
Deciduous trees known to achieve a mature height of twenty feet (20') to forty five feet (45') at maturity and have been found
adaptable to climatic conditions of Hawthorn Woods. Such conditions being hardiness zone 4 (winter temperatures -30 to -20
degrees Fahrenheit) established by the United States department of agriculture.
b. Ornamental understory trees which are not acceptable for use as a replacement tree are as follows:
Common Name
Scientific Name
Osage-orange Maclura pomifera
Buckthorn Rhamnus cathartica
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 361/426
c. Replacement ornamental understory trees shall have a minimum caliper of two inches (2") or a minimum height of six feet (6') if
multistemmed.
d. The required number of equivalent replacement ornamental understory trees shall be computed on the following basis:
Two (2) replacement ornamental understory trees = one replacement shade/canopy tree.
3. Equivalent Replacement Evergreen Trees:
a. For the purposes of this chapter the following tree species are designated as equivalent replacement evergreen trees:
Common Name
Scientific Name
Fir, douglas Pseudotsuga menziesii
Fir, white Abies cancolor
Hemlock, Canadian Tsuga canadensis
Pine, Austrian Pinus nigra
Pine, Scotch* Pinus sylvestris*
Pine, white Pinus strobus
Spruce, Black Hills Picea glauca densata
Spruce, Colorado Blue Picea pungens glauca
Spruce, Colorado Green Picea pungens
Spruce, Norway Picea abies
*Discouraged due to potential of bore attack to roots which is presently not treatable.
b. Equivalent replacement evergreen trees shall have a minimum size of six feet (6') in height.
c. The required number of equivalent replacement evergreen trees shall be computed on the following basis:
One and one-half (1.5) replacement evergreen trees between six (6) and eight feet (8') in height = One replacement shade/canopy
tree
or,
One replacement evergreen tree eight feet (8') and over in height = One replacement shade/canopy tree.
C. Tree Replacement Schedule:
1. Protected trees removed subject to the provisions of this Chapter shall be replaced according to the following schedule:
Diameter Of
Removed Trees
Required Replacement
Shade/Canopy Trees
6-9 inches 2
10-12 inches 4
13-15 inches 6
16-20 inches 8
21-25 inches 9
26 or more inches 11
2. The size of required replacement shade/canopy trees and number and size of equivalent replacement ornamental/understory and
evergreen trees shall be as set out in subsection B of this Section. Trees measured in any fraction shall be rounded to the next
highest whole number for the purposes of determining the number of required replacement trees.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 362/426
3. The total number of required replacement trees may be less than that required in the tree replacement schedule provided that the
total caliper of all combined replacement trees is equal to or greater than that which would be required by the strict application of the
tree replacement schedule. For example, the removal of two (2) protected trees each with a DBH of twelve inches (12") requires eight
(8) replacement shade/canopy trees or equivalent with a minimum diameter of three inches (3") pursuant to subsection B of this
Section. The total caliper of the required replacement trees is therefore twenty four inches (24"). The Village may instead permit four
(4) shade/canopy trees to be planted each with a diameter of six inches (6").
4. At least sixty percent (60%) of required replacement trees shall be selected from the replacement tree list of the category of tree or
trees being removed. For example, the removal of two (2) protected ten (10) to twelve inch (12") caliper diameter trees requires eight
(8) replacement trees or equivalent trees. At least five (5) of the replacement trees must be comprised of shade/canopy trees and the
remainder of the required plantings may be made up of either or both ornamental understory or evergreen trees.
5. The Village may authorize the applicant to plant fewer trees than required by the tree replacement schedule, as long as such
replacement is in keeping with good forestry practices as determined by the Plan Commission, under the following circumstances:
a. There is not sufficient space available on the subject property to plant the number of replacement trees required by this Chapter; or
b. Due to a catastrophic loss or natural disaster, the number of replacement trees required by this Chapter would cause undue
financial hardship to the owner of the subject property.
6. The applicant shall not be required to replace protected trees removed under the following circumstances:
a. Trees that have died as the result of natural causes, disease, virus, infestation or act of God. The applicant shall notify the Village
in writing of the dead tree or trees and the Village shall have adequate time, but no longer than seven (7) business days after
receipt of the notification, to verify the death of the tree or trees.
b. Trees that need to be culled, pursuant to proper forestry practice, in order to prolong and enhance the lives of surrounding trees.
The applicant must submit a written statement or plan prepared by a qualified landscape architect or urban forester detailing that
culling is necessary to maintain and prolong the life of the applicant's existing trees.
c. Trees required to be removed for the construction of a house.
7. Trees required to be planted according to the Village's Subdivision Control Ordinance, or Section 9-17-6 of this Chapter shall not be
considered replacement trees. However, the Plan Commission may allow credit for the preservation of existing trees on the subject
site toward meeting the landscape planting requirements of the Village's Subdivision Control Ordinance and Section 9-17-6 of this
Chapter, as well as credit for increasing the minimum size of required trees.
8. Where an applicant seeks to move an existing tree from its location to another location on the subject site, and make provisions for
proper tree location and planting practices, the Village shall not require additional replacement tree plantings for said relocated tree,
provided that the applicant demonstrates a reasonable probability that the said tree shall survive. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997)
9-17-6: LANDSCAPE PLAN AND PLANTING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Applicability: A "landscape plan" shall be filed with the Village at the time of filing of an application for a building permit for any project
that requires an application under the Architectural Review Commission provisions of the Village Code.
B. Noneffect On Village Subdivision Control Regulation Ordinance Requirements: None of the landscape plan and planting requirement
provisions of this Chapter shall in any way affect any of the planting or other landscape plan requirements of the Village's Subdivision
Control Ordinance.
C. Content Of Landscape Plan: Any landscape plan submitted to the Village for review shall be prepared by a qualified landscape architect,
be of the same scale as the site plan and/or preliminary plat, and shall contain or have attached to it the following information:
1. A scale, date and north arrow.
2. Name and address of the applicant and the name of the project.
3. Name, address, telephone number and qualifications of the person preparing the plan.
4. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, parking lots and drives, roadways and rights-of-way, sidewalks,
bicycle paths, ground signs and refuse disposal areas, and, any other proposed improvements to the site.
5. To the extent known, the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, parking lots and drives, roadways, and
rights-of-way, sidewalks, bicycle paths, ground signs and refuse disposal areas, and, any other pertinent information for the adequate
consideration of the plan by the Village on property adjacent to the subject site.
6. The location, quantity, size and species (both common and scientific names) of all proposed plant materials including ground cover.
7. Existing and proposed topography with contours at one foot (1') intervals.
8. Elevations, location and description of construction materials of all buildings and other forms of enclosure on the property.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 363/426
9. A full description of the manner in which existing trees that will be preserved (if any) and site will be protected during construction.
10. Such other data and/or information as the Village Planner/Landscape Architect and the Village Engineer may reasonably deem
necessary to permit full and fair consideration of the landscape plan.
D. Landscape Planting Requirements:
1. Single-family homes that require a permit from the Architectural Review Commission shall comply with the landscaping provisions as
established by the Architectural Review Commission.
2. For all other development one shade/canopy tree a minimum caliper of three inches (3") or equivalent substitute plantings shall be
provided on the lot for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of required open space on any development lot as required in the
Village Zoning Ordinance for the Zoning District in which the subject lot is located. Such required landscape planting shall not apply to
interior open space areas devoted to athletic fields, agricultural fields, septic fields and similar interior open space uses that may limit
interior landscaping opportunities. For the purposes of this Section, the minimum number and size equivalent substitute plantings
shall be computed on the following basis:
a. Equivalent ornamental/understory trees shall have a minimum diameter of two inches (2") or a minimum height of six feet (6') if
multi-stemmed.
Two (2) ornamental shade/canopy trees = One shade/canopy tree.
b. Equivalent evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height.
The required number of equivalent evergreen trees shall be computed on the following basis:
One and one-half (1.5) evergreen trees between six (6) and eight feet (8') in height = One shade/canopy tree
or,
One evergreen tree eight feet (8') and over in height = One shade/canopy tree.
c. Eight (8) evergreen shrubs at least two feet (2') in height = One shade/canopy tree
Ten (10) deciduous shrubs at least three feet (3') in height = One shade/canopy tree
Fifteen (15) flowering shrubs at least two feet (2') in diameter/height = One shade/canopy tree.
d. Five hundred (500) square feet of ground cover tree = One shade/canopy tree.
3. All plant material indicated on the submitted landscape plan shall be contained in the Village's approved landscape planting list as set
out in subsection E of this Section.
4. No more than ten percent (10%) of the required plantings shall be comprised of equivalent substitute ground cover plantings.
5. Larger shade/canopy trees may be substituted for the minimum caliper of three inches (3") provided that the total caliper of all
combined required shade/canopy tree plantings is equal to or greater than that which would be required by the strict application of the
minimum shade/canopy planting requirements of this subsection. For example, two (2) required three inch (3") caliper shade trees
may be substituted without penalty by one six inch (6") caliper shade/canopy tree. Such substitution in the size of shade/canopy trees
is particularly encouraged in prominent locations on the site to increase the aesthetic value of the landscape plantings immediately
following installation.
6. A diverse mixture of trees and other plant material is generally encouraged throughout the site to provide an aesthetically pleasing
and interesting landscape. No single species of deciduous or evergreen planting shall represent more than forty percent (40%) of all
required landscape material except where such a concentration is required to comply with the tree preservation provisions of Section
9-17-5 of this Chapter, or where the applicant successfully demonstrates that a more interesting landscape would result if the strict
application of this provision were not followed.
7. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) but not more than forty percent (40%) of all required plantings shall be comprised of equivalent
substitute evergreen tree plantings subject to the tree preservation provisions of Section 9-17-5 of this Chapter.
8. Shade/canopy tree species must represent at least twenty five percent (25%) of the required shade/canopy tree equivalents.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 364/426
9. Clustering of landscape material is encouraged to accomplish the following:
a. Soften the visual impact of the mass of a particular structure;
b. Soften and visually divide larger expanses of parking; and
c. Harmonize nonresidential uses with the prevailing residential character of the area, provided that all of the required plantings are
situated on the same lot.
10. If natural resource limitations, such as flood plains, wetlands or other natural conditions, are not conducive to satisfying the planting
requirements of this Chapter, then the Village may approve the installation of the required plantings on adjacent sites.
11. Trees and other landscape material shall be placed so as to provide a buffer between parking areas and the street, and between a
nonresidential use and a residential use or a lot zoned for a residential use.
12. Existing healthy trees shall be preserved if possible in addition to the tree preservation requirements of this Chapter.
13. Landscape material shall be placed so as not to impair visibility at driveways and street intersections or in locations that could
otherwise potentially pose a threat to highway safety. The mature size of the plants should be afforded due consideration in this
regard.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 365/426
14. Fences, hedgerows and berms may be permitted and shall be required in certain instances, subject to Village approval, to screen
nonresidential land uses from adjacent residential uses or a lot zoned for residential use. Said fences and/or berms shall be required
where topographic conditions, building features including loading facilities, lighting, waste disposal and other similar features, site
features such as parking circulation location and others create lines of sight or noise potential that support the need for fencing or
berming. Fencing or berming shall be in addition to landscape planting requirements.
15. Planting design requirements shall include such criteria as established in the Architectural Review Commission criteria for issuance
of a certificate of approval.
E. Approved Landscape Planting List:
1. Shade/Canopy Trees: Landscape plant material selected for use shall be plant species found adaptable to climatic conditions of
Hawthorn Woods and generally found growing in hardiness Zone 4 (winter temperature lows -20 to -30 degrees Fahrenheit)
established by the United States Department of Agriculture.
Trees listed in subsection 9-17-5B1b and B2b as unacceptable shall not be considered suitable along with the other plant deemed as
being unsuitable for a given location or purpose, provided a reasonable alternative exists.
F. Parking Lot Landscape Design Criteria: Every nonresidential parking lot shall be landscaped according to the following design criteria:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 366/426
1. Provide a minimum of ten percent (10%) landscaped area within the parking lot and access isles (see above illustration).
2. Provide a minimum of fifty foot (50') landscaped setback between the parking lot and adjacent residential uses or residentially zoned
lots and adjacent driveways and public rights-of-way.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 367/426
3. Provide landscape planting island(s) with a minimum area of one hundred eighty (180) square feet, spaced no further than one
hundred feet (100') apart, having a minimum length of seventeen feet (17') and minimum width of nine feet (9') and, containing at
least one shade/canopy tree equivalent number of substitute plantings for each row of parking spaces. Two (2) shade trees per three
hundred sixty (360) square feet of islands.
4. Provide low screening such as dense evergreen shrubs or low berming to prevent vehicle headlight spillover onto adjacent residential
or residentially zoned lots or onto adjacent streets/public rights-of-way.
5. Accommodate snow removal storage/stacking areas.
6. Provide for the preservation of existing healthy trees where possible.
7. Provide for an eight foot (8') landscaped strip between parking spaces and the face of a building or a ten foot (10') strip in cases
where said strip contains a sidewalk.
8. Parking lot plantings must be those varieties capable of withstanding extreme temperatures, drought, air pollution, high salinity, oil
pollution and physical damage caused by human activity. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997)
9-17-7: INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE, FEES, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Installation And Maintenance Of Landscape Material:
1. All landscape material shall be installed in accordance with the procedures established by the American Association of Nurserymen.
2. Any tree or shrub required to be planted as a condition of this Chapter shall conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock as
approved by the American Standards Institute, Inc., and live for a period of not less than three (3) years following installation. The
Village may require the property owner to replace trees or shrubs that do not live a minimum of three (3) years following installation.
3. The owner of the subject property shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscape materials and
means of enclosure, including refuse disposal screening as may be required by the provisions of this chapter.
4. All landscape materials shall be of specimen quality, maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly
appearance, shall be replaced as necessary, and shall be kept free of refuse and debris.
5. Where allowed, fences, walls and other means of enclosure shall be maintained in good repair. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997)
B. Fees And Penalties:
1. Applications for a tree removal permit shall be accompanied by: a) a tree removal permit application fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per
tree that is to be removed and b) a one hundred dollar ($100.00) village landscape architect review fee; provided, however, that no
fees shall be required for trees removed pursuant to subsection 9-17-5C6 of this chapter.
2. The applicant shall, at the time of either: a) issuance of a tree removal permit, as related to a tree preservation plan, or b) issuance of
a building permit, as related to a landscape plan, or both a) and b), provide an escrow letter of credit in the amount of one hundred
fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost of: a) completing all of the plantings indicated on the approved tree replacement plan or b)
as indicated on the approved landscape plan, respectively. The letters of credit shall be in a form approved by the village, and the
letters of credit shall be provided for a period of not less than three (3) years, but shall be extended as necessary to cover the
completion of construction or tree replacement. Single-family homes or lots of record shall be exempt from having to provide an
escrow letter of credit under this subsection.
3. A landscape plan submitted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
4. Fees for on site inspection to determine compliance with this chapter as conducted by the village landscape architect, or his or her
designee, shall be charged to the permittee at a rate of forty dollars ($40.00) per dwelling unit inspected (or $75.00 per hour, or
fraction thereof, for nonresidential properties including open spaces, parks, golf courses, parkways and perimeter buffers).
5. Any permit issued under this chapter shall be revoked or suspended if the permit holder violates the terms and conditions of the
permit or any other provisions of this chapter.
6. Any person who removes or causes a tree to be removed or damaged other than as permitted by this chapter shall be fined one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per inch of dbh of every tree that had been removed or damaged other than as permitted by this chapter,
up to the maximum fine permitted by Illinois law. In the event that a tree is removed or damaged other than as permitted by this
chapter and the size of the removed or damaged tree cannot be determined, a fine of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per tree
shall be imposed.
7. Fees required herein shall be in addition to any other fees as required in section 11-1-1 of this code. (Ord. 1135-05, 8-15-2005)
C. Enforcement, Inspections And Prior Damage:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 368/426
1. Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the chief operating officer with such advice and assistance
as may be required by the village engineer and the village landscape architect. Upon request of the village, the village landscape
architect shall review plans and permit applications, make inspections and make recommendations to the plan commission. (Ord.
1135-05, 8-15-2005; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
2. The village landscape architect, or his or her designee, shall, as necessary, conduct inspections and surveys to determine the
existence, nature and extent of compliance with this chapter. A copy of the approved tree removal plan or landscape plan and all
applicable permits shall be kept at the site during the time that work is underway and the village landscape architect, or his or her
designee, shall make whatever inspections are required to ensure compliance with this chapter. The schedule of inspections shall be
determined at the time of granting of the tree removal permit or landscape plan. (Ord. 1135-05, 8-15-2005)
3. Where it is determined that the precautions as specified in the tree preservation plan or landscape plan are not undertaken before
construction is commenced or are not maintained at any time during construction, or where it is determined that the site work does
not comply with the tree removal permit or landscape plan, the chief operating officer, or his or her designee, or the village landscape
architect, or his or her designee, may issue a stop work order until such time as the permittee complies with such requirements.
Furthermore, no certificates of occupancy shall be issued for the affected property until after such compliance occurs. (Ord. 1135-05,
8-15-2005; amd. Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
4. If in the determination of the village landscape architect it is reasonable to infer that damage or destruction of trees was effected so as
to avoid the requirements of this chapter, the village may require the replacement or repair of any such destroyed or damaged trees in
addition to any other tree or landscape plantings required by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1135-05, 8-15-2005)
D. Variations: Whenever an applicant has a hardship or seeks relief from this regulation an application for variation may be filed under the
zoning variation procedures established in section 9-16-7 of this title. In addition, variations may also be granted as part of a special use
permit process when it is determined an exceptional design or unique character is created which is consistent with the village
comprehensive plan and/or community goals. (Ord. 802-97, 8-11-1997)
E. Nonliability Of Village: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the village or upon any of its
officers or employees nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep any trees and shrubs upon private property
or under his/her control, including unauthorized planting of trees and shrubs in the village right of way, in a safe and healthy condition.
(Ord. 1449-13, 4-15-2013)
Chapter 18
SOLAR ENERGY
ARTICLE A. SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
9-18A-1: INTENT:
A. The intent of these standards is to allow for the safe and effective development of solar energy systems that reduce the on-site
consumption of fossil fuels or utility supplied electric energy throughout the Village of Hawthorn Woods. These regulations are intended
to encourage the use of local renewable energy resources and promote sustainable building design and management practices. (Ord.
1791-17, 10-23-2017)
9-18A-2: DEFINITIONS:
GLARE: The sensation of brightness within the visual field which causes annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual performance and visibility.
PHOTOVOLTAIC CELL: A semiconductor device that converts solar energy into electricity.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: An active solar energy system that converts solar energy directly into electricity.
RENEWABLE ENERGY EASEMENT, SOLAR ENERGY EASEMENT: An easement that limits the height or location, or both, of permissible
development on the burdened land in terms of a structure or vegetation, or both, for the purpose of providing access for the benefited land
to wind or sunlight passing over the burdened land.
SOLAR ACCESS: A property owner's right to have unobstructed access to direct sunlight on a lot or building through the entire year,
including access across adjacent parcel air rights, for the purpose of capturing direct sunlight to operate a solar energy system.
SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device, structure or a part of a device or structure for which the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant
energy into thermal, mechanical, chemical or electrical energy.
SOLAR COLLECTOR SURFACE: Any part of a solar collector that absorbs solar energy for use in the collector's energy transformation
process. Collector surface does not include frames, supports and mounting hardware.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 369/426
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES): A system for which the primary purpose is to convert solar energy into thermal, mechanical or electrical
energy for storage and use and reduce on-site consumption of utility power.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ACTIVE: A solar energy system whose primary purpose is to harvest energy by transforming solar energy into
another form of energy or transferring heat from a collector to another medium using mechanical, electrical or chemical means.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-INTEGRATED: A solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building,
rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural part of the building. Building-integrated
systems include, but are not limited to, photovoltaic or hot water systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, skylights,
awnings, shading devices and similar architectural components.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING-MOUNTED: A solar energy system that is mounted on the roof of a principal building or accessory
structure or facade.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, FLUSH-MOUNTED: A solar energy system that is mounted flush with a finished surface, at no more than
twelve inches (12") in height above that surface.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, FREESTANDING OR GROUND-MOUNTED: A solar energy system not attached to another structure and is
ground mounted on a rack or pole that is attached to the ground.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, JOINT: A solar energy collector or storage mechanism that supplies energy for structures or processes on
more than one lot or in more than one dwelling unit or leasehold, but not to the general public and involves at least two (2) owners or users.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, OFF GRID: A photovoltaic solar energy system in which the circuits energized by the solar energy system are
not electrically connected in any way to electric circuits that are served by an electric utility company.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, PASSIVE: A solar energy system that captures solar light or heat without transforming it to another form of
energy or transferring the energy via a heat exchanger.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF-MOUNTED: A solar energy system mounted on a rack that is fastened to or ballasted on a building
roof.
SOLAR FARM: A commercial facility that converts sunlight into electricity, whether by photovoltaics (PV), concentrating solar thermal
devices (CST), or other conversion technology, for the primary purpose of wholesale sales of generated electricity.
SOLAR GARDEN: A commercial solar-electric (photovoltaic) array that provides retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail power) to
multiple households or businesses residing or located off-site from the location of the solar energy system.
SOLAR HEAT EXCHANGER: A component of a solar energy device that is used to transfer heat from one substance to another, either
liquid or gas.
SOLAR MOUNTING DEVICES: Racking, frames, or other devices that allow the mounting of a solar collector onto a roof surface or the
ground.
SOLAR PANEL: A group of photovoltaic cells are assembled on a panel. Panels are assembled on-site into solar arrays.
SOLAR RESOURCE: A view of the sun from a specific point on a lot or building that is not obscured by any vegetation, building, or object
for a minimum of four (4) hours between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M. standard time on all days of the
year.
SOLAR SKYSPACE: The maximum three-dimensional space extending from a solar collector to all positions of the sun necessary for
efficient use of the collector.
A. Where a solar energy system is used for heating purposes only, solar skyspace shall mean the maximum three-dimensional space
extending from a solar energy collector to all positions of the sun between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M. local
apparent time from September 22 through March 22 of each year.
B. Where a solar energy system is used for cooling purposes only, solar skyspace shall mean the maximum three-dimensional space
extending from a solar collector to all positions of the sun between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. local apparent
time from March 23 through September 21 of each year.
SOLAR SKYSPACE EASEMENT: A right, expressed as an easement, covenant, condition, restriction or other property interest in any deed,
will or other instrument executed by or on behalf of any landowner or in any order of taking, appropriate to protect the solar skyspace of a
solar collector at a particularly described location to forbid or limit any or all of the following where detrimental to access to solar energy:
structures on or above ground; vegetation on or above ground; or other activities. Such right shall specifically describe a solar skyspace in
three-dimensional terms in which the activity, structures or vegetation are forbidden or limited or in which such an easement shall set
performance criteria for adequate collections of solar energy at a particular location.
SOLAR STORAGE MECHANISM: Equipment or elements such as piping and transfer mechanisms, containers, heat exchangers or
controls thereof and gases, solids, liquids or combinations thereof that are utilized for storing solar energy, gathered by a solar collector, for
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 370/426
subsequent use.
SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEM: A system that includes a solar collector and a heat exchanger that heats or preheats water for building
heating systems or other hot water needs, including residential domestic hot water and hot water for commercial processes. (Ord. 1791-17,
10-23-2017)
9-18A-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND INFORMATION:
A. Permitted Systems; Requirements: Solar energy systems (SES) are permitted in any zoning district, unless otherwise specified in this
article, provided that all building permit requirements and general regulations are met including the Building Code, Zoning Code and the
requirements referenced herein.
B. Prohibited Systems: The following shall be prohibited in all zoning districts: freestanding or ground-mounted solar energy system, solar
farm, and solar garden.
C. Accessory Structure: SESs are permitted as accessory structures as detailed in this article.
D. On-Site Use: Energy produced through the solar energy system shall be utilized on site; however, the energy output may be delivered to
a power grid.
E. Utility Provider Notification: Written evidence must be provided at the time a building permit is requested that the utility company has
been notified of the customer's intent to install a solar energy system.
F. Glare: Installation of the solar collection system shall not adversely impact adjacent properties. A solar collection device or combination
of devices shall be designed and located to avoid glare or reflection onto adjacent properties, businesses, residential homes and
adjacent roadways and shall not interfere with traffic or create a safety hazard. All solar energy systems using a reflector to enhance
solar production shall minimize glare from the reflector that impacts adjacent or nearby properties.
G. Emergency Disconnect: An external disconnect switch, readily accessible by emergency responders, and which is clearly identifiable
and unobstructed, shall be provided to disconnect power at the solar panel.
H. Tree Removal: Tree removal shall be minimized. If trees or vegetation are to be removed or reduced to allow for the proper functioning
of an SES, adherence to the Village's tree preservation ordinance will be required, which may include the replacement of trees.
I. Additional Height: Additional height may be requested through the variation process outlined in section 9-16-7 of this title.
J. Review: In reviewing the request for additional height, such factors as height of the system in relationship to existing and potential
structures, manmade or natural, and their impact on the system's efficacy shall be considered.
K. Arrangement: Where feasible, solar collector units shall be consolidated into array groupings located toward the center of the roof, rather
than situated in a disjointed manner.
L. Building Permit Required: No solar energy system (SES) shall be constructed or installed without first obtaining a building permit.
M. Approved Solar Components: Electric solar energy system components must have an Underwriters Laboratory (UL) listing or approved
equivalent and solar hot water systems must have a Solar Rating and Certification Corporation (SRCC) rating.
N. Compliance With Building Code: All solar energy systems shall meet approval of local Building Code officials, consistent with Village of
Hawthorn Woods' current adopted codes; and solar thermal systems shall comply with HVAC-related requirements of the current edition
of the International Energy Conservation Code as adopted by the State of Illinois.
O. Compliance With National Electrical Code (NEC): All photovoltaic systems shall comply with the current edition of the National Electrical
Code (NEC) adopted by the Village.
P. Compliance With State Plumbing Code: Solar thermal systems shall comply with applicable State of Illinois Plumbing Code
requirements. (Ord. 1791-17, 10-23-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 371/426
9-18A-4: BUILDING-MOUNTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
A. Building-Mounted Solar Energy Systems: Building-mounted solar energy systems shall be developed according to the following
parameters. Refer to section 9-18B-1, figures 1 through 3 of this chapter.
1. Residential:
a. Location: Building-mounted systems are permitted in the following locations:
(1) Principal and accessory structures. Solar collection panels shall be allowed on the roof of only the principal structure of the
property and must be mounted flush with the slope of the roof to ensure the lowest profile permissible per manufacturer
specifications. If solar shingles are integral to the roof of the structure on which they are installed, then they may be installed on
any roof face of accessory structures. Solar collection devices shall not be constructed on any part of the vertical portion of a
mansard roof.
b. Orientation: Panels shall be oriented to maximize solar access.
c. Height: Height is measured from the roof surface, on which the solar collection device is mounted, to the highest edge of the
system. Refer to section 9-18B-1, figure 1 of this chapter.
(1) Sloping Roof: Solar energy systems shall be mounted flush with the roof, shall not have a highest finished pitch steeper than the
roof pitch on which the system is mounted, and the surface of the collector shall not extend any further than twelve inches (12")
from the roof surface at any point. No portion of the solar collectors shall extend beyond the ridgeline of the roof at any point. The
total height of the building, including the solar collection devices, shall comply with the height regulations of the zoning district.
(2) Flat Roof: Solar collection devices mounted on a flat roof may be oriented to achieve maximum sun exposure but shall not
exceed two feet (2') in overall height, or extend above the building parapet. No such mounted panel shall exceed the height
regulations of the zoning district.
d. Projection: The collector surface and mounting devices for building-mounted solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the roof
edge or the exterior perimeter of the principal structure.
e. Roof Access: Building-mounted solar energy systems shall allow for adequate roof access for fire-fighting purposes.
2. Nonresidential:
a. Location: Building-mounted systems are permitted in the following locations:
(1) Principal and accessory structures.
(2) Any roof face, with the exception of mansard roofs.
(3) Side and rear building facades.
(4) Front or corner building facades, if the following conditions are met:
(A) Solar access is optimized on the front and corner facades.
(B) Systems are simultaneously used to shade the structure's windows. Refer to section 9-18B-1, figures 2 and 3 of this chapter.
b. Orientation: Panels shall be oriented to maximize solar access.
c. Height: Height is measured from the roof surface, on which the system is mounted, to the highest edge of the system. Refer to
section 9-18B-1, figure 1 of this chapter.
(1) Sloping Roof: Solar collection devices mounted on a sloping roof shall be mounted parallel to the roof whenever possible, and
shall not exceed a height of fifteen inches (15") above the ridge of the roof. No such mounted panel shall exceed the maximum
permitted height of the structure.
(2) Flat Roof: Solar collection devices mounted on a flat roof may be angled to achieve maximum sun exposure but shall not
exceed eight feet (8') in overall height, or extend above the building parapet whichever results in less height. Solar collection
devices shall be consolidated into array groupings located toward the center of the roof, where feasible, rather than situated in a
disjointed manner. No such mounted panel shall exceed the maximum permitted height regulations of the zoning district.
d. Projection: The collector surface and mounting devices for building-mounted solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the
exterior perimeter of the building on which the system is mounted or built, unless the collector and mounting system has been
explicitly engineered to safely extend beyond the roof edge or building facade as follows. Refer to section 9-18B-1, figure 2 of this
chapter on how to measure projection.
(1) May project up to four feet (4') from a building facade or roof edge provided the systems are simultaneously used to shade the
structure's windows.
(2) May project into a side or rear setback, but shall be no closer than five feet (5') to the side or rear property line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 372/426
e. Roof Access: Building-mounted solar energy systems shall allow for adequate roof access for fire-fighting purposes. (Ord. 1791-17,
10-23-2017)
9-18A-5: SOLAR ACCESS PROTECTION:
A. Solar Access:
1. Creation Of Easements: Solar access easements across contiguous or nearby lots, tracts, or land may be created to establish a
window of exposure to the sun so as to protect an existing or intended solar collector's exposure to the sun from obstruction of
buildings and trees.
a. Such easements may be purchased, reserved, granted, or otherwise obtained.
b. Adverse possession cannot create such an easement.
c. An easement infringed upon is a compensable property right through private remedy.
2. Recording Of Easements: Solar access easements shall be recorded with the Lake County Recorder of Deeds and filed with the
Community Development Department.
3. Construction In Easement Areas: Any person seeking a building permit to construct or modify any structure or building so as to
increase the consumption of airspace over that lot shall certify in writing that no solar access easement exists over that lot.
4. Denial Of Permit: Should the Community Development Department determine that the proposed construction would intrude upon the
easement, no building permit shall be granted. (Ord. 1791-17, 10-23-2017)
9-18A-6: DECOMMISSIONING:
A. An SES that is visibly damaged or not capable of operating for a period exceeding thirty (30) consecutive days shall be deemed
abandoned. The owner of an abandoned SES and the owner of the property on which the SES is located shall cause either: 1) the SES
to be repaired and made operable within ninety (90) days after receipt of a notice of abandonment from the Village; or 2) the removal of
all SES structures and facilities within ninety (90) days after receipt of a notice of abandonment from the Village.
B. Any abandoned SES that is not removed within ninety (90) days after receipt of a notice of abandonment shall be deemed a public
nuisance, which nuisance the Village shall have the right, but not the obligation, to: 1) summarily abate by removing such system at the
joint and several expense of the owners of the system and of the property on which the system is located; or 2) address through other
means. In the case of such removal, the Village shall have the right, but not the obligation, to file a lien for reimbursement of any and all
expenses incurred by the Village in connection with the SES removal and related roof repair, including, without limitation, attorney fees
and accrued interest.
C. Upon removal of the SES, the owner of record of the subject property shall restore that portion of the subject property on which the
system was installed in accordance with the standards required by the Village's then-current applicable codes. (Ord. 1791-17, 10-23-
2017)
9-18A-7: PENALTY:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
day during, or upon which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1791-17, 10-23-2017)
ARTICLE B. SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM FIGURES
9-18B-1: FIGURES:
FIGURE 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 373/426
FIGURE 2
FIGURE 3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 374/426
(Ord. 1791-17, 10-23-2017)
Title 10
LAND SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL SUBDIVISION PROVISIONS
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE FOR THE VILLAGE OF
HAWTHORN WOODS, ILLINOIS, and is adopted pursuant to the authorization of chapter 65 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 439-89,
12-11-1989)
10-1-2: PURPOSE:
A. The purpose and intent of this title is to provide reasonable regulations for the design of subdivisions and resubdivisions of unimproved
land and of areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public improvements and for the establishment of reasonable requirements for
the location, width, course and surfacing of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service facilities, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, streetlights, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, stormwater drainage, water
supply distribution, sanitary sewers and sewage collection and treatment and the further development of standards to lessen the
hazards of flood and to prevent or limit the construction of structures in areas prone to flooding.
B. All such rules, regulations and requirements are deemed to be nominal requirements for the preservation and promotion of the health,
safety, welfare and convenience of the village and adjacent areas. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
10-1-3: JURISDICTION:
A. This title is adopted pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-5, and shall apply to the subdivision and resubdivision of property
and to planned unit developments pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city1, located or to be located within the corporate limits of the
village and to property located within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits of the village, provided said property is not
located within the corporate limits of any other municipality.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 375/426
B. Should the village enter into a boundary agreement with any other municipality having a valid comprehensive plan, then the terms and
provisions of this title shall apply within such adjacent unincorporated areas as provided in any applicable boundary agreement.
C. Notwithstanding any provision contained in this title to the contrary, the exemption from compliance with this title and the subdivision act2
as provided for by paragraph 205/1(b)9 of said act shall not be applicable to any division or partitioning of land subject to the jurisdiction
of the village. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
10-1-4: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A. No person shall subdivide or resubdivide land, or create a planned unit development, subject to the jurisdiction of the village, without
having first complied with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. 1995 Code)
B. Prior to the review of any proposed subdivision, resubdivision or planned unit development, the applicant shall submit an executed draw
down deposit agreement in the form approved by the village. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. 1995 Code; Ord. 1352-10, 11-15-2010)
C. The approvals required under the provisions of this title shall be obtained prior to:
1. The installation of any public improvements, or the issuance of any building permits.
2. Any development of the property.
3. Offering for sale, entering into an option or a contract for the sale, or selling any portion of the property for which compliance with this
title is required. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. 1995 Code)
10-1-5: INTERPRETATION:
A. Minimum Standards Established: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. Higher Standards Govern: Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this title upon the subdivision of land are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this title or any other applicable law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or
requirements shall govern.
C. Easements Or Covenants Not Abrogated: This title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement.
D. Existing Subdivisions: No subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing on the effective date hereof shall be made lawful solely by
reason of the adoption of this title, and to the extent that said subdivision of land is in conflict in any manner with the requirements of this
title, said subdivision of land remains unlawful hereunder. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
10-1-6: SEPARABILITY:
The several provisions of this title shall be separable in accordance with the following:
A. Separability Of Parts: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not
affect any other provision of this title not specifically included in said judgment.
B. Separability Of Application: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this title to a
particular subdivision of land, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other subdivision of land, not
specifically included in said judgment.
C. Land Part Of Larger Subdivision: Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to
the village as a whole, the plan commission3 shall, before approval, cause to be prepared by the subdivider a plan for the entire area or
neighborhood, such plan to be used by the plan commission in judging the proposed plat. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
10-1-7: RULES AND DEFINITIONS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 376/426
A. Interpretation: In the interpretation of this title, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except
when the context clearly indicates otherwise.
B. Rules Of Word Construction: The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of
construction:
1. The present tense shall include the future, and words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and the plural the
singular.
2. The word "shall" is mandatory.
3. The word "may" is permissive.
4. The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "tract" and "parcel".
5. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
(Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way,
bulkhead lines or shorelines of waterways or corporate boundary lines of the village.
CREEK: A channel of water often tributary to a river and/or body of water. A watercourse that is a naturally occurring swale or
depression or engineered channel or enclosed farm drainage system that conveys stormwater runoff either seasonally or year round.
A creek must include all of the following features: 1) hydrologic connectivity, 2) presence of channel form including a bed, bank and
features that indicate actual or potential sediment movement, and 3) topographic position. A creek begins at the first point at which
these features are met.
BORINGS, SOIL: Examination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a specific parcel of land by drilling.
BUILDING: Any structure with walls and roof affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space
or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and which is designed or intended for shelter,
enclosure or protection of persons, animals or chattels.
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village of Hawthorn Woods for the construction, erection or alteration of a structure or
building.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line parallel to the street line at a distance from it, regulated by the front yard and/or side yard
requirements of the Hawthorn Woods Zoning Ordinance4.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Hawthorn Woods or any segment thereof, in the form of
plans, maps, charts, text of reports, implementing ordinances and the Official Map.
CORINGS, PAVEMENT: Examination and analysis of the completed surface and/or subsurface of a finished pavement by removing a
core by drilling.
CROSSWALK: A public right-of-way located across a block to provide pedestrian access to adjacent streets or alleys.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
CURB: The permanent edge of a paved surface designed to separate the vehicular travelway from the landscaped parkway.
DATUM PLANE: A reference point from which elevations are measured. The datum plane is mean sea level as established by the
United States Geodetic Survey (USGS).
DETENTION BASIN: A covered or uncovered area designed to hold an accumulation of storm water so as to reduce peak flow in a
storm water drainage system and to be normally dry.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved property.
DITCH/DRAINAGE SWALE: A geometric depression of shallow depth with various cross sections to carry surface water.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person for a
specific purpose or purposes.
ELEVATIONS: The vertical distance measured from a point on the ground to the datum plane.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried,
uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled,
transported or moved by man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 377/426
GRADE: The slope of the land, road, street, swale, ditch, pipe or other public way expressed in percentage (feet per 100 feet).
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
GROSS LAND AREA: The entire area of a development including lots, streets and alleys, measured to the center line of any
bounding streets.
LOT: A parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land of record.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a
through lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lines.
OFFICIAL MAP: The map showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and any
amendments or additions thereto resulting from the Board of Trustees or the approval of subdivision plats.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PARKWAY: The area between the lot line and the edge of the pavement.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right-of-way, or easement however designed, across or within a block for use by pedestrian traffic; and shall
include but not be limited to sidewalks and crosswalks.
PERSON: Any person, firm or corporation, public or private, the State of Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the
United States of America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee of any of the foregoing.
PLAN COMMISSION: The Plan Commission of the Village of Hawthorn Woods, Illinois5.
PLAN CONCEPT: A general map or drawing on which the subdivider's design for the subdivision of land is presented for discussion
purposes prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A parcel or tract of land, initially under single ownership or united control, which contains two (2) or more
principal buildings or uses, planned and constructed as a unified development where specific regulations of a given zoning district are
modified through the issuance of a special use permit.
PLAT: A map or chart of a subdivision of land.
PLAT, FINAL: A plat which is in conformance with the Plat Act, Illinois Compiled Statutes, chapter 765 and this Title.
PLAT OFFICER: The chairman of the Plan Commission.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: The drawings and documents presented for tentative approval as described in this Title.
RESIDUE AREA: That portion of a planned development not platted as residential lots or designed for dedication as streets or alleys.
RESUBDIVISION: The subdivision of previously subdivided property in accordance with the Plat Act, Illinois Compiled Statutes,
chapter 765 and this Title.
RETENTION BASIN: A covered or uncovered area designed to hold an accumulation of storm water so as to reduce peak flow in a
storm water drainage system and to normally contain water to a designed level.
ROADWAY: The paved area within a street right-of-way intended for vehicular traffic.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing streets, driveways and utilities.
SOIL TESTING: Determination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a specific land area by use of soil borings.
STREET, APPROVED: Any streets, whether public or private, meeting standards and specifications of the Village of Hawthorn
Woods.
STREET, HALF: A street of less than the total required width along one or more property lines of a subdivision.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to highways and major streets and which provides
access to abutting properties and protection to local traffic from fast, through moving traffic on the highways and major streets.
STREET, MAJOR: A street of considerable continuity which serves or is intended to serve as a major traffic artery connecting various
sections of Hawthorn Woods.
STREET, MINOR: A street primarily as access to abutting properties.
STREET, PUBLIC: Any major or secondary street or minor street which is shown on the subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 378/426
for public use.
STREET, SECONDARY or COLLECTOR: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major street system, including the
principal entrance streets of residential development and streets for circulation within such development.
STREET WIDTH: The distance between lot lines measured perpendicular to the center line of that street.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person who shall seek to subdivide a parcel or tract of land or seek approval of a planned development.
SUBDIVISION: The partitioning of a parcel or tract of land by the subdivider thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal
representatives, successors or assigns, where the act of division creates a subdivision not exempt under the provisions of chapter
765, Illinois Compiled Statutes, except that the exemption provided by chapter 765, section 205/1(b)9 shall not be applicable with
respect to property subject to the jurisdiction of the Village. In addition, as used herein, a subdivision shall be deemed to include a
planned unit development to the extent provided in Section 10-1-2 hereof, or who shall seek to construct a heretofore approved
planned unit development.
THOROUGHFARE: A street with a considerable degree of continuity and serving as a traffic artery for intercommunication between
areas of concentrated use, including but not limited to Federal, State, County and major township highways.
VILLAGE BOARD: The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Hawthorn Woods.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: The person or persons assigned within a firm duly registered by the State of Illinois charged by the Village with
the responsibility for engineering, planning and related matters.
WATER LEVEL, CONSTANT: The minimum depth of water designed to be contained at all times within a retention basin.
WATER LEVEL, OCCASIONAL: The maximum depth of water designed to be contained within a retention or detention basin during
periods of peak storm water flow.
WETLANDS: A. The land areas in which the ground water table or zone of saturation periodically intersects the surface and which
contain wetland plant species. Wetland plants are distinguished from aquatic in that they are limited to species that can complete their
life cycle without submersion but which have the ability to withstand a permanent or seasonally long submersion of at least the plant
root system.
B. Wetlands, for the purposes of this title, are also defined to include areas of poorly drained soils with a water table within two feet
(2') of the ground surface for at least three (3) months of the year. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 1323-10, 6-21-2010)
Chapter 2
PROCEDURES AND GUIDELINES
10-2-1: PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION:
A. If any parcel of land is not within the corporate boundaries of the village, the petitioner shall make his intentions for annexation known to
the village board. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
B. Prior to the submission of the concept plan of any proposed subdivision, the following actions will be taken:
1. A draw down deposit agreement is required to be filled out and submitted with the appropriate fees.
2. The subdivider should secure a copy of the zoning ordinance, subdivision control ordinance, stormwater management and erosion
control standards, standard specifications, and other similar ordinances of control relative to the subdivision and improvements of
land so as to be aware of the requirements of the village.
3. An investigation of proper zoning of the intended use should be made by the subdivider.
4. An investigation of the adequacy of existing schools and of public open spaces, including parks and playgrounds to serve the
proposed subdivision, should be made by the subdivider.
5. The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to arterials and plans for widening of such arterials should be investigated
by the subdivider.
6. All applicable standards for wastewater disposal, water supply, floodplains, wetlands and drainage should be investigated by the
subdivider.
7. The need to have all public utilities and other facilities such as gas, electrical, wells and septic field located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
8. The need to have adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood damage. (Ord. 1629-16, 2-22-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 379/426
10-2-2: CONCEPT PLAN:
Prior to the filing of any application for approval of a preliminary plat of subdivision, an applicant may prepare and submit a concept plan of
the proposed subdivision in accordance with the terms of this code.
A. Filing:
1. Copies of the concept plan of the proposed subdivision, together with written application, shall be submitted to the chief operating
officer or his major designated representative.
2. The chief operating officer or his designated agent(s) shall conduct a meeting for the purpose of reviewing the concept plan. Notice of
the proposed meeting shall be given to the applicant and he shall be permitted to attend said meeting. (Ord. 1629-16, 2-22-2016)
B. Identification And Description: The concept plan shall include:
1. Proposed name of subdivision, date and north point.
2. An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000') showing the relationship of the
subdivision to its surroundings within one-half (1/2) mile, such as section lines or arterial or collector streets shall be provided.
3. Location by section, township and range or by other legal description.
4. Names and addresses of the subdivider, owner and the planner, designer, engineer or surveyor who designed the subdivision layout.
5. Scale of plat:
Single lot to 5 acres 1 inch equals 30 feet
5 acres to 20 acres 1 inch equals 50 feet
Over 20 acres 1 inch equals 100 feet
(Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
6. Topography drawn as contours with an interval of not greater than one foot (1') based on existing USGS datum. (Ord. 823-98, 5-11-
1998)
7. General soil types and locations shall be indicated in map form, wetlands and floodplains.
8. Location of any existing streets or lots within two hundred feet (200').
9. Identification of any significant wooded areas, including a table of existing trees.
10. Identification of existing zoning on the site and zoning of abutting property within two hundred feet (200').
C. Preparation:
1. The concept plan should be drawn to scale and show the arrangements of lots, blocks and streets. Dimensions of all lots shall be
shown, but may be approximated. It is the intent of this title that the concept plan need not be done in precisely engineered plans but
only in sufficient detail to permit planning review. At this stage, the subdivider should expect that the plan commission may require
major alterations to be made in the plat if it is found necessary.
2. It is not necessary that the concept plan be prepared by and sealed by a registered land surveyor; provided, however, that the outside
dimensions of the plat shall be based upon an accurate boundary survey prepared by a registered land surveyor. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-
1989)
D. Concept Plan Review:
1. The village planner shall provide the applicant with a written review of the concept plan.
2. Copies of the written review of the concept plan shall be forwarded to the village board of trustees. (Ord. 1629-16, 2-22-2016)
E. Concept Plan Not Mandatory: The concept plan provided for in this section is provided as a convenience to the subdivider and is not
mandatory. As such, should a subdivider elect to present a concept plan, such election shall not be deemed to cause the
commencement of the statutory time limitations set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 380/426
10-2-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
As a prerequisite to the filing of a final plat of subdivision, an applicant shall file a preliminary plat of subdivision. Preliminary plats of
subdivision, including all information set forth hereinbelow, shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the following criteria: (Ord.
439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 803-97, 8-11-1997)
A. Filing:
1. The preliminary plat shall comply with the provisions of the plat act1.
2. The preliminary plat shall not substantially deviate from the concept plan previously reviewed by the plan commission and village
planner. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
3. The subdivider shall make application and forward two (2) copies to the Lake County water conservation district for review and
recommendation within thirty (30) days of the date of application. Preliminary plat approval shall not be considered until said
recommendation from the soil and water conservation district has been received by the plan commission.
4. Fifteen (15) copies of the preliminary plat of proposed subdivision together with written application in triplicate and appropriate fees as
established by this title shall be submitted to the plan commission at the time of application. Submittal with the plan commission shall
be at least thirty (30) days prior to the regular plan commission meeting (which meeting shall be considered at the date of filing) at
which the subdivider will be scheduled to appear. Should any of the data required in this section be omitted, the subdivider shall be
notified of the additional data required and the Plan Commission action shall be delayed until data is received.
5. The subdivider shall cause one copy to be forwarded to each of the applicable school districts, one copy each to the local fire
protection districts and to the Village Engineer, Village Planner, Lake County Health Department, the Army Corp of Engineers and, if
applicable, to the Lake County Division of Transportation and the Illinois Department of Transportation IDOT Division of Water
Resources for review and recommendation within thirty (30) days of the date of such forwarding. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord.
617-94, 10-10-1994)
6. Topography drawn as contours with an interval of not greater than one foot (1') based on existing USGS datum.
B. Identification And Description: The preliminary plat shall include that information contained within subsection 10-2-2B of this Chapter and
shall further include a statement of ownership, whether in fee or as a beneficiary of trust. The subdivider shall also indicate his interest
in the land.
C. Preparation: The preliminary plat shall be drawn to scale and show the exact dimensions and arrangements of lots, blocks, streets,
rights-of-way, easements and the area of all lots. The preliminary plat shall be prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor.
D. Existing Conditions: The preliminary plat shall include:
1. Boundary line of proposed subdivision, section or corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property dimensions.
2. Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation to and within two hundred feet (200') of the
tract being proposed for subdivision (not including road right-of-way). (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
3. Location, dimensions and names of all existing or prior platted streets or other public ways, railroad and utility rights-of-way,
easements, parks and other public open spaces; location (including depth or, for overhead facilities, height) of culverts, gas, water
and sewer mains, electric, telephone, cable and other telecommunications lines; and location of buildings, structures, traffic-control
and utility facilities, and section and municipal corporation lines, within two hundred feet (200') adjacent to the tract. (Ord. 803-97, 8-
11-1997)
4. In case of a resubdivision, all descriptive lines of the original plat being vacated shall be shown by dotted lines in their proper position
in relation to the new arrangement of the plat, the new plat being clearly shown in solid lines so as to avoid ambiguity or confusion.
5. Location and/or size of existing channels, natural and manmade retention/detention areas, flood plain, wetland, storm sewers,
culverts or other underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of five hundred feet (500') beyond the tract to include such
data as grades, invert elevations and locations of catchbasins, manholes, valves and hydrants. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
6. Location of all existing farm and storm drainage tiles, which shall be located by means of slit trenching and hand probing or electric
radar tile location devices along with slit trenching and hand probing by persons qualified to do such work. All existing drain tile lines
encountered during the investigation shall be repaired to their original condition. One Mylar and four (4) copies of a topographical
boundary map locating these lines must be submitted showing the following:
a. Location of each slit trench and each trench identified to correspond with the tile investigation report;
b. Location of each drain tile with a flow direction arrow and tile size;
c. A summary of the tile investigation report showing trench identification number, tile size, material and quality, percentage of tile
filled with water, percentage of restricted siltation, depth of ground cover and soil texture at grade;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 381/426
d. Name, address and phone number of person conducting tile location investigation. (Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
7. The water lines for the normal, high and 100-year flood crest elevations of all streams, surface water channels, lakes, ponds,
wetlands, and other detention basins. If sewer and water mains are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and distance
to and size of nearest usable facilities.
8. An environmental site assessment report, prepared in accordance with the Standard Practice for Environmental Site Assessments,
latest edition, of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM).
9. A wetland delineation report, prepared in accordance with the Wetland Delineation Manual, latest edition, by the Army Corps of
Engineers. (Ord. 803-97, 8-11-1997)
E. Proposed Conditions: The preliminary plat shall include: (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
1. Layout of streets and other public ways, including proposed street names, right-of-way widths, approximate gradients and other
dimensions, street lights and traffic signals, and connections, with adjoining platted streets and the widths, locations and purposes of
easements. (Ord. 803-97, 8-11-1997)
2. Layout, numbers and dimensions of lots, including setback lines showing dimensions, and areas (in square feet) of each lot. (Ord.
439-89, 12-11-1989)
3. Indication of parcels of land and acreage intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the
subdivision. (Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
4. The preliminary plat shall show the actual geometrics and dimensions which shall include profile drawings drawn at a scale of not
less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') horizontally and one inch equals five feet (1" = 5') vertically showing the proposed street
center line profiles, ditchline profiles and right-of-way grade profiles. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
5. An indication of the system proposed for sewage disposal by a method approved by the Lake County Health Department and/or Lake
County Public Works Department, including the layout of any septic and/or sanitary sewerage facilities with the approximate sizes and
lengths of sanitary sewers, location of treatment facilities and/or septic fields, depths and gradients of sewers and other pertinent
information concerning such facilities. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994; Ord. 803-97, 8-11-1997)
6. An indication of the system proposed for storm water management by a method approved by the Village Engineer which shall be in
conformance with the provisions of this Title, showing the water lines for the normal, high and 100-year flood crest elevations of all
streams, surface water channels, lakes, ponds, wetlands, other detention basins and the layout of storm sewers including location,
sizes, gradients and depths of all storm sewers, drainage swales and open channels. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 803-97, 8-
11-1997)
7. An indication of any protective covenant or deed restriction which is to be placed upon the property to be subdivided.
8. In the case where the subdivider wishes to subdivide a given area, but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the
preliminary plat shall include the proposed general layout for the entire area. The part which is proposed to be subdivided first shall be
clearly superimposed upon the overall plan in order to illustrate clearly the method of development which the subdivider intends to
follow. However, each division shall be independent of future divisions for storm water management, traffic circulation and other
considerations. Each subsequent plat shall follow the same procedure until the entire area controlled by the subdivider is subdivided.
(Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
9. Preliminary layout of grading and drainage showing the approximate method of lot drainage and street drainage throughout the
development.
10. Layout of water supply facilities including well locations, approximate sizes and lengths of mains, valves, hydrants and other
appurtenances.
11. Layout of public utility facilities including location, size and height or depth of gas, electric, telephone and cable lines.
12. The following supporting documents shall be submitted:
a. Preliminary transportation studies, prepared by an engineer.
b. Sanitary sewer, water main, storm sewer, and detention capacity and loading calculations prepared by an engineer, including the
method(s) to be employed to address particular problems that may be encountered with the development.
c. Preliminary soils and subsurface investigation report, prepared by an engineer, of sufficient scope to point out potential ground
absorption, runoff, flooding deficiencies, the presence of unstable soil or of soils of such low bearing capacity as to adversely affect
the intended construction, or the presence of subsurface rock that would affect the installation of required improvements. If the
Village Engineer determines that additional soil investigations, boring or other soil tests are necessary to determine the nature and
extent of any such soil and/or subsurface conditions, the subdivider shall cause such work to be performed and submit reports
thereof to the Village Engineer. (Ord. 803-97, 8-11-1997)
d. For subdivisions of twenty (20) lots or more (in any single phase of construction), or as otherwise requested by the Plan
Commission, a fiscal impact report, showing the revenues generated by, and expenses resulting from, the proposed subdivision
with respect to the Village and any affected school district(s). (Ord. 845-98, 9-14-1998)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 382/426
F. Preliminary Plat Review By The Plan Commission:
1. Conformity: The preliminary plat documents shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission to conform with the reviewed concept plan
and compliance with the requirements of this Code.
2. Donations: Applicable school districts and local park jurisdictions will be required to agree to and accept the school and park
donations.
3. Fire Protection Districts: Applicable fire protection districts or jurisdictions will be requested to review the preliminary plat and submit
comments in writing within thirty (30) days of the date of filing.
4. Recommendations:
a. Should the recommendation be for approval subject to certain conditions, said conditions shall be agreed to by the subdivider prior
to approval of the preliminary plat by the Board of Trustees.
b. Should the Plan Commission recommend disapproval of the preliminary plat, it shall record the reasons for such recommendation
in the minutes of its regular meeting and such reasons shall accompany the recommendation to the Board of Trustees.
c. Should the Plan Commission find that all conditions have been satisfactorily met, it may recommend approval of the preliminary
plat to the Board of Trustees, at the next regularly scheduled meeting.
5. Approval, Disapproval, Further Consideration: Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Plan Commission, the Board of Trustees
may approve the preliminary plat, disapprove same or refer the plat back to the Plan Commission for further consideration or
comment.
a. Should the Board of Trustees refer the preliminary plat back to the Plan Commission, it shall next consider said plat upon receipt of
additional comments and recommendations from the Plan Commission.
b. Should the Board of Trustees approve said preliminary plat, such approval shall be effective for a period of one year. Should a final
plat not be submitted for approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat must again be submitted for approval, unless an
extension is applied for by the subdivider and such request is granted in writing by the Village Board.
6. Time For Consideration:
a. The Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove the application for preliminary plat approval within ninety (90) days from the
date of the application or the filing by applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later, unless such time
is extended by mutual consent.
b. If such plat is disapproved, then within said ninety (90) days the Plan Commission shall furnish to applicant in writing a statement
setting forth the reason for disapproval and specifying with particularity the aspect in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this
Title, including the Official Map. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
c. If such plat is approved, the corporate authority shall take action on said plat within thirty (30) days after its next regular stated
meeting following the action of the Plan Commission. Preliminary approval shall not qualify a plat for recording. (Ord. 439-89, 12-
11-1989; amd. Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
10-2-4: FINAL PLAT:
Fifteen (15) copies of the final plat of subdivision, together with written application in triplicate and appropriate fees as established by this
Title, shall be submitted to the Plan Commission. Prior to submission of the final plat of subdivision, the subdivider shall submit for review
and approval: landscape plans for all landscaping required pursuant to this code and for any permanent monument sign(s) for the
subdivision; and final engineering plans for all required improvements, including, but not limited to, street improvements, drainage, storm
water, wetlands, and soil and erosion control improvements, sanitary sewerage improvements, water supply improvements and public
utilities. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 803-97, 8-11-1997)
The procedure for preparation and review of a final plat shall be as follows: (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
A. Preparation: Within one year after approval of the preliminary plat by the mayor and board of trustees and after receiving final approval
of all engineering documents, the subdivider shall submit a final plat. One Mylar and a sufficient number of blackline prints shall be filed
with the plan commission for review. The final plat, if desired by the subdivider, may constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which is proposed to be recorded and developed at the time; provided, however, that such portion shall conform to all
requirements of these regulations, and be able to stand by itself in respect to drainage, surface water detention and street access. The
final plat shall be prepared at the same scale as the preliminary plat and shall show: (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 1125-05, 5-
16-2005)
1. Name of subdivision.
2. Location by section, township and range, or by other legal description.
3. The name and certification of the registered professional engineer and registered land surveyor responsible for the preparation of the
plat.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 383/426
4. Scale shown graphically, date and northpoint.
5. Accurate angular and linear dimensions for all lines, angles and curvatures, with functions and titles used to describe all boundaries
including perimeter survey of tracts, streets, alleys, easements, areas to be dedicated for public use and other important features.
Error of closure of boundary line surveys shall not exceed one in ten thousand (1 foot for 10,000 feet of perimeter survey). Angular
error shall not exceed plus or minus twenty (.20) seconds. Lot lines to show dimensions in feet and hundredths, and when an angle
occurs in any lot line between lot corners, the measurement of the angle shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds and shall
include the area in square feet, of all lots. The final plat shall show accurately the location of all permanent lot markers as actually
installed.
6. An identification system for all blocks and lots using consecutive numbers of lots within a block.
7. True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines and official monuments (not less than 3, which shall be accurately
described in the plat by location, size and elevation).
8. Municipal, township or section lines accurately correlated to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-
1989)
9. a. Accurate location of all monuments which shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, and at intermediate points as shall be
required by the village engineer and installed in such a manner that they may be located by a licensed surveyor. All USGS, state,
county, village or other official bench marks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in
precise position.
b. Permanent bench marks shall be placed at every fourth (1/4) mile interval in each north-south and east-west direction.
c. Not less than one permanent bench mark shall be provided in each development.
d. Each permanent bench mark shall be a brass disc set in a concrete cylinder, eight inches (8") in diameter by forty eight inches (48")
deep, cast in place with one no. 4 vertical reinforcing rod at its center. Said brass discs shall be provided by the village, at a price
equal to the cost to the village.
e. Bench marks and markers shall be set level with the finished grade.
f. Bench marks shall be in USGS datum, and shall be inscribed with the number and elevation. USGS datum elevation shall be
checked against at least two (2) reference marks approved by the village engineer. The result of the closure survey shall be
reported in writing to the village engineer on monument and bench mark recovery forms. The reference marks used for this survey
and their elevations shall be denoted on the cover sheet of the development plans.
g. Permanent monuments shall be constructed as denoted on the plat. Permanent monuments shall be constructed in accordance
with construction standard M-1, section 10-3-15 of this title.
h. Iron pipe markers of three-fourths inch (3/4") diameter, twenty four inches (24") long, shall be set at all corners, angle points, and
points of curvature of lots, and streets, by a registered land surveyor.
i. The developer shall replace or verify the existence of all iron pipes after the completion of all construction and before the issuance
of any building permit with respect to the development.
j. Second order control shall be required for all permanent bench marks and monuments set in concrete as described above.
k. Upon receiving the monument and bench mark recovery form, the village shall inspect the installation of the disc. The proper
number and elevation will be inscribed by the surveyor hired by the developer to do such work after approval of the investigation by
the village engineer. (Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
10. Exact location, width and name of all streets within and adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all alleys and
crosswalks and typical cross section of street curb and sidewalks showing dimensions and type of material utilized in base and
surface.
11. No street names shall be repeated within the village and final determination of the street names shall be at the sole discretion of the
plan commission, with the approval of the appropriate fire district.
12. Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon
and in the dedication, and of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners.
13. A legal description of the property platted which shall be the same as that recorded in the preceding transfer of the property or that
portion of said transfer covered by the plat.
14. Protective covenants of all types which run with the land, or filed as an accompanying document which shall not in any case be at
variance from the terms or provisions of any existing ordinance.
15. Drainage easements, including surface water detention, wetlands and conservation, shall be shown and specific language included
to prohibit the alteration, landscaping, berming or filling of such drainage easements.
B. Certificates Required: No application for a final plat shall be approved until the following certificates have been executed:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 384/426
1. Certification by a licensed surveyor that the plat represents a survey made by him and that monuments and markers exist as located;
that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct; and that he has complied with all of the requirements of this title regarding plats,
noting exceptions, if any.
2. Notarized certification by owner, and if required by any mortgage holder of record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of
streets and other public areas.
3. Approval by signature of county, state and other officials concerned with the specifications of utility installations.
4. Certification by the chairman of the plan commission that the final plat has been reviewed and approved by said commission.
5. Certification by the village collector that all taxes and special assessments have been paid up to date.
6. Certification by the county clerk that all taxes and special assessments have been paid up to date.
7. Certification that the approval of the county health officer has been given for subdivisions where private wells or septic systems are
proposed.
8. Certification that the approval of the village engineer has been given to all proposed or existing public improvements.
9. In cases of plat or right of way vacations, written evidence as provided by statute shall be shown on the plat. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-
1989; amd. 1995 Code)
10. Certification of approval by the mayor and the board of trustees attested by the village clerk. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. 1995
Code; Ord. 1125-05, 5-16-2005)
11. Certification of acceptance by the recorder of deeds, Lake County, Illinois.
12. Certification of design engineer and owner or duly authorized attorney as required by 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/2.
13. Certification that approval of the Illinois department of transportation and the Lake County department of transportation has been
granted, if applicable. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. 1995 Code)
C. Review Of Final Plat:
1. The plan commission shall review each final plat, and shall transmit said plat to the board of trustees accompanied by written findings
as to the conformance of the final plat with the previously approved preliminary plat and all other requirements of this title.
2. The board of trustees shall approve or deny approval of the final plat of subdivision. Such action shall be taken within sixty (60) days
of the filing of the application for approval of the final plat except that any delay in the consideration of said plat occasioned by the
action or request of the applicant shall not be counted against the sixty (60) day requirement.
3. Upon approval, the zoning administrator shall cause a fully executed original mylar of the final plat to be recorded in the office of the
recorder of deeds of Lake County, Illinois. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. 1995 Code; Ord. 1645-16, 3-21-2016)
10-2-5: CONSTRUCTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Site Development Permit And Fee: No improvement including site development, clearing, grading, earthwork nor buildings constructed
shall be made prior to the approval and recording of the final plat. No site development permit shall be issued until the final plat has
been recorded. A construction schedule must be submitted prior to the filing of a site development permit. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
shall be charged for the site development permit. (Ord. 456-90, 6-28-1990)
B. As Built Plans: Upon the completion of construction of all public improvements required by this title, in conformance with approved
engineering plans, specifications and other documents, the design engineer engaged by the subdivider shall prepare and submit to the
village engineer four (4) sets of blueline prints and one reproducible set on mylar plus one microfilm set of the as built plans. The village
engineer shall notify the village board that such public improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the
approved engineering plans, specifications and other documents. (Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
C. Conveyance Of Improvements: Upon completion of all, or designated portions, of the improvements required by this title, and approval
thereof by the village engineer, said improvements shall be conveyed and transferred to the village by appropriate bills of sale or other
documents. All labor and material for installing public improvements shall be furnished by the subdivider. All testing required for
approval of said improvements shall be done by the subdivider under the supervision of the village engineer. Such bills of sale or other
documents of conveyance shall be accepted by resolution of the village board. For purposes of this section, the term improvements
shall not include service lines, driveways and other improvements which serve individual parcels, stormwater detention and/or retention
facilities on individual parcels or outlots, approved private streets, or appurtenances thereto. (Ord. 803-97, 8-11-1997)
D. Subdivision Site Improvement Inspection Schedule:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 385/426
Type Frequency
Preconstruction meeting with
developer, engineer, village and
contractors
1 time
Soil erosion and sediment control Prior to start of earthmoving activities, once per month or as required by the watershed
development ordinance (WDO) as the enforcement officer and 1 last time prior to final sign
off
Storm sewer installation Daily
Water main and sanitary sewer Daily, if sewer or water are to be village owned utilities. If serviced by another provider, there
will be daily checks of backfill operations where main lines or services cross a street
Subgrade proof roll 1 time, repeated as needed
Stone base proof roll 1 time, repeated as needed
Curb and gutter Prepour to check stone base (may be included in street base proof roll). Part time
observation of curb installation
Bituminous pavement Full time observation of all pavement placements
Public sidewalk Walk is installed as each home is built. Inspections by village
Final inspection 1 time and subsequent checks of repaired items
Record drawings review 1 time for each submittal of as built drawings
Note: All site inspections will require twenty four (24) hours' notice. (Ord. 1499-14, 9-11-2014)
10-2-6: AGREEMENTS AND GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The requirements of this section shall be complied with prior to the approval and recording of a final plat of subdivision, except as noted
otherwise.
A. Action By The Subdivider:
1. Prior to the approval of a final plat, the owner or subdivider shall submit an executed subdivision improvement agreement, acceptable
to the village, providing for the completion and guarantee of all required improvements in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications therefor, said completion of all required improvements, and submission of as built plans therefor, to occur as provided
for in such agreement.
2. After final plat approval, but prior to construction activity, the owner or subdivider shall submit a guarantee security in accordance with
subsection A2a of this section, naming the village as beneficiary thereto from a sound and reputable banking institution, savings and
loan association, surety or insurance company, authorized to do business in this state, and deemed good and sufficient by the village,
in a form acceptable to the village attorney. The cost of improvements shall be in accordance with cost estimates prepared by the
subdivider at his expense by a registered professional engineer and approved by the village engineer.
a. Guarantee Security:
(1) A corporate surety bond or other financing surety submitted in accordance with this section to guarantee the completion of
public improvements shall be in an amount equal to or greater than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of
installing and constructing said public improvements, including labor and material required for the work, whether by subcontractor
or otherwise, and shall provide as follows:
(A) An expiration date not less than one year from the date of issuance and an express provision that such surety or bond will not
expire prior to completion and village board acceptance of said public improvements;
(B) That written notice shall be given by certified or registered mail to the village clerk of the expiration date, if any, of the surety
bond not less than sixty (60) days before said expiration, and that the surety or bond shall not expire absent such notice;
(C) That failure of the subdivider to complete the public improvements secured by such surety or bond prior to the completion
date and acceptance by the village board shall be considered a default by the subdivider and the issuing institution;
(D) That failure of the subdivider to submit a new surety or bond in accordance with this section upon expiration of such surety or
bond shall be considered a default by the subdivider and the issuing institution;
(E) That the surety or bond shall be irrevocable and shall be clearly marked "irrevocable";
(F) That the surety or bond will not be discharged or reduced by the issuing institution except upon written certificate of the village
clerk that said surety or bond may be discharged or reduced in accordance with this section and the amount of such discharge or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 386/426
reduction;
(G) That the issuing institution will pay all attorney fees and other costs reasonably incurred in enforcing collection of such
financing surety in the event that the issuer wrongfully fails to honor the village's demand for payment under the terms of such
surety or bond.
(2) The requirements of subsection A2a(1) of this section may be modified or waived upon motion, resolution or ordinance of the
village board if the board first determines that the requirements of said subsection A2a(1) of this section would impose an
unreasonable hardship upon the subdivider and that the absence of a surety or bond submitted in accordance with said
subsection will not materially affect the guarantee that the requirements of this title will be met.
(3) A subdivider may, at its option, submit separate sureties or bonds for each public improvement to be accepted.
(4) A surety or bond submitted in accordance with this section to guarantee the completion of public improvements may be reduced
or partially discharged prior to completion and acceptance of such public improvements by the village board upon the following
showing by the subdivider and the certificate of the village engineer:
(A) A sworn statement by the subdivider's engineer of the cost of work performed and labor and materials provided toward the
completion of such improvement and estimating the amount and cost of work, labor and material remaining to be performed or
provided in order to complete such improvement. This statement may be waived by the village board where the estimated cost of
the public improvement is less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
(B) Written waivers of lien for all labor or material provided for such public improvement where public funds are involved.
(5) Any partial reduction or discharge of a surety or bond submitted in accordance with this section to guarantee completion of
public improvements shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(A) No partial reduction or discharge approved on account of work performed and labor and materials provided shall exceed the
cost of such work, labor or materials;
(B) No partial reduction or discharge shall be approved to the extent that it would cause the balance of funds remaining to be less
than one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of work, labor, and material remaining to be performed or provided in
order to complete such improvements;
(C) A partial reduction or discharge of such financing surety may be approved upon the chief operating officer's recommendation
to the village board; provided, however, such certificate shall not be construed as partial or complete acceptance of the
improvement for which said work was performed or labor and materials provided.
(6) When the subdivider has supplied all of the documents or materials required by this title to be submitted in support of its request
for discharge of a surety or bond or acceptance of the public improvement as completed, the village board shall approve or
disapprove such request within sixty (60) days of the subdivider's application. If the subdivider's application is disapproved, a
written statement of the reasons for such disapproval shall be given to the subdivider. The subdivider and the village board may
mutually agree to extend the sixty (60) day period. In addition, the sixty (60) day period shall be extended as necessary in the
event that weather prevents the village from verifying the facts contained in the subdivider's application.
(7) A surety or bond submitted in accordance with this section shall be discharged upon acceptance by the village board of all
improvements for which said surety or bond was submitted and submission of a maintenance bond guaranteeing said
improvement against defects in materials or workmanship in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the estimated cost of said
improvement to be effective for a period of one year from the date of acceptance in order to assure the satisfactory condition of
the required improvements for a period of one year after the date of their acceptance by the village board. The maintenance bond
shall continue in effect for good cause shown in writing by the village beyond the maintenance period and until the village staff
shall verify that condition of the improvements is satisfactory and recommend release of the maintenance bond.
(8) Upon acceptance of all public improvements or approval of a partial reduction or discharge of such a surety or bond, the village
clerk shall send a written certificate within three (3) days after the next succeeding village board meeting to the issuing institution
and to the subdivider that such financing surety may be discharged or partially reduced and the amount of such discharge or
reduction, said surety or bond to otherwise remain in full force and effect.
(9) This section shall be binding upon and applicable to all subdividers, developers and successors in title of property which is
subdivided or platted in accordance with this title.
B. Compliance Required Before Sale Of Lots: No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall
transfer or sell such parcel before the final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the village board, in accordance with the
provisions of this title, and filed with the recorder of deeds of Lake County, Illinois.
C. Compliance Required Before Issuance Of Building Permits: No building permits shall be issued until the chief operating officer has
notified the village board that the final plat has been recorded, that the improvements of the entire plat have been installed, inspected
and approved in writing by the village engineer up to, but not including, the bituminous surface course and subsequent required items,
and that the construction of the subdivision has complied with the requirements of this code. (Ord. 1645-16, 3-21-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 387/426
Chapter 3
SUBDIVISION DESIGN PLANNING STANDARDS
10-3-1: STANDARDS ENUMERATED:
The Standards of the Village are as follows:
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, latest edition; Illinois Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions; Interim Special
Provisions and Local Roads and Streets Special Provision; and the Village of Hawthorn Woods Construction Standards as set forth in
Section 10-3-15 of this Chapter. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
10-3-2: STREET STANDARDS:
A. Street Arrangement: Where it is not shown on the Comprehensive Plan and/or Official Map, the arrangement of streets within a
subdivision shall be in compliance with the following:
1. Continuity: Provide for the continuation or projection of existing principal streets in adjacent areas.
2. Half Streets: No half streets permitted.
B. Street Design: All required street right-of-way widths, and pavement widths, curves, gradients and site distances shall be shown in the
accompanying Table of Minimum Standards for Street Design and in accordance with the following:
1. Street Jogs: Street jogs should be avoided, but not less than one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall be from center line to center
line.
2. Intersections: It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences encourage safe and efficient traffic flow and, in
general, be at or near right angles. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
3. Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sacs shall be permitted based upon findings and recommendations of the Plan Commission and approval
by the Village Board.
a. In residential areas, the following standards shall apply:
(1) Cul-de-sac with a turning loop:
(A) Minimum inside back-of-curb radius: thirty five feet (35')
(B) Minimum outside back-of-curb radius: fifty eight feet (58')
(C) Minimum right-of-way diameter: one hundred sixty feet (160')
(2) Cul-de-sac without a turning loop:
(A) Minimum pavement radius: forty five feet (45')
(B) Minimum right-of-way diameter: one hundred twenty feet (120')
(3) A temporary terminus for streets with five (5) lots or fewer shall have a fully paved, sixty six foot (66') diameter cul-de-sac and
temporary easements for drainage purposes.
(4) The length of cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') or ten (10) lots, whichever is greater.
b. In nonresidential areas, cul-de-sac termini shall have a minimum diameter of one hundred forty nine feet (149') and a pavement
outside diameter of not less than one hundred five feet (105').
c. In all areas, where a cul-de-sac terminus is utilized, the minimum front lot line shall be ninety feet (90'), and the terminus shall be
fully paved. (Ord. 845-98, 9-14-1998)
4. Access From Major Streets: Provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access to residential property abutting a major
street either by providing: a) a marginal access road, or b) by backing lots to the thoroughfare and providing access by a collector,
minor or cul-de-sac street one lot depth removed and with a no-access strip at least twelve feet (12') wide along the rear lot line.
These standards are established for the purpose of providing protection for the residential properties and to provide for traffic safety
and the efficient use of the major street for its intended function of accommodating through traffic.
5. Frontage Roads: Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad or highway, the Plan Commission may require a street
approximately parallel to and on each side of such railroad or highway, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening
land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall
also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 388/426
6. Reserve Strips: Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities, streets or alleys shall be prohibited. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
7. Sidewalks Required: Sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of all streets in all residential subdivisions in which the density
is not less than one and four-tenths (1.4) dwelling units per gross acre of subdivision, and in all nonresidential subdivisions. (Ord. 762-
96, 5-13-1996)
8. Street Levels: Street levels shall provide proper relation between the street and the elevation of the houses to assure positive
drainage from the building to the street. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
10-3-3: EASEMENTS:
A. Easement Design And Locations: Utility distribution or transmission installations serving the subdivision, and, when required, storm
water drainageways shall be located in easements as designated on the final plat of record. Such easements shall be located along the
rear lot lines or side lot lines at locations and extensions of utility installation between blocks, or continuity of drainageway. They shall
occupy not less than the rear ten feet (10') of lot depth or ten feet (10') of lot width adjoining the applicable side lot line, or may be of
greater width if recommended by the Village Engineer and approved by the Board of Trustees. Additional easements at other locations
may be recommended for specific conditions by the Village Engineer and required by the Board of Trustees. No utility distribution or
transmission installation shall be located in the same easement as a storm sewer, but shall be placed in a separate easement. (Ord.
439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
B. Continuity Of Easements: Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block to block.
C. Drainage Easements: Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage
easement, conforming substantially with the areas bordering such watercourse that are subject to flooding. The easement width shall be
determined by the Village Engineer.
D. Lake And Pond Easements: A ten foot (10') wide land easement shall be provided, measured from the established shoreline of all
bodies of water and surface water detention basins and where necessary a ten foot (10') wide access easement to a public roadway.
E. Easement Responsibility: Each lot owner shall be responsible for the maintenance, operation and preservation of all drainage structures,
both on the surface and underground, which cross or enter upon his lot or lots. Lot owners shall be prohibited from altering the natural
flow of water on such easements. Covenants to this effect shall be placed on the final plat. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
F. Additional Restrictions:
1. No change in topography (grading) shall be permitted without the written approval of the Village Engineer.
2. No landscaping items or plantings other than grass or sod shall be placed in the easement without the written approval of the Village
Engineer.
3. No structures, fences, pavements, sheds, signs, animal shelters, monuments, satellite or antenna systems, swimming or wading
pools, and/or any other permanent structural item shall be placed in the easement without the written approval of the Village Engineer.
4. The Village Engineer shall determine how to preserve the subdivision design and proposed or naturally existing drainage patterns in
any easement. (Ord. 785-97, 4-9-1997)
10-3-4: BLOCKS:
A. Configuration Of Blocks: The shape of blocks shall be determined by topographical features, the basic street system and traffic pattern,
lot depths and areas designated for public and other nonresidential land uses. In addition to these, the lengths, widths and shapes of
blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
1. Site Adequacy: Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated.
2. Zoning: Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within the corporate limits of the village.
3. Convenience: Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
B. Nonresidential Blocks: Blocks or portions thereof intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designated as such, and the plan
shall show adequate off street areas to provide for parking, loading docks and other such facilities. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
10-3-5: LOTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 389/426
A. Configuration Of Lots: The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the
type of development and use contemplated and, in general, lots should be as nearly rectangular in shape as practicable.
1. Conformance With Zoning Regulations: Width and area of lots shall conform with lot width and area requirements set forth in the
zoning ordinance of the village1 or that of Lake County in the unincorporated areas beyond the village limits. Corner lots shall be
increased in width by twenty percent (20%) over the width of typical interior lots, except the board of trustees may require, when
recommended by the plan commission, a greater lot width to provide for the proper development of intersection design and traffic
safety.
2. Nonresidential Lots: Width, area and depth of lots in a manufacturing or business subdivision shall be as recommended by the plan
commission and approved by the board of trustees.
3. Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street line, or substantially so.
B. Access To Lots: Each lot within the subdivision must have access to a public street, except when private streets have been approved.
C. Separation From Major Streets: Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation
of residential development from major streets or highways or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A
planting screen of at least ten feet (10'), and across which there shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be provided along the rear lot
lines of lots abutting such highways and major thoroughfares.
D. Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots are not permitted, except where lots back upon a major street, upon a body of water in
separate or undivided ownership or in manufacturing and business subdivisions when specifically recommended by the plan
commission and approved by the village board. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
E. Lot Size: Lots shall comply with the minimum lot size requirements of the applicable zoning district classification for the property being
subdivided.
In addition, newly created lots shall further comply with the following:
1. Newly created lots shall contain no area of lake, pond, wetland or designated stormwater detention areas or similar areas, unless
recommended by the plan commission and approved by the village board.
2. Newly created lots must be served by sanitary sewer service or be demonstrated to be suitable for accommodating a private
individual sewage disposal (septic) system as governed by the environmental regulations for septic systems as adopted by the Lake
County health department. (Ord. 1255-08, 6-16-2008)
F. Lots Abutting A Watercourse: Lots abutting a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream shall have an additional depth or width as
recommended by the plan commission and approved by the board of trustees in order to provide acceptable building sites.
G. Preservation Of Natural Features: In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be given to the preservation of natural features, such
as trees, watercourses, historical landmarks, wetlands and similar community assets, which, if preserved, would add to the
attractiveness and value of the subdivision, neighborhood or the community as a whole. The plan commission shall include in its report
its conclusions as to compliance herewith. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
H. Natural Features: Wetlands, lakes, ponds, detention areas and similar natural features shall comply with the following:
1. Such areas shall be located on separate outlots, unless otherwise recommended by the plan commission and approved by the village
board.
2. Such areas shall be maintained by a homeowners' association. A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, in a form
approved by the village, shall be recorded along with the final plat of subdivision and shall include the responsibility to maintain such
areas.
3. Such areas shall be subject to a backup special service area in the event the homeowners' association fails to properly maintain such
areas. Prior to recording a final plat of subdivision, the applicant shall submit a consent to the special service area signed by all
owners of the property. In addition, the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions applicable to the property shall include an
acknowledgment of the backup special service area. (Ord. 1255-08, 6-16-2008)
10-3-6: BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
Building setback lines in all new subdivisions shall conform to the front, side or rear yard provisions of the village zoning ordinance (title 9 of
this code). (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
10-3-7: PARKS, SCHOOL SITES AND PUBLIC AREAS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 390/426
A. Depiction And Configuration: Whenever required by this title or any other ordinance of the village, park sites, school sites and other
public areas shall be shown on all plans and plats and shall be of such configuration as to be acceptable to the plan commission and
village board.
B. Dedication Of Park Lands, Or Cash Contribution In Lieu Thereof: As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plan
and plat of a planned unit development or any other development of land (hereinafter referred to as a development), each subdivider or
developer (hereinafter referred to as a developer) will be required to: dedicate land for park and recreational purposes, including, but not
by way of imitation, bike/walking paths/trails, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents or occupants of the development;
make a cash contribution in lieu thereof; or some combination of both, at the option of the village. Unless otherwise provided in the
resolution or ordinance approving such final plat or final plan and plat or other instrument granting final development approval, such
dedication and/or contribution shall be due as a precondition to such approval. Such dedications and/or contributions shall be in
accordance with the following criteria:
1. Criteria For Requiring Park And Recreation Land Dedication:
a. Requirements And Population Ratio: The ultimate population of a proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of
land required for dedication. The total land dedication requirement shall be one and one-half (1.5) acres of land per one hundred
(100) people. The required one and one-half (1.5) acres may be allocated by the village board, in its discretion, based upon the
following criteria: (Ord. 1169-06, 7-6-2006)
Park Classification Park Size
Minimum Acreage
Per 100 People
Neighborhood parks Not less than 5 acres 0.5 acres
Community parks More than 20 acres 1.0 acres
Total 1.5 acres
(Ord. 1365-11, 4-18-2011)
The ultimate population of a proposed development shall be calculated in accordance with subsection B3 of this section.
b. Location: The comprehensive plan and/or the standards adopted by the village shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. If a
public school site is located within a development, a park site adjoining the school site shall be required. A central location which
will serve equally the entire development is most desirable. In large developments, these sites can be located throughout the
development according to established standards for park area distances.
c. Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas: When developers provide their own open space for recreation areas and
facilities, it may have the effect of reducing the demand for local public recreational services. Depending on the size of the
development, a portion of the park and recreational area in developments may, at the sole option of the village board, be provided
in the form of "private" open space in lieu of dedicated "public" open space. The extent of same shall be determined by the village
board, based upon the needs of the projected residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land for the general
area.
In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the
installation of recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer as part of his obligation. Detailed plans of such areas,
including specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the village, and before any credit is given for private
recreation areas, the developer shall guarantee that these private recreation areas will be permanently maintained for such use by
the execution of the appropriate legal documents. Private "swimming clubs" are included in this provision. When an adjustment for
private recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total park land dedication that would have been required
from the subdivision or planned unit development and then subtract the credit to be given.
2. Criteria For Requiring A Cash Contribution In Lieu Of Park Sites: The village shall require the developer to pay a cash contribution in
lieu of or in combination with the land dedication required when so determined by the village board. The cash contributions in lieu of
park and recreation land dedication shall be held in trust by the village, solely for the acquisition, maintenance, and/or improvement of
park and recreation land as herein classified, which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that
development.
Improvements of park and recreation land under this subsection B2 shall be liberally construed and shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the development of: sidewalks; adjacent streets, including, but not limited to, pavement, curbs, gutters and streetlights;
connections with sewers, water, electrical and other utility lines; and, as appropriate, grading, seeding and/or sodding, and/or
drainage and erosion controls; and as appropriate other improvements as deemed necessary, including bike/walking paths/trails on
the development and to serve the development and maintenance thereof.
If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of dedication of land is not expended for the purposes set forth herein within ten (10) years
from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded with interest at the rate(s), in effect from time to time during said ten (10) year period,
paid on investments in the Illinois public treasurers' investment pool, to the owners of record of all lots, except lots dedicated pursuant
to the provisions hereof, in the development for which such contribution was made. The refund shall be paid to the person who is the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 391/426
owner of record on the day which is the tenth anniversary of the receipt of such contribution. The amount of the refund due to each lot
owner shall be equal to the amount of the original contribution not expended, divided by the total number of lots in the development
(excluding only those lots which were dedicated pursuant to the provisions hereof) for which such contribution was made.
The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the area, improved as specified
herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated pursuant to the provisions hereof. It has been determined that the present fair
market value of such improved land in and surrounding the village is one hundred ninety thousand dollars ($190,000.00) per acre and
such figure shall be used in making any calculation herein unless the developer files a written objection thereto. In the event of any
such objection the developer shall submit an appraisal showing the fair market value of such improved land in the area of his
development or other evidence thereof and final determination of said fair market value per acre of such improved land shall be made
by the village board based upon such information submitted by the developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the
village board.
3. Formulas For Determining Ultimate Population: The following table of population density represents current and short range projected
trends in family size for a new residential construction and shall, where applicable, be used in calculating the amount of required
dedication of acres of land and/or the cash contribution in lieu thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the developer:
Type Of Unit People Per Dwelling Unit
Detached single-family:
2 bedroom 2.017
3 bedroom 2.899
4 bedroom 3.764
5 bedroom (or more) 3.770
Attached single-family:
1 bedroom 1.193
2 bedroom 1.990
3 bedroom 2.392
4 bedroom (or more) 3.145
Multiple-family:
Efficiency 1.294
1 bedroom 1.758
2 bedroom 1.914
3 bedroom (or more) 3.053
For all developments in which the population density cannot be precisely determined at the time of approval of the development, the land
donation requirement shall be determined as follows. The ultimate population shall be calculated on the basis of four (4) bedrooms and one
acre per detached single-family unit, which the village board hereby determines to the current trend in such development within the village;
and the bedroom mix used for single-family attached and multiple-family dwelling units shall be based upon the number of units and mix of
bedrooms as indicated on the approved final plan and plat of planned unit development.
In the event a developer files a written objection to one or more of the tables, formulas and/or determinations pursuant to this section, he
shall submit his own study showing the estimated ultimate population and in that event final determination of the formula to be used in such
calculations shall be made by the village board based upon such information submitted by the developer and from other sources which may
be submitted to the village board. It is recognized that population density, age distribution and local conditions change over time, and the
specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and
amendment as necessary.
4. Reservation Of Additional Land: Where the comprehensive plan of the village calls for a larger amount or size of park and
recreational land in a particular proposed development, than the developer is required to dedicate pursuant to the provisions hereof,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 392/426
the land needed beyond the developer's required contribution shall, if so determined by the village board, be reserved for subsequent
purchase by the village, provided that such purchase is made, or proceedings to acquire such land by condemnation are commenced,
within one year from the date of approval of the final plat or plan for the development.
5. Combining With Adjoining Developments: For all developments of less than fifty (50) acres, public open space which is to be
dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in order to produce usable recreation
areas or sites without undue hardship to a particular developer.
6. Dedicated Sites, Topography, Grading And Improvements: The slope, topography and geology of each dedicated site as well as its
surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on dedicated sites shall not differ greatly from surrounding land.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a dedicated site may, with the consent of the village board, include areas of minimal or limited
suitability, such as wetlands and stormwater detention areas. The acreage of such areas of minimal or limited suitability shall not be
used to satisfy, or be credited against, the land dedication requirement.
All sites shall be dedicated as improved sites, i.e., in a graded, seeded and/or sodded condition with appropriate drainage and erosion
controls and ready for full service by streets (including, but not limited to, pavement, curbs, gutters and streetlights), sewers, water
and electrical and other utilities, or acceptable provision made therefor. Sidewalks, bike/walking paths/trails and trees shall be
included within the definition of improved sites.
7. Title To Sites: All sites shall be conveyed to the village either by warranty or trustee's deed. The developer shall be responsible for
conveying good, merchantable title to such sites, and shall be responsible for payment of all real estate taxes to the date of
conveyance, including any agricultural rollback taxes which might be extended or levied against such sites, for any tax years or
periods prior to the time of conveyance.
8. Sale Of Dedicated Land: When, in the opinion of the village board, any such parcel has become unnecessary or unsuitable or
inconvenient, such parcel may be sold as provided by applicable statutory authority and the proceeds shall be held in trust by the
village, solely for such uses as are provided for herein, and said proceeds shall be subject to the ten (10) year expenditure
requirements from and after the date when said land is converted to cash proceeds.
9. Agreement: When the village requires any cash contribution in lieu of a dedication of land, the developer shall execute a park
donation agreement and provide the security set forth therein, in the form of agreement approved by the village attorney. (Ord. 1169-
06, 7-6-2006)
10-3-8: UNDERGROUND IMPROVEMENTS, MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION:
A. Installation Required: The owner or subdivider shall install storm and sanitary sewers, septic system, water supply system, street grading
and pavement, public utilities, street lighting, trees, surface water detention, street signs, overland grading in accordance with applicable
ordinances and standards of construction of the village. No subdivision of land shall be approved without receiving a statement signed
by the village engineer, certifying that the improvements described in the subdivider's plans and specifications conform with standards of
the village, as set forth in section 10-3-1 of this chapter.
B. Erosion And Sedimentation Control:
1. The subdivider and his contractor shall at all times during the course of construction take adequate measure to prevent soil erosion
by surface water runoff or wind action.
2. The subdivider/contractor shall see that any needed erosion/sedimentation measures required are maintained so they function
correctly. The developer/contractor shall take corrective action within twenty four (24) hours after being notified that an
erosion/sedimentation condition exists. No area within the development shall be left without vegetative cover for a period of over
fifteen (15) days.
3. Erosion and sedimentation methods shall be to the Illinois environmental protection agency standards and specifications for soil
erosion and sediment control and subject to review and approval by the village. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
10-3-9: STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM REQUIRED2:
An adequate system of stormwater drainage consisting of natural watercourses, conduits, surface water detention, drainage and
swales/ditches shall be constructed to drain the subdivision and protect roadway pavements.
A. Storm Drainage Computations:
1. Storm sewers shall be constructed throughout the entire area contemplated for development. Such storm sewers shall be connected
to adequate outfall and be of the kind of character and runoff as approved by the Village Engineer.
2. Storm sewer capacity shall be determined by the use of the rational formula. The intensity (I) factor used shall be a return frequency
of not less than ten (10) years. The runoff coefficient (C) factor shall be determined by the character of the land to be drained in its
developed state.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 393/426
3. Drainage ditches may be permitted if a minimum one and one-half percent (11/2%) slope is maintained and the velocity does not
exceed six feet (6') per second in grass-lined ditches.
4. All street grades, lot and block drainage shall be established so as to permit positive drainage.
5. All drainage systems shall be designed to prevent floods.
6. Engineering plans and final plat shall indicate at each lot the minimum driveway culvert size needed to carry the storm water runoff
flowing in the roadside ditch adjacent to the lot. But in no case shall be less than fifteen inches (15") diameter. End treatment shall be
flared end sections.
7. The developer shall provide a storm water service line to each residential lot in accordance with the Hawthorn Woods Construction
Standards.
B. Water Retention Or Detention Facilities: Surface water detention basins shall normally be dry. Detention ponds or reservoirs may be
constructed upon approval of the Village. Such detention facilities shall be designed to retain a certain water level at all times and may,
in addition to serving a part of the storm water drainage system of the Village, be used for scenic and recreation purposes. Detailed
engineering plans and specifications for detention facilities shall be prepared by the design engineer for review by the Village Engineer
and Plan Commission and approval by the Village Board.
1. Plans To Include: The plans shall include design, calculations, control structures, elevations, details of vegetative cover, cost
estimates, provisions for ownership and for perpetual maintenance. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
2. Easements: Not less than two (2) vehicle traversable access easements for maintenance into each facility area, from opposite
directions, and a ten foot (10') wide vehicle traversable easement around entire facility perimeter, above the high water elevation
during maximum 100-year overflow conditions and with a slope not greater than two percent (2%), shall be provided. (Ord. 731-95, 4-
10-1995)
3. Emergency Overflow: An emergency overflow shall be constructed at all ponds.
4. Storm Sewer Lines: The ends of all incoming storm sewer lines shall be at or above the normal pool elevation and shall be set in a
concrete headwall or end section.
5. Surface Water Runoff:
a. Runoff of surface water from each tract or parcel would be limited to a maximum of 0.05 cfs/acre of runoff per acre of land or
fraction thereof.
b. Detention basins or equivalent shall be provided by the subdivision and/or development to accomplish the limit of surface water
runoff as hereinbefore set forth. Where waterways, channels, ditches, streams or rivers are traversed, the design of the facilities
should not be less than a 100-year frequency storm.
c. Due cognizance shall be taken to the effect of development of any land tract to downstream owner and surrounding areas affected
by rainfall and surface water runoff.
d. It is the intent of this requirement to develop a single detention basin for each development thereby facilitating purpose, operation
and maintenance of the facility. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
6. Detention Ponds:
a. Construction of detention ponds shall be in accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local statutes, codes, ordinances,
rules and regulations, and subject to the approval of the Village Engineer. Detention ponds shall be setback from the street rightsof-
way in accordance with Construction Standards P-3 and P-4. (Ord. 813-97, 12-8-1997)
b. A dry flow drainage shall be provided in detention areas.
c. Detention areas shall be designed so as to drain to normal levels within seventy two (72) hours of the end of the storm event.
d. Detention ponds shall not be considered as park land though may be integrated with a park system upon approval of the Village
Board.
7. Variance: Where the land developer or subdivider can show that the strict adherence to the design standards set forth causes an
unnecessary hardship, the Village Board may approve a variance. Such a variance may be granted after recommendation of the Plan
Commission, and where topography and conditions peculiar to the site or surrounding area substantiate a variance without destroying
the intent of the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
8.a. The service area for storm water holding facilities shall be defined by the Village Engineer. Parking lots, streets and roof tops
shall not be used for detention.
b. The storm water runoff flows less than the allowable release rate shall be conducted through or around the detention facility in pipe.
c. In order to prevent soil erosion and weed problems, detention basins shall be landscaped including the establishment of a ground
cover over all unpaved areas through sodding or other means which result in a quality ground cover comparable to that obtained
through sodding.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 394/426
d. Permanent ponds, with or without detention, shall be designed in accordance with Construction Standard STS-1. Ponds shall have
a two foot (2') horizontal to one foot (1') vertical side slope from a point one and one-half feet (11/2') above normal water level down
to a point three feet (3') below normal water level. This sloped area shall be covered with a layer of angular natural stones a
minimum diameter of eighteen inches (18"). The surface of the stones on the slope shall be so arranged as to enable a person to
climb out of the pond over the stones. The area between the top of the slope and the high water level shall be protected by sodding
in order to prevent soil erosion. The first twelve feet (12') of the sodded area at the top of the slope shall be sloped at two percent
(2%) toward the pond. At the toe of the partially submerged slope, a ten foot (10') wide safety ledge sloped toward the shore at four
percent (4%) shall be provided. Beyond the safety ledge, the pond shall slope at two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) down to the
bottom of the pond elevation. Twenty five percent (25%) or more of the area of the surface of the pond at the normal water level
shall be twelve feet (12'), or more, deep. All remaining areas inside of the safety ledge area shall be at a minimum depth of five feet
(5') from the normal water level.
e. Dry-bottom detention facilities shall be designed so that the cross slopes are at least two percent (2%) and the side slopes are not
steeper than six horizontal to one vertical (6:1). If the longitudinal slope of the bottom of the facility is less than one and one-half
percent (11/2%), the facility shall be provided with an underdrain of a minimum six inch (6") diameter perforated PVC pipe covered
on all sides, top and bottom, by six inches (6") of gravel, gradation CA18, which is completely wrapped in filter cloth, and is placed
under four inches (4") of top soil and sod. The underdrain shall be installed to drain the basin below grade during periods of low
flow and shall connect to the storm sewer system. The spillway crest elevation shall be no more than four feet (4') higher than the
lowest ground elevation in the detention facility. Dry-bottom facilities shall follow Construction Standard STS-2. (Ord. 617-94, 10-10-
1994)
10-3-10: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
All streets within all subdivisions or for access to planned developments as herein defined shall be improved with a durable hard-surfaced
roadway in accordance with the following:
A. Base Course And Surface Course: Base courses and surface courses shall comply with the Village specifications and control
ordinances. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
B. Design Standards: Except as otherwise provided in this Title, all street improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the applicable provisions of the following:
1. "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", Illinois Department of Transportation, latest edition.
2. "Manual for Structural Design of Portland Cement Concrete Pavement", Illinois Department of Transportation, latest edition.
3. "Manual of Instructions for the Structural Design of Flexible Pavements on Projects Involving MFT, FAS and FAUS Funds", Illinois
department of transportation, latest edition.
4. "Design Manual", Illinois department of transportation, latest edition.
5. "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways", Illinois department of transportation, latest edition.
C. Street Improvements:
1. General: (Ord. 762-96, 5-13-1996)
a. All streets, public or private, shall meet or exceed the minimum standards set forth at table 1 of this section. (Ord. 926-01, 1-15-
2001)
TABLE 1
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR PAVEMENT DESIGN
Street
Row
Width
Feet
Pavement
Width Feet
Min.
Hor.
Curve
Radius
Min. Tangent
Between
Hor. Reverse
Curves
Min.
Vert.
Curve
Length
Min.
Crown
Max.
Gradient
Min.
Gradient
Min.
Structural
Number
Min.
Intersect.
Curb
Radius
Arterial 100 * * * * * * * * *
Major
80
44 (B-B) curb
and gutter
500'
200'
200'(b)
5.1"
4%
0.50%
4
50'
Collector
66
27 (B-B) curb
and gutter
275'
200'
100'(a)
3.0"
4%
0.50%
3.5
40'
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 395/426
Minor
66
27 (B-B) curb
and gutter
100'
75'
100'(a)
3.0"
5%
0.50%
3
30'
Cul-desac
66
27 (B-B) curb
and gutter
100'
75'
100'(a)
3.0"
5%
0.50%
3
30'
Business/
industrial
80
2 @ 27 (B-B)
curb and gutter
with 13' grassed
median strip
500'
200'
100'(a)
6.0"
3%
0.50%
4
50'
Private
street or
road
40
easement
18' edge to edge
of pavement
21' (B-B) curb
and gutter
100'
75'
100'(a)
3.0"
5%
0.50%
3
20'
(a)40 feet for each 1 percent of algebraic difference of grade, but in no case less than 100 feet.
(b)50 feet for each 1 percent of algebraic difference of grade, but in no case less than 200 feet.
*Per IDOT/LCDOT standards.
(Ord. 845-98, 9-14-1998)
b. Deceleration lanes shall be constructed at the intersection of any Village street with any major or arterial street.
c. Pavement materials shall meet or exceed the strength requirements set forth at Table 2.
All aggregate material for subbase and base course shall be crushed stone or crushed gravel.
TABLE 2
STRENGTH REQUIREMENTS
Material M.S. IBR PSI
Structural
Layer
Coefficient
Surface Course:
Flexible: Surface, Class I 1700 0.40
Rigid: Portland cement
concrete (Class PV with
5%-7% air entrainment)
1850 (3-day)
2850 (7-day)
3500 (14-day)
0.50
Base Course:
Aggregate, Type B
Crushed gravel 50 0.10
Crushed stone 80 0.13
Aggregate, Type A 80 0.13
Binder, Class I 1700 0.33
Bituminous aggregate
mixture 2400 0.28
M.S. = Marshall Stability/IBR = Illinois Bearing Ratio
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 396/426
2. Subgrade Preparation:
a. Subgrade materials shall have a minimum Illinois Bearing Ratio (IBR) of 3.0 in all areas to be paved. The required minimum IBR
shall be explicitly stated in the approved plans and specifications.
b. In the event that any portion(s) of the subgrade are undercut, it shall be replaced with crushed stone without any round or
subangular material. If angular stone three inches (3") or greater in diameter is used for such replacement, the depth of the
undercut shall be not less than twelve inches (12") and said stone shall be mixed with well-graded aggregate to fill the voids.
c. At least one moisture and density test shall be taken in each embankment section, with the maximum distance between tests of
three hundred feet (300'). The method of testing shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer. The results of such tests
shall be submitted to the Village Engineer, and no proof-rolling of the subgrade shall take place prior to the Village Engineer's
approval of said results.
d. The subgrade shall be proof-rolled in the presence of the Village Engineer. Proof-rolling shall be done using a three-axle dump
truck together with load weighing at least twenty five (25) tons. The tires shall be designed for highway use and shall be properly
inflated. The load shall be uniformly placed in the dump body.
Subgrade allowing deflection of more than one-fourth inch (1/4") at any wheel shall either be recompacted, or undercut and
replaced with suitable compacted replacement material, as directed by the Village Engineer, prior to placement of the subbase or
base course.
Proof-rolling shall be explicitly specified in the approved plans and specifications.
e. The subgrade shall include the area extending two feet (2') beyond the finished pavement width of all streets constructed without
curb and gutter, and six inches (6") beyond the back of curb of all streets constructed with curb and gutter.
3. Flexible Pavement Construction:
a. Flexible pavement materials shall not be installed prior to May 1 of any year. Flexible pavement materials shall be installed after
October 1 of any year only upon written authorization of the Village Engineer, and shall proceed at the sole risk of the developer.
b. Flexible pavement materials shall be installed in three (3) courses; the bituminous aggregate mixture (BAM) base course, the
bituminous asphalt binder course, and the bituminous asphalt surface course. Each course, or lift thereof, shall be tested for
compaction by the nuclear density testing method.
(1) The base course shall be installed in one or more lifts of BAM, after inspection and approval of the subgrade by the village
engineer. Nuclear density test reports shall be submitted to the village engineer with respect to each lift of the base course, and
each lift shall be inspected and approved by the village engineer before any subsequent lift of the base course or the binder
course is installed. Any deficiencies in any lift of the base course shall be repaired or remedied prior to such approval.
(2) The binder course shall be installed in one lift of bituminous asphalt binder course material, after inspection and approval of the
base course by the village engineer. Nuclear density test reports shall be submitted to the village engineer with respect to the
binder course, and the binder course shall be inspected and preliminarily approved by the village engineer. Any deficiencies in
the binder course shall be repaired or remedied prior to such preliminary approval. After such preliminary approval, the binder
course shall set for not less than one year. After the setting period, and during the same construction season as, but prior to,
installation of the surface course, pavement boring reports and a dynaflect pavement evaluation program report, or approved
equivalent, shall be submitted to the village engineer, and the village engineer shall inspect and approve the pavement materials
previously installed. Any deficiencies in the pavement materials and/or subgrade shall be repaired or remedied prior to such
approval, and all remedial patching shall be done by full depth saw-cutting and replacement, covered by a reflective crack control
treatment.
(3) The surface course shall be installed in one lift of bituminous asphalt surface course material, after approval of the binder
course by the village engineer and, to the extent determined to be necessary by the village engineer, priming of the binder
course. Nuclear density test reports shall be submitted to the village engineer with respect to the surface course, and the surface
course shall be inspected and approved by the village engineer. Any deficiencies in the surface course shall be repaired or
remedied prior to such approval. Not less than six (6) months, nor more than twelve (12) months, after such approval, the surface
course shall be sealed with a preservative seal of reclamite, or approved equivalent, applied in a solution of two (2) parts sealant
to one part water at a rate of six one hundredths (0.06) gallons per square yard, and covered with sand or limestone screenings
at a rate of one half to one (0.5:1.0) pound per square yard. Repeated coverings with sand or limestone screenings shall be
applied at the direction of the village engineer. (Ord. 762-96, 5-13-1996)
4. Curb And Gutter:
a. Combination concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed along both sides of all full-street pavements, whether private or public,
and in all parking and loading areas where runoff waters run parallel to the edge of pavement. Concrete barrier curb shall be
constructed along the edge of pavement of all nonresidential parking and loading areas, except such portion thereof where
combination curb and gutter is required. Where curbs are to be cast integrally with a rigid pavement, such curbs shall be reinforced
in the same manner as said pavement. Each combination curb and gutter and barrier curb shall be designed in accordance with
construction standards C-1 and C-2, as set forth in section 10-3-15 of this chapter. (Ord. 926-01, 1-15-2001)
b. Depressed curb or driveway entrances shall be provided at each driveway entrance and at each sidewalk intersecting the curb line.
c. Expansion joints shall be installed in each curb and combination curb and gutter at intervals not to exceed sixty feet (60').
Expansion joints shall also be installed at the following locations:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 397/426
(1) Five feet (5') from, and on each side of, any casting located in the curb or combination curb and gutter;
(2) Each change in horizontal curvature;
(3) Each junction with an existing curb or combination curb and gutter; and
(4) To match expansion joints in abutting rigid pavement or sidewalk.
d. Steel reinforcement consisting of at least two (2) No. 5 steel bars shall be installed in all concrete curbs and gutters at all trench
crossings. Said reinforcement shall be continuous in the ten feet (10') centered over the trench.
e. Control joints shall be installed in each curb and combination curb and gutter at intervals not to exceed fifteen feet (15') and so as
to match any control joints in abutting pavement or sidewalk.
All control joints shall be saw-cut to a depth of not less than one and one-half inches (1.5").
f. Each combination concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed atop not less than four inches (4") of well-compacted aggregate
subbase materials and/or aggregate base course material, and shall not block drainage of the subgrade, subbase or base course.
g. Underdrain shall be placed parallel to the curb or curb and gutter in locations as directed by the Village Engineer to prevent water
penetration and/or accumulation into the road base. The underdrain shall be a four inch (4") minimum diameter perforated PVC
pipe, surrounded on each side by not less than four inches (4") of CA 18 gravel.
Said underdrain and gravel shall be completely enclosed, and double-layered on top, by a filter cloth envelope of woven or
nonwoven monofilament yarns with a sieve opening ranging from forty (40) to eighty (80). The underdrain shall be connected to the
storm sewer system.
5. Pavement Markings:
a. The following pavement markings shall be required, unless otherwise directed by the Village Engineer:
(1) Major Streets, Collector Streets And All Nonresidential Streets:
(A) Lane lines
(B) Edge lines (where no curb is installed)
(C) Median and no-passing lines
(D) Stop lines
(E) Crosswalks
(F) Railroad approach lines
(G) Lane symbols and letters.
(2) Cul-De-Sacs, Minor Streets:
(A) Railroad approach lines
(B) Stop lines at major and collector streets
(C) Crosswalks.
b. All pavement markings shall be thermoplastic pavement markings, except parking areas and edge lines, which may be painted.
c. All pavement marking lines parallel to the direction of travel shall be six inches (6") in width, except edge markings, which shall be
four inches (4") in width. Miscellaneous pavement markings, such as those in parking areas, shall be four inches (4") in width.
Markings not parallel to the direction of travel shall be not less than twelve inches (12") in width.
d. Immediately after any binder course is placed and compacted, pavement marking tape shall be installed and maintained until the
surface course is placed. Such pavement marking tape shall be removed before the surface course is placed.
6. Signage:
a. The developer shall install all street signs, and shall provide to the Village one additional dual-sided street identification sign for
each differently named street within each unit or phase of any subdivision.
b. All regulatory and warning signs shall use diamond grade sheeting 3M Series 3970, or approved equivalent. Such signs shall be
attached to three (3) pound green channel U-post using aluminum breakaway nuts and bolts.
Street name signs shall use high intensity sheeting on a flat stock aluminum plate. Street name letters shall be Series B, four
inches (4") in height, and street classification shall be Series B, two inches (2") in height. Street classification shall be abbreviated
(i.e., LN, RD, PKWY, etc.). Lettering shall be white and background shall be green. Street name signs shall be attached to a round
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 398/426
post aluminum bracket #922F and round cross aluminum bracket #990F, both with aluminum set screws. Brackets shall be
attached to a two and three-eighths inch (23/8") diameter galvanized steel post (154 wall thickness).
7. Pavement Material Thickness: All streets shall be constructed to meet or exceed the following material thickness standards:
a. Cul-De-Sacs And Minor Streets:
(1) Flexible Pavements:
(A) Surface course, two inches (2")
(B) Binder course, two inches (2")
(C) Base course, five inches (5")
(2) Rigid Pavements:
(A) Surface course, six inches (6")
(B) Base course, four inches (4")
b. Collector Streets:
(1) Flexible Pavements:
(A) Surface course, two inches (2")
(B) Binder course, two inches (2")
(C) Base course, seven inches (7")
(2) Rigid Pavements:
(A) Surface course, seven inches (7")
(B) Base course, four inches (4")
c. Major And Nonresidential Streets:
(1) Flexible Pavements:
(A) Surface course, two inches (2")
(B) Binder course, two inches (2")
(C) Base course, nine inches (9")
(2) Rigid Pavements:
(A) Surface course, eight inches (8")
(B) Base course, four inches (4")
8. Testing Of Pavement Materials:
a. In conjunction with any pavement construction within the Village, the developer shall conduct tests and, if applicable, provide the
Village Engineer certificates of testing and/or test reports from the Illinois Department of Transportation, the Lake County Division of
Transportation and/or a testing laboratory which has been prequalified by the Illinois Department of Transportation for testing BAM,
bituminous asphalt binder course Class I, bituminous asphalt surface course Class I and/or Portland cement concrete, as follows:
(1) All Pavements:
(A) Pavement Thickness: For each lift or course, by string line, and for completed pavement, by core samples.
(B) Subgrade: By proof-rolling as provided at subsection 10-3-10C2d of this Section.
(2) Flexible Pavements:
(A) All Courses:
(i) Proportioning Tests: A minimum of one plant inspection report per day, indicating moisture and gradation data.
(ii) Density Tests: Nuclear density test reports, at the greater of two (2) per day, one per location or one for each five hundred
(500) tons of material.
(B) Binder Course:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 399/426
(i) Pavement Borings: Pavement boring reports, for borings spaced at intervals of not more than three hundred feet (300'),
indicating boring locations on a street map, and material composition, thickness of each structural material, density and
condition of the subgrade.
(ii) Dynaflect Pavement Evaluation Program: A Dynaflect pavement evaluation program report, or approved equivalent,
including environmental study, pavement surface evaluation, soil borings at approximately one boring per mile and dynamic
pavement deflection analysis using a Dynaflect machine, or approved equivalent, with Benkelman Beam, or approved
equivalent. Such program shall evaluate the binder course in sections not longer than two hundred feet (200').
(3) Rigid Pavements:
(A) Certificate of testing with one set of cylinders (consisting of 1 cylinder for the 7 day break and 1 cylinder for the 14 day break)
for each day's pour, or fifty (50) cubic yards, whichever is fewer.
(B) Where any pavement testing shows any deficiency in the subgrade or pavement, the village engineer may direct any
additional testing and/or remedial work which he deems, in his sole discretion, to be necessary. (Ord. 762-96, 5-13-1996)
D. Landscaping Within Public Rights Of Way; Grass Seeding Or Sod Required: All unpaved areas within street rights of way shall be
seeded or sodded with Kentucky blue grass mixture or with such other grass mixture as approved by the village board. Before the
release of the twelve (12) month maintenance bond can be recommended by the village engineer, all unpaved areas between the edge
of the road pavement and the right of way line must support an adequate mat of grass. Provisions shall be made to assure the growth of
all landscaping.
E. Sidewalks: Sidewalks, where required, shall be constructed of air entrained portland cement concrete, to a thickness of five inches (5"),
six inches (6") at driveways. Concrete for such sidewalks shall have a minimum twenty eight (28) day compressive strength of four
thousand (4,000) pounds.
F. Trees:
1. One tree shall be required for the equivalent of each fifty feet (50') of linear lot boundary adjoining the street right of way; however, the
clustering of trees may be permitted; provided, that the minimum number of trees required for a particular lot is clustered on the same
lot.
2. Placement of trees shall be in the front yard and required corner side yard within fifteen feet (15') from the property line or, when
clustered trees are approved, may extend along the interior lot line a maximum distance equal to the front yard setback. Trees placed
along side property lines must not interfere with required drainage and must be placed within twenty feet (20') from the interior lot line.
3. Shade trees will have a minimum trunk diameter of three inches (3") measured twelve inches (12") above grade. Alternative shade
tree equivalents may be provided subject to village approval. Equivalent shade trees may be either ornamental or evergreens. Two
(2) ornamental trees may be permitted as an alternative to required shade tree. Minimum ornamental tree size shall be one and onehalf
inches (11/2") in diameter measured twelve inches (12") above grade or five feet (5') in height for multistemmed trees. One and
one-half (11/2) evergreen trees may be permitted as an alternative to one required shade tree when the minimum evergreen tree size
is five feet (5') in height. One evergreen tree may be permitted as an alternative to one required shade tree when the minimum
evergreen tree is eight feet (8') in height. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
4. The following shade tree species, shade tree equivalents and cultivars of the listed species shall be permitted:
List Of Permitted Street Trees
Shade trees minimum size 3" diameter
Acer platanoides - Norway maple
Acer rubrum - Red maple
Acer saccharum - Sugar maple
Carya ovata - Hickory
Celtis occidentalis - Hackberry
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis - Thornless honeylocust
Gymnocadus dioicus - Coffee tree
Ostrya virginiana - Ironwood
Pinus strobus - White pine
Prunus seotina - American black cherry
Quercus alba - White oak
Quercus bicolor - Swamp white oak
Quercus macrocarpa - Burr oak
Quercus palustris - Rin oak
Quercus rubra - Red oak
Tilia americana - Linden
Tilia cordata - Little leaf linden
Tilia redmond - Redmond linden
List Of Equivalent Ornamental Shade Trees
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 400/426
Ornamental trees minimum size 11/2" diameter
Tree form or 5' multistemmed
2 trees required per shade tree
Acer ginnula - Amur maple
Amelanchier canadensis stonifera - Shadblow serviceberry
Amelanchier grandflora - Grandflora serviceberry
Betula migra - River birch
Cornus mas - Cornelian cherry
Crataegus crusgalli inermis - Thornless hawthorn
Hamamelis virginiana - Common witchhazel
Malus species - Crab apple varieties
Viburnum prunifolium - Blackhaw viburnum
List Of Equivalent Evergreen Trees
Evergreen trees, minimum size 5' - 1.5 tree per shade tree
Evergreen trees, minimum size 8' - 1 tree per shade tree
Picea abies - Norway spruce
Picea glauca densata - Black Hills spruce
Picea pungens - Green or blue spruce
Pinus nigra - Austrian pine
Pinus sylvestris - Scotch pine
(Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. Ord. 1374-11, 9-19-2011)
5. All trees planted in accordance with this title shall be installed by use of a tree spade or balled and burlapped at the time of
installation.
6. Existing trees shall be preserved, if possible, as determined by the village engineer, village planner or a landscape architect.
7. A landscape plan shall be proposed by a landscape architect in accordance with the requirements of this title as part of the final plat
submission.
8. A note shall appear on the final plat as follows:
As a condition of final plat approval, a landscape plan dated and approved exists, which may or may not affect lots in the (name of
subdivision).
G. Screen Planting Required: Protective screen planting may be required to secure a reasonably effective physical barrier between
residential properties and adjoining uses to minimize adverse conditions of sight and sound. The screen planting plan shall be prepared
by a landscape architect and shall meet the approval of the plan commission. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
H. Berm Required: A barrier berm shall be constructed along each major and arterial street adjacent to or within each subdivision or
development. Such berm shall have a slope of not more than three to one (3:1) and shall have a height which varies from not less than
two feet (2') to not more than five feet (5'). Such berm, in conjunction with screening landscaping, shall create a sight and sound barrier
between the street and the adjacent property. Such berm shall be set back from the street right of way in accordance with construction
standards P-3 and P-4. (Ord. 813-97, 12-8-1997)
10-3-11: STREET LIGHTING IMPROVEMENTS:
Street lighting improvements, where required, shall be installed to service all property developed. Such improvements shall be of the
individual service utilizing the standard luminaries of the constant wattage type to provide lighting levels as hereinafter set forth. The design
shall be in accordance with the "Illuminating Engineering Society's Lighting Handbook", latest edition.
MAINTAINED HORIZONTAL ILLUMINATION
(Average)
Roadway And
Walkway Classification
Area Classification
Commercial
Business And
Industrial Residential
Foot-
Candles
Lux Foot-
Candles
Lux Foot-
Candles
Lux
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 401/426
Vehicular designation:
Collector 1.0 11 0.8 9 0.5 5
Major 0.8 9 0.6 6 0.3 3
Minor 0.6 6 0.4 4 0.2 2
Pedestrian walkways:
Sidewalks 0.6 6 0.4 4 0.2 2
(Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. 1995 Code)
10-3-12: ENGINEERING DOCUMENTS AND FEES:
A. Complete engineering documents with signature and seal of registered professional engineer along with cost estimate, guarantees and
certificates shall be furnished to the village. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. 1995 Code)
B. The fee for application for concept plan, preliminary plat and final plat shall be as set forth in subsection 11-1-1B6 of this code. (Ord.
1160-06, 4-17-2006)
C. A subdivider shall be obliged to and shall submit a draw down deposit agreement in the form approved by the village to cover fees and
costs attributable to the subdivider. A sample of said agreement is set forth in section 11-1-2 of this code. (Ord. 1167-06, 5-15-2006;
amd. Ord. 1352-10, 11-15-2010)
10-3-13: INSPECTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Inspection Required: All grading, paving, landscaping, sewers, water mains, and other required improvements shall be inspected during
the course of construction, and upon completion, by the village engineer.
B. Notification Required: During the course of construction of required improvements, the developer shall notify the village engineer forty
eight (48) hours before any construction work or other activity requiring inspection. (Ord. 762-96, 5-13-1996)
10-3-14: ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Upon the completion of construction of all public improvements required by this title, and certification by the village engineer that such
public improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved engineering plans and specifications, the
design engineer engaged by the subdivider, builder or land developer shall prepare and submit to the village engineer as built plans as
follows: four (4) sets of blueline prints; one set on reproducible mylar; one set on microfilm; and one set, in AutoCAD format, on three
and one-half inch (31/2") floppy disk(s). Such as built plans shall include, but not be limited to, the following information, together with
such other or additional information as the village engineer shall specify:
1. Driveways: Pavement type and locations.
2. Driveway culverts: Offset from roadway, size of pipe, pipe material, length of pipe, pipe inverts, slope of pipe.
3. Roadways: Centerline spot elevations, edge of pavement spot elevations, longitude slope, traverse slope, top of curb elevations.
4. Streetlights: Location and offset from roadway.
5. Mailboxes: Location and offset from roadway.
6. Roadway signs: Location and offset from roadway.
7. Utilities: Location and offset from roadway and/or property lines.
8. Trees: Location and offset from roadway.
9. Ditchlines: Spot elevations and slopes.
10. Detention Facilities: One foot (1') grade contours of all constructed elevations and calculations showing that volume requirements
have been met.
11. Overflow Routes: Cross section verification of area required for design flow. (Ord. 762-96, 5-13-1996)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 402/426
12. Storm, Sanitary And Water Main: Structure location and offsets from roadway and/or property lines, rim and invert elevations of all
structures, pipe size and slope, length of pipe, and pipe material.
13. Storm, Sanitary And Water Services: Location and offset from main line and/or roadway, approximate depth from grade, size of
service line and pipe material. (Ord. 776-96, 11-11-1996)
B. The subdivider shall furnish maintenance bonds, cash, certified checks and/or letters of credit, in a form approved by the village attorney,
guaranteeing the improvements against faulty workmanship and/or materials for a period of one year after acceptance and in amounts
equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total cost of the improvements to be accepted. The subdividers obligation under this
subsection may be satisfied through the villages retention of an appropriate amount of the security furnished by the subdivider to secure
the completion of such improvements, provided that the village has the right to draw upon such security as necessary or appropriate for
such maintenance purposes.
C. The subdivider shall furnish appropriate bills of sale or other documents conveying and transferring all required improvements to the
village, except service lines, driveways and other improvements which serve individual parcels, storm water detention and/or retention
facilities on individual parcels or outlots, approved private streets, and appurtenances thereto. Such bills of sale or other documents
shall be accepted by resolution of the village board. (Ord. 803-97, 8-11-1997)
10-3-15: APPENDIX:
See following page for appendix to ordinance 617-94 as amended. (Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994; amd. Ord. 813-97, 12-8-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 403/426
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 404/426
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 405/426
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 406/426
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 407/426
(Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 408/426
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 409/426
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 410/426
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 411/426
(Ord. 813-97, 12-8-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 412/426
(Ord. 617-94, 10-10-1994)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 413/426
Chapter 4
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT1
10-4-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted to establish reasonable rules and regulations for floodplain and stormwater management in order to:
A. Minimize harm due to periodic flooding including loss of life and property and threats and inconveniences to public health, safety and
welfare;
B. Assure that new development does not increase flooding and drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to
erosion;
C. Lessen the financial burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and for flood
rescue and relief operations;
D. Protect, assure and promote the orderly development of land and water resources;
E. Protect buildings and improvements to buildings from flood damage to the greatest extent possible;
F. Preserve the natural hydrologic, hydraulic and other beneficial functions of watercourses, floodplains, wetlands and protect water quality;
G. Ensure "no net loss" of the village's existing wetland resources including acreage, types and functional values;
H. Conserve the flood mitigation and stormwater control benefits of wetlands which store and desynchronize flood flows;
I. Enhance pollution treatment and water quality by conserving wetlands which serve as sedimentation and filtering basins for organic and
inorganic nutrients and toxic materials;
J. Protect the quality of groundwater and recharge sites;
K. Prevent disruption of the economy and governmental services due to stormwater and flood damage;
L. Maintain eligibility for the village in the national flood insurance program and thus make federally subsidized flood insurance available;
and
M. Preserve and protect plants, fish and wildlife. (Ord. 505-91, 11-11-1991)
10-4-2: LAKE COUNTY WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE ADOPTED:
A. Adoption: The Lake County watershed development ordinance, as most recently amended by the county of Lake on October 13, 2015, is
hereby adopted by reference and is in full force and effect within the village of Hawthorn Woods and is found in its own compilation.
(Ord. 1621-16, 1-21-2016)
B. Amendments: The following additions, insertions, deletions and changes are hereby made to the Lake County watershed development
ordinance: (Ord. 1158-06, 3-20-2006)
Article IV - Amend by deleting section E.5.b.(2),(3) and (4). Therefore, all mitigation required by this section shall occur on site.
(Ord. 1158-06, 3-20-2006; amd. Ord. 1207-07, 4-2-2007)
C. Regulations Imposed: Where the rules, regulations, terms or conditions imposed pursuant to the Lake County watershed development
ordinance are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable rules, regulations, terms or conditions imposed by any other
provision herein, or any other applicable rule, regulation, resolution, ordinance, statute or law, then the most restrictive rules,
regulations, terms or conditions shall govern. (Ord. 1158-06, 3-20-2006)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 414/426
10-4-3: FEES:
A schedule of fees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be established by separate resolution. Any public agency which
provides services to the village shall be compensated for the costs of those services by the village. (Ord. 505-91, 11-11-1991; amd. Ord.
884-99, 12-13-1999)
10-4-4: PENALTIES AND LEGAL ACTIONS:
A. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a violation, and any person, upon conviction thereof, shall
be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
B. The village may also take any other legal action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation including appropriate equitable or
injunctive relief, and, if applicable, an assessment to the violator for the removal, correction or termination of any adverse effects upon
any property resulting from any unauthorized activity for which legal action under this section may have been brought.
C. For the purposes of this section, the owner, developer and/or contractor doing development work on the land shall be jointly and
severally liable for any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 505-91, 11-11-1991; amd. 1995 Code; Ord. 884-99, 12-13-1999)
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10-5-1: ORGANIZATION:
The following offices of the government of the village are concerned with the administration of this title:
A. The village board.
B. The village plan commission.
C. The village engineer/village planner.
D. Village planner. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
E. Chief operating officer. (Ord. 1290-09, 8-17-2009)
10-5-2: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
A. Hardships: Where the plan commission and village board find that extraordinary hardships or particular difficulties regarding the physical
development of land may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may recommend variations or exceptions to the
regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that such variation or exception shall not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this title; and further provided, the plan commission shall not recommend variations
or exception to the regulations of this title unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case
that:
1. Public Welfare Protected: The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare or injurious to
other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located.
2. Unique Condition: The conditions upon which the request for a variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is
sought and are not applicable, generally, to other property.
3. Particular Physical Conditions: Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific
property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the
regulations were carried out.
B. Conditions: In recommending variations and exceptions, the plan commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of this title.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 415/426
C. Procedure: A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time the preliminary plan is filed for
consideration by the plan commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the
petitioner.
D. Recommendations: Such variations and exceptions as may be recommended by the plan commission shall be forwarded to the village
board in writing, substantiating the recommended variations and/or exceptions. The village board may approve such variations or
exceptions from the requirements of this title in specific cases as listed on the final plat, which in its opinion do not adversely affect the
adopted comprehensive plan or the intent and purpose of this title. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
10-5-3: AMENDMENTS:
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare, the village board may from time to time amend the regulations
imposed by this title. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
10-5-4: PUBLIC UTILITIES PERMITS:
Public utilities shall obtain permits from the village board for the installation of communications, electric power, gas or other utility services
before any installation work is started. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989)
10-5-5: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person who fails to comply with, or violates, any of the provisions of this title shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1
of this code and each day the violations continues shall be considered a separate offense.
B. Whoever shall sell or offer for sale, lease or offer for lease, while this title is in effect, any lot or lots or block or blocks, within the
incorporated limits of the village or any resubdivision of any lot or block therein, or within contiguous territory and not more than one and
one-half (11/2) miles beyond the incorporated boundary of the village before a final plat of subdivision has been approved by the plan
commission and the village board of trustees as required by this title, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code
for each lot, block, or part thereof so disposed of, offered for sale or leased. (Ord. 439-89, 12-11-1989; amd. 1995 Code)
Title 11
FEES
Chapter 1
FEES, RATES AND CHARGES
11-1-1: FEES FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES AND PURPOSES:
The Village Board may, in its discretion, waive any fees and deposits that are not otherwise legally required, and that are established in this
chapter for the benefit of any government entity or not for profit organizations, except for deposits made to reimburse the Village for costs of
professional, architectural, planning, engineering and legal services, utility connection fees and fees used to pay the Village's out of pocket
costs, including, but not limited to, publication costs, fees for the services of a court reporter, plan reviews and building inspection fees.
Where an ordinance or resolution of the Village licenses, regulates or otherwise governs a particular activity or purpose, and a fee or
charge is provided for in conjunction therewith, the amount of such fee or charge shall be as follows:
Activity Or Purpose Fee Or Charge
A.
Facility usage:
1. Barn rental:
a.
Resident $150.00 first 2
hours,
$100.00/hour
thereafter
b. Nonresident $150.00/hour; 3
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 416/426
hour minimum
c.
Maintenance fee $50.00
d.
Security personnel 25.00/hour
e.
Security deposit $200.00, not
refundable if
canceled by renter
f.
Audio/visual rental fee $150.00
2. Barn loft:
a.
Resident 35.00/hour
b.
Nonresident 70.00/hour
c.
Maintenance fee 50.00
d.
Security personnel 25.00/hour
e.
Security deposit $200.00, not
refundable if
canceled by renter
3. Aquatic Center pool:
a.
Swim party and room rental party packages: Monday - Sunday, 2 hour bookings
(1) Outdoor party package: A 2-hour reserved outdoor space and all day access to the
outdoor facility for up to 24 guests
$150.00 resident;
$175.00 nonresident
(2) Indoor basic party package: A 2-hour shared room reservation and all day access to the
outdoor facility for up to 30 guests
$250.00 resident;
$275.00 nonresident
(3) Indoor deluxe party package: A 2-hour private room reservation and all day access to the
outdoor facility for up to 60 guests
$400.00 resident;
$425.00 nonresident
(4) For swim party and room rental party packages $50.00 holding
deposit due at the
time of booking;
non-refundable if
cancelled by
renter; deposit is
applied to total
amount due on the
day of rental
b.
After-hours private pool party rentals: Friday - Sunday, 6:30 P.M. - 8:30 P.M. The first 1/2 hour
is during open swim hours; the last 11/2 hours are private. Lifeguards and staff included in
rental
(1) Activity pool/slides rental: Includes 2-hour use in the activity pool and outdoor party deck
with 2 slides, 0 depth entry, and spray features for up to 50 guests
$275.00/resident;
$325.00/nonresident
(2) Main pool/diving pool rental: Includes 2-hours of use of the main pool only and outdoor
party deck with 6 lap lanes, diving well with two 1-meter boards, for up to 100 guests
$325.00/resident;
$375.00/nonresident
(3) Aquatic full-facility rental: Includes use of the entire outdoor pool facilities (main pool,
activity pool, diving well, slides) for up to 300 guests
$450.00/resident;
$500.00/nonresident
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 417/426
(4) For after-hours private pool party rentals $150.00 holding
deposit due at the
time of booking;
non-refundable if
cancelled by
renter; deposit is
applied to total
amount due on the
day of rental
c.
Add-on fees:
(1) Food opt-out fee $25.00 and
minimum order of
$50.00
(2) Indoor extra hour $50.00/hour
shared room;
$100.00/hour
private room
(3) Reserved outdoor space extra hour $25.00/hour
(4) Additional guests 5.00/person
(5) Additional staff 25.00/hour
4. Community room at Aquatic Center:
a.
Resident $100.00/hour, 2
hour minimum
b.
Nonresident $150.00/hour, 2
hour minimum
c.
Maintenance fee $50.00
d.
Security personnel 25.00/hour
e.
Security deposit $200.00, not
refundable if
canceled by renter
f.
Floor removal/setup fee $50.00
5. Heritage Oaks gazebo:
a.
Resident 25.00/hour
b.
Nonresident 50.00/hour
c.
Maintenance fee 50.00
d.
Setup fee 25.00
e.
Security deposit $200.00, not
refundable if
canceled by renter
6. Community Park gazebo:
a.
Resident $35.00/hour
b.
Nonresident 70.00/hour
c. Maintenance fee 50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 418/426
d.
Setup fee 25.00
e.
Security deposit $200.00, not
refundable if
canceled by renter
7. Heritage Oaks pavilion:
a.
Resident $ 75.00/hour
b.
Nonresident 150.00/hour
c.
Maintenance fee 50.00
d.
Setup fee 25.00
e.
Security deposit $200.00, not
refundable if
canceled by renter
B.
Planning/development:
1. Draw down deposit agreement:
Single-family residential lot $ 2,000.00
0.00 - 4.99 acres 4,000.00
5.00 - 15.99 acres 8,000.00
16.00 - 50.99 acres 16,000.00
51.00 - 100.99 acres 20,000.00
101.00 - 200.99 acres 40,000.00
201.00 - 300.99 acres 60,000.00
301.00 - 400.99 acres 80,000.00
401.00 - 600.99 acres 100,000.00
601.00 acres and greater 200,000.00
Notwithstanding the foregoing applications requesting a zoning variation, zoning amendment, certificate
of approval, special use permit, or ditch line construction permit for a single, previously subdivided lot,
shall require a deposit of $1,000.00
Final plat approval - 1.5 mile jurisdiction 2,000.00
2. Department director or planning manager rate 125.00/hour
Staff rate (research/analysis) 100.00/hour
3. Zoning variation hearing1:
a.
Residential (existing) 250.00
b.
Residential (new) 300.00
c.
Nonresidential (existing) 550.00
d.
Nonresidential (new) 550.00
4. Special use permit hearing1:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 419/426
a.
Residential 500.00
b.
Nonresidential 800.00
5. Zoning amendment hearing1:
a.
Text amendment 500.00
b.
Map amendment 600.00
6. Subdivision review1:
a.
Concept plan 550.00
b.
Preliminary plat $550.00 plus
$60.00/lot
c.
Final plat $600.00
7. Board of appeals hearing (see subsection 8-1-6B of this code) 300.00
8. Certificate of approval hearing (building facade/storefront/site plan/landscape plan)1 250.00
9. Annexation $1,000.00/acre or
dwelling,
whichever is
greater ($1,000.00
minimum)
10.
Application for personal wireless services facility (PWS)1:
a.
New towers $6,000.00
b.
Collocates 2,500.00
c.
Ground based structures only 1,500.00
11.
Temporary use permit - cell on wheels device:
a.
First permit (30 day maximum) 400.00
b.
Each renewal of permit (maximum of 2 renewals) 400.00
12.
Zoning letters 250.00
13.
Capital improvement and community development fee 5,531.00
C.
Reserved.
D.
Reserved.
E.
Motor vehicle licenses:
1. Passenger car 30.00
2. Truck (up to 8,000 pounds) 30.00
3. Truck (8,001 - 14,000 pounds) 40.00
4. Truck (over 14,000 pounds) 55.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 420/426
5. Motorcycle 20.00
6. Antique car with antique plates 15.00
7. Recreational vehicle 30.00
8. Scooter under 250cc 15.00
9. Privately owned golf carts 20.00
10.
Replacement/transfer sticker 5.00
11.
Senior citizen (1 sticker per resident 65 years of age or older) 5.00
12.
Prorated cost on or after July 1 for any person who becomes the owner of any new vehicle on or
after July 1 of any license year, or any person who becomes a new resident of the Village on or
after July 1 of any license year
50% of applicable
fees
F.
General fees and charges:
1. Accident report $ 5.00
2. Zoning ordinance 45.00
3. Subdivision control ordinance 45.00
4. Village street map 10.00
5. Comprehensive Plan 80.00
6. Village zoning map 10.00
7. Returned check/NSF 30.00
8. Recording of letter of indemnification 50.00
9. Recreational vehicle permit:
a.
Guest - RV 25.00
10.
Controlled burn permit 25.00
11.
Administrative hearing fee for liable judgments 20.00
12.
Black and white copies (up to and including 11" x 17") No charge for first
50 pages;
thereafter,
$0.15/page
13.
Color copies (up to and including 11" x 17") $0.20/page
14.
Copies; all other sizes: black and white, and color 2.00/page
15.
Refund processing fee 15% of the amount
refunded; with a
maximum fee of
$50.00
16.
Administrative reimbursement processing fee 15%, but not more
than $50.00
G.
Dog license (see section 5-4-3 of this Code):
1. Annual license fee:
a.
January 1 - January 31 $ 10.00
b.
February 1 - February 29 15.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 421/426
c.
March 1 - December 31 20.00
However, if the reason for application being submitted after January 31 is that the owner became
a Village resident after January 31, the dog requiring the license was acquired after January 31,
or the dog became 3 months of age after January 31, these fees shall not apply and the fee
would be set forth in subsection G1a of this section
2. Replacement dog license tag 5.00
H.
Building permit/plan review/inspections/use and occupancy:
1. Fee (see title 8, chapter 2 of this Code):
a.
Class Type A:
Door, drainage tile, fence slats, firepit gas line, hot water heater, invisible pet fence, pet
fence, roofing, siding, storm sewer manhole, sump pump, window replacement
115.00
b.
Class Type B:
Air conditioner, chimney repair, culvert, demolition, dog run, drainage ditch,
driveway/driveway approach, elevator, fence, fireplace, furnace, garage floor replace, gate,
gate with electrical, outdoor kitchen/fireplace, patio, pavers, permanent signs, sprinkler,
electrical
205.00
c.
Class Type C:
Deck, generator, hot tub, pillar/light post, remodel minor (250 square feet and under),
satellite antenna system, solar energy system (building-mounted), solar energy systems
(SES3)
375.00
d.
Class Type D:
Addition, gazebo, porch, personal wireless services facility (PWS), remodel (251 square feet
or greater), basement finish/remodel limited (no plumbing work)
750.00
e.
Class Type E:
Basement finish/remodel (includes work on stubbed-out plumbing), swimming pool 1,700.00
f.
Class Type F:
New single-family home (connection fees, impact fees, recapture fees and other district fees
not included)
8,250.00
New townhome/rowhome - first unit permit fee (connection fees, impact fees, recapture fees
and other district fees not included)
8,250.00
New townhome/rowhome - permit fee for each additional unit in building (connection fees,
impact fees, recapture fees and other district fees not included)
6,400.00
For any projects not identified in subsection H1a through H1f of this section, permit fee will be
determined by the Community Development Director or designee
2. Plan re-review (0.5/1 hour) $53.00/$106.00
3. Re-inspection (0.5/1 hour) $53.00/$106.00
4. Use and occupancy certificate when change in occupancy only, not in connection with
construction (see subsection 8-2-7C of this Code):
a.
Temporary $ 200.00
b.
Final 100.00
Temporary certificate of occupancy extension (see subsection 8-2-7E1f of this Code):
a.
First 3-month extension 500.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 422/426
b.
Second 3-month extension 1,000.00
5. Personal wireless services facility (PWS) review analysis fee (for each small cell facility) 106.00
6. Cash or surety bond (see subsection 8-2-4A of this Code):
a.
New home 6,000.00
b.
Additions, pools, demolition, commercial build-out 4,000.00
c.
Commercial buildings 10,000.00
d.
Personal wireless services facility (PWS) 1,000.00
e.
All other improvement projects requiring a building permit 300.00
7. Excavation, grading and tree removal permit:
a.
Residential excavation permit or grading permit 50.00
b.
Nonresidential excavation permit or grading permit - under 25 acres1 300.00
c.
Nonresidential excavation permit or grading permit - 25 acres or greater 500.00
d.
Residential - amendment of a grading site development plan 25.00
e.
Nonresidential - amendment of a grading site development plan1 200.00
f.
Tree removal:
(1) Application $25.00 all trees
dead/alive
(2) Permit $50.00/live tree -
however no permit
fee if tree is box
elder, silver maple,
tree of heaven,
female ginkgo
tree, thorned
honey locust,
lombardy poplar,
black cottonwood,
Siberian elm,
buckthorn
8. Sign permit2:
a.
Temporary sign (30 day maximum) $55.00
b.
Temporary business sign (maximum 4 permits in calendar year) 55.00
9. Commercial and industrial building:
a.
Building permit $5,500.00 base
fee, plus
$0.50/square foot
b.
Plan review fee $0.20/square foot
c.
Inspections:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 423/426
(1) Backfill $ 53.00
(2) Base (or prepour) 53.00
(3) Culvert 53.00
(4) Electric - final (251 square feet or greater) 106.00
(5) Electric - final minor (250 square feet or less) 53.00
(6) Electric - rough (251 square feet or greater) 106.00
(7) Electric - rough minor (250 square feet or less) 53.00
(8) Elevator Consultant fee
plus 10 percent
administrative fee
(9) Final building (251 square feet or greater) $106.00
(10) Final building - minor (250 square feet or less) $53.00 (includes
electric final)
(11) Footing/posthole $ 53.00
(12) Foundation 53.00
(13) Fireplace 53.00
(14) Garage 53.00
(15) Gas piping 53.00
(16) Grading 73.00
(17) Insulation 106.00
(18) Insulation minor (250 square feet or less) 53.00
(19) Lawn sprinkler - RPZ valve required 53.00
(20) Patio 53.00
(21) Plumbing - aboveground (251 square feet or greater) 106.00
(22) Plumbing - aboveground minor (250 square feet or less) 53.00
(23) Plumbing - final (251 square feet or greater) 106.00
(24) Plumbing - final minor (250 square feet or less) 53.00
(25) Plumbing - sump/ejector 53.00
(26) Plumbing - underground 106.00
(27) Plumbing - underground minor remodel 53.00
(28) Plumbing fixtures:
New installation 25.00 each
Replacement 15.00 each
Water heater, new or replacement 35.00
Sump or ejector pump with fiber basin 35.00
Drain tile 35.00
(29) Right-of-way 53.00
(30) Rough framing - new construction and additions 160.00
(31) Rough framing 53.00
(32) Service electric 53.00
(33) Site - preliminary/initial 53.00
(34) Site - final 53.00
(35) Storm sewer 53.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 424/426
(36) Water/sanitary sewer connection 53.00
(37) Reinspection of any item noted above Double the original
fee
(38) Ice and water shield $53.00
(39) Sill plate 53.00
(40) Stack test 53.00
10.
Commercial build-out:
a.
Plan review $0.20/square foot
b.
Permit $500.00 base fee,
plus $0.50/square
foot
c.
Permit - fire alarm $75.00
d.
Permit - suppression 75.00
e.
Inspections See subsection
H9c of this section
11.
Stop work order; release (see subsection 8-2-6A of this Code):
a.
Residential Up to $500.00
b.
Nonresidential, and multi-family Up to $1,000.00
12.
Contractor and subcontractor registration:
a.
Demolition contractors $ 150.00
b.
Electrical contractors 150.00
c.
General contractors 150.00
d.
Heating, air conditioning, and refrigeration contractors 150.00
e.
Subcontractors (all trades not otherwise listed here) 150.00
For purposes of this subsection, the terms "contractors" and "subcontractors" shall include, but not
be limited to: any person or company who undertakes to construct, alter, improve, install, repair,
remodel, rehabilitate, renovate or move any land, house, building or other structure (of any kind or
nature, whether residential or not), or any fixture or any other item that is located on or in the ground
and/or attached to something that is located on or in the ground. No contractor registration under
this activity shall be required of any person performing any of the above defined work at or upon
property owned by said person, provided said person otherwise complies with all applicable
provisions of this Code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no registration shall be required of any
contractor or subcontractor where prohibited by State law
I.
Liquor licenses (see section 3-3-9 of this Code):
Class A 2,750.00
Class B 2,400.00
Class C 250.00
Class C license fee may be lowered at the discretion of the Chief Operating Officer
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 425/426
Class D 50.00
Class E 100.00
Class E license fee may be lowered at the discretion of the Chief Operating Officer
Class F 2,750.00
Class G 2,750.00
J.
General business fee schedule (see section 3-1-20 of this Code)
K.
Portable storage units and dumpster permits (see section 9-3-16 of this Code):
1. Portable storage unit 40.00
2. Dumpster permit 40.00
L. Aquatic Center fees:
Pass Type Resident Non-Resident
January early bird rates: Rates effective January 1 - 31:
Individual/nanny $ 59.00 $ 86.00
Family - 2 person 118.00 171.00
Family - 3 person 177.00 257.00
Family - 4 person 207.00 342.00
Family - 5 person 237.00 383.00
Additional person 59.00 86.00
Senior (65+) 57.00 86.00
Early bird rates: Rates effective February 1 through March 31:
Individual/nanny 66.00 86.00
Family - 2 person 131.00 171.00
Family - 3 person 197.00 257.00
Family - 4 person 230.00 342.00
Family - 5 person 263.00 383.00
Additional person 66.00 86.00
Senior (65+) 63.00 86.00
Standard rates: Rates effective April 1:
Individual/nanny 73.00 95.00
Family - 2 person 146.00 190.00
Family - 3 person 219.00 285.00
Family - 4 person 255.00 380.00
Family - 5 person 292.00 425.00
Additional person 73.00 95.00
Senior (65+) 70.00 95.00
Fee Type Resident Non-Resident
Daily fees:
Individual $8.00 $10.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=637 426/426
Youth/senior 6.00 8.00
Ages 3 and under Free Free
Individual twilight $4.00 $5.00
Youth/senior twilight 3.00 4.00
Activity Or Purpose Fee Or Charge
M. Book exchange boxes, commonly known as "little free libraries" $25.00
Notes:
1. Fees subject to draw down deposit agreement.
2. Plus fees for all applicable permits and inspections for all sign types.
3. Permit fees for SES on commercial buildings will be determined by the Community Development Director or designee.
(Ord. 1411-12, 7-16-2012, eff. 1-1-2013; amd. Ord. 1439-13, 2-19-2013; Ord. 1447-13, 4-15-2013; Ord. 1476-13, 11-18-2013, eff. 1-1-2014;
Ord. 1482-14, 1-21-2014; Ord. 1485-14, 2-18-2014; Ord. 1490-14, 3-31-2014; Ord. 1522-15, 2-23-2015; Ord. 1563-15, 5-19-2015; Ord.
1599-15, 10-19-2015; Ord. 1644-16, 3-21-2016; Ord. 1656-16, 4-25-2016; Ord. 1683-16, 7-18-2016; Ord. 1697-16, 10-24-2016; Ord. 1698-
16, 10-24-2016; Ord. 1721-17, 1-23-2017; Ord. 1725-17, 2-27-2017; Ord. 1756-17, 4-24-2017; Ord. 1780-17, 7-24-2017; Ord. 1791-17, 10-
23-2017; Ord. 1796-17, 12-13-2017; Ord. 1811-18, 1-22-2018; Ord. 1815-18, 2-26-2018; Ord. 1825-18, 3-26-2018)
11-1-2: DRAW DOWN DEPOSIT AGREEMENT:
With respect to applications relating to subsections 11-1-1B3, B4, B5, B6, B8, B10 and H7 of this chapter, and any annexation of property,
each owner and petitioner/applicant shall enter into a draw down deposit agreement with the Village. The draw down deposit agreement
shall be in substantially the following form: (Ord. 1698-16, 10-24-2016)
VILLAGE OF HAWTHORN WOODS
DRAW DOWN DEPOSIT AGREEMENT
I. OWNER
A. Owner of Property Date
B. Owner's Address
C. Owner's Phone Number
D. Owner's Email Address
II. PERSON MAKING REQUEST (PETITIONER)
A. Name of Petitioner
B. Petitioner's Address
C. Petitioner's Phone Number
D. Petitioner's Email Address