Chapter 1
CITY GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appointed City officers — See Ch. 2.
1:1

ARTICLE 1
Title; Interpretation; Penalties; Amendments
§ 1.01. Title; citations.
This Code shall be known as the "Municipal Code of Hometown" ("Code").
Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate
chapter heading (if any) and to the penalty clause relating thereto, as well
as to the section itself when reference is made to this Code by title in any
legal document or ordinance of this City.
§ 1.02. Construction of terms.
Whenever any word in any section of this Code importing the plural number
is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any
single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not be used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this Code by words importing the singular number
only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons, and
females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be
included. The words "person, firm or corporation" shall be deemed to
include any partnership, association, or organization of any kind; words in
the present shall include the future. The words "this Code" whenever used
in this Code shall be held and be taken to mean this entire Code, including
each and every section thereof. The word "city" or "City" whenever used
in this Code shall be held and taken to mean the City of Hometown. The
words "written" and "in writing" shall include printing. If a time is given in
a.m. or p.m., it shall mean Central Standard Time except when the City is
on Daylight Saving Time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted
in computing the time; however, the day on which such proceeding is to be
had shall not be counted. These rules of construction shall not be applied
to any section of this Code which contains any express provision excluding
such construction or where the subject matter or content of such section
may be repugnant thereto.
§ 1.02.1. Interpretation of terms.
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this
Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent of the Council
may be fully carried out.
§ 1.03. Penalties.
(A) In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may
elect under which to proceed; however, not more than one recovery
shall be held against the same person for the same offense; provided
§ 1.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.03
1:3
§ 1.04. Officers and employees.
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty from being enforced.
(B) Whenever in this Code a minimum but not maximum fine or penalty is
imposed, the court may in its discretion fine the offender any sum
exceeding the minimum fine or penalty so fixed, but not exceeding
$750. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 7-2016]
(C) Whenever in this Code the doing of any act or the omission to do any act
constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code, and there
shall be no fine or penalty for such breach, any person who shall be
convicted of any such breach shall be fined not less than $10 nor more
than $750 for each offense. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No.
7-2016]
(D) Whenever in this Code an offense is made punishable, except for
violations of Chapter 11, Article 2, Alcoholic Liquor Dealers, the
prosecuting officer or the police officer or person making the arrest
may issue, in lieu of a formal complaint, a notice to appear at the police
station in the City of Hometown within 10 days after said arrest and pay
the minimum fine provided for in a section of the article or, if none is
provided for, then a minimum fine of $25 for each offense. Every person
issued such notification of a violation, after consenting to a waiver of
court hearing and trial, may pay the sums for the violation at the police
station, Hometown, Illinois, in lieu of said person's appearance in court.
In the event a second notice to appear is issued for the violation, double
the amount shall be added to the fines provided. Failure to pay the fine
herein provided within said time shall subject such person to whom the
notification was given to issuance of a warrant for his arrest, and the
police officer or person issuing such notification shall swear out a
complaint for the arrest or issue a summons to appear in court on a day
certain.
(E) Any person that fails to pay a fine within the time period required shall
also be assessed for the City's costs of collection in an amount of 35% of
the applicable fine. [Added 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 9-2018]
(A) Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer or employee
by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of
the City of Hometown" and shall be taken to mean the officer or
employee of this City having the title mentioned or performing the
duties indicated.
(B) No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee
liable for any fine or penalty provided in this Code for a failure to
perform such duty, unless the intention of the City Council to impose
such a fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically clear
and expressed in the section creating the duty.
§ 1.03 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.05
1:4
§ 1.05. Saving clause.
Nothing in this ordinance or in the Code hereby adopted shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any courts or any rights
acquired or liability incurred nor any causes of action accrued or existing
under any act or ordinance repealed hereby; nor shall any right or remedy
of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this Code.
§ 1.06. Severability.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of
the court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections
of this Code.
§ 1.07. Amendments; reference to Code.
Any additions or amendments to this Code, when passed in such a form
as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part of this
Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that a reference
to the Code shall be understood to include them. Amendments to the whole
or part of a section may be made by using the same section and number
and indicating the date of the amendment and ordinance number. Where a
new section is to be added and no section number is available, it may be
identified by the use of decimals after the preceding section number; for
example, § 1.01.1 (subject).
§ 1.08. Effect of amendments on penalties.
In case of amendment of any section of this Code containing the provisions
for which a penalty is provided in another section, the penalty so provided
in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended or the
amending section, whether reenacted in the amendatory ordinance or not,
unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein.
§ 1.09. Recording amendments.
(A) It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep at least one copy of the
Municipal Code of Hometown, which he shall mark in the following
manner. Whenever an ordinance which amends or makes an addition to
the Code is passed and approved, he shall note on the margin of the
section or sections amended that such amendment has been made, with
a reference to the place in the amendment book, hereinafter described,
where the amendment may be found; and in the case of an addition, he
shall mark in the appropriate place a notation that such addition has
been made, with a similar reference to the aforementioned amendment
book.
§ 1.05 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.09
1:5
§ 1.09.1. Alternative penalties; compliance tickets.
(B) The City Clerk shall keep also a separate book containing every
amendment or addition passed to this Code, with a reference on each
copy of such amendment or addition as to the place in the record or
ordinances where the original ordinance may be found. The abovementioned
records shall be kept in addition to the record of ordinances
which the City Clerk is required to keep by statute.
(A) Any person accused of a violation of any section of Chapter 14, Traffic,
of this Code, or failing to purchase, obtain and/or display any permit or
license required pursuant to any other provision of this Code which
requires the purchase of a license or permit, pursuant to the issuance of
a compliance ticket, except a traffic offense for which a court
appearance is required pursuant to Supreme Court Rule 551, may
settle and compromise that ticket by paying to the City a fee of $25 and
showing proof of the correction of the violation (i.e., replacement of the
faulty equipment, purchase of the required license or permit) within 10
days from the date such alleged violation was committed or by paying to
the City the sum of $30, subsequent to said ten-day period and prior to
said person being issued a uniform traffic complaint or notice to appear
("P" ticket) or other form of complaint, and showing proof of the
correction of the violation.
(B) Compliance tickets shall be issued as a courtesy in lieu of instituting a
prosecution for the alleged offense. If the person accused of the
violation does not settle the claim, a uniform traffic complaint or notice
to appear ("P" ticket) or other form of complaint will be issued for that
violation and that person shall be subject to the general penalties set
forth in this Code.
§ 1.09 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.09.1
1:6
ARTICLE 2
Mayor
§ 1.10. Election; term.
The Mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the City, and he shall
hold his office for four years and until his successor is elected and has
qualified.
§ 1.11. Duties.
The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City and shall have
such powers and perform such duties as may be required of him or granted
to him by statute or ordinance. He shall have supervision over all of the
officers and employees of the City, and shall have the power and authority
to inspect all books and records pertaining to City affairs and kept by any
officer or employee of the City, at any reasonable time.
§ 1.12. Mayor Pro Tem. [Amended 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. 8-2002]
If the Mayor's absence from the City or a disability prevents the Mayor from
performing his duties, but does not create a vacancy in the office, a Mayor
Pro Tem shall be appointed and perform the duties of the Mayor. The Mayor
Pro Tem shall possess all rights and powers of the Mayor, but shall retain
his right to vote as an Alderman. The Mayor Pro Tem shall be appointed
from the Aldermen by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council. He shall retain the office until his successor is appointed. Upon the
Mayor's return to the City or recovery from a disability, the Mayor Pro Tem
shall cease to act.
§ 1.13. Chairman Pro Tem. [Amended 8-13-2002 by Ord. No.
8-2002]
In the Mayor's temporary absence from a meeting, not resulting from
a disability or the Mayor's extended absence from the City, a Chairman
Pro Tem shall be appointed to act as the Chairman of the meeting. The
Chairman Pro Tem shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and shall
vote in his capacity as an Alderman. The Mayor Pro Tem shall act as the
Chairman Pro Tem. In the absence of the Mayor Pro Tem at a meeting, the
Chairman Pro Tem shall be appointed by the City Council from among its
members.
§ 1.14. Appointment and removal of City officers.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in the Illinois statutes, all officers of the
City shall be appointed by the Mayor and Aldermen, voting jointly.
Vacancies in all such offices may be filled in like manner. If a vacancy
exists or any officer is not or cannot perform his duties and is an office
he is authorized by law to appoint, the Mayor may appoint a temporary
successor to that office until a successor is appointed and qualified.
(Referendum 11-2-1982)
§ 1.10 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.14
1:7
§ 1.15. Supervision of employees; reports to Council.
The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all appointed officers and
employees and see that they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties
of their respective offices; he shall inquire into all reasonable complaints
made against them and cause all their neglects or violations of duties to
be promptly corrected; and he shall from time to time give the Council
such information relative to the affairs of the City as he may deem proper
and recommend to its consideration any measure he may deem expedient,
tending to the well-being, security and improvement of the City.
§ 1.16. Release of prisoners.
The Mayor may for good and sufficient reasons release any person
imprisoned for violation of any City ordinance. The Mayor shall cause a
proper record thereof to be made, and shall report such release with the
cause therefor to the City Council at its first session thereinafter.
§ 1.17. Legal authority.
(B) The Mayor may remove any officer appointed by him by following the
procedure provided for in the Illinois Municipal Code. All officers
appointed jointly by the Mayor and Aldermen shall be removed by them
jointly.
(C) All appointments shall be for the fiscal year unless otherwise authorized
by this Code or statute. No appointment for a City office shall be longer
than the term of the Mayor.
(D) Whenever a vacancy shall occur in any office which by statute or
ordinance the Mayor is authorized to fill, he shall, at the regular
meeting of the City Council next occurring, communicate to the Council
the name of his appointee to such office, and, pending approval or
rejection by the Council as to such appointment, he may designate
some suitable person to discharge the duties of said office.
(A) The Mayor shall sign, and is hereby authorized to sign on behalf of the
City, all instruments necessary to the prompt prosecution or defense of
any or all actions brought by or against said City, including bonds for
injunction.
(B) Upon the receipt of any notice, summons or subpoena, the Mayor shall
contact the City Attorney, who shall immediately represent the City. The
Mayor is authorized to cause litigation to be instituted in behalf of the
City in all cases where he shall deem it in the best interest of the City to
proceed to do so. He shall contact the City Attorney for advice. The City
Attorney shall represent the City in all such legal matters.
§ 1.14 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.18
1:8
§ 1.18. Civil emergency powers.
The Mayor may by proclamation declare a civil emergency and impose a
curfew under the following conditions.
(A) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CIVIL EMERGENCY —
CURFEW — A prohibition against any person or persons walking,
running, loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway,
public property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the
City, excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially
designated to duty with reference to said civil emergency.
A riot or unlawful assembly, characterized by the use of actual force
or violence or any threat or apparent threat to use force or violence
against persons or property if accompanied by immediate power to
execute by three or more persons acting together without authority
of law; or
(1)
Any natural disaster or man-made calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within
the corporate limits of the City, resulting in the death or injury
of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that
extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
(2)
(B) Declaration or proclamation. Whenever a civil emergency as defined in
Subsection A of this section exists, the Mayor shall declare the
existence by means of a written declaration (proclamation) signed by
him under oath, which statement shall contain a finding that the
standards herein set forth have been met, setting forth facts to
substantiate said findings constituting the emergency, describing the
nature of the emergency, and declaring that a state of emergency
exists. Such statement shall be filed with the City Clerk as soon as
practicable.
(C) General curfew. After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor,
he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of
the City, or to the City as a whole, as he deems advisable, and applicable
during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the
interest of the public safety and welfare.
(D) Orders in interest of public safety. After the proclamation of a civil
emergency, the Mayor may also, in the interest of public safety and
welfare, make any or all of the following orders:
(1) Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and
private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of
intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted.
§ 1.18 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.18
1:9
§ 1.19. through § 1.25. (Reserved)2
§ 1.26. Fixing of compensation.
The compensation of elected officials, including the Mayor, shall be fixed by
ordinance at least 180 days before the beginning of the terms of the elected
official whose compensation is to be fixed. In no case may the compensation
be raised or lowered during a term of office.
(2) Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer.
(3) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any
container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor
vehicle.
(4) Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character
whatsoever.
(5) Order the blocking of streets or changing the direction and flow of
traffic.
(6) Such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of
life and property.
(E) Duration. The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a
period of no longer than seven days or the adjournment of the first
regular or special meeting called by the City Council, whichever occurs
first, unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor
indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The Mayor shall
have the power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the
end of each seven-day period during the time said civil emergency
exists.
(F) Public notice. Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the
Chief of Police shall notify the news media situated within the City and
shall cause three copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of
the emergency to be posted at the following places within the City: the
City Hall, the police station, and the post office.
(G) Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section or of an
executive order issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an offense
against the City, and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $750.1
1. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
2. Editor's Note: Former §§ 1.19 through 1.25, regarding civil emergencies, appear as § 1.18,
Subsections (A) through (G), above.
§ 1.18 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.26.1
1:10
§ 1.26.1. Mayor's compensation. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No.
14-2004; 7-22-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
The annual salary of the Mayor shall be increased to $12,000 effective upon
the beginning of the term of office following the 2017 Consolidated Election.
§ 1.27. Vacancy.
If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, the following rules shall apply:
§ 1.28. through § 1.29. (Reserved)
(A) If the unexpired term is 28 months or more in length, and the vacancy
occurs at least 130 days before the next consolidated election
scheduled under the general election law, the vacancy shall be filled at
that consolidated election.
(B) If the unexpired term is less than 28 months or until said election, the
City Council shall appoint one of its members to fill the vacancy as
Acting Mayor until a Mayor is elected and qualified. He shall be called
"Mayor."
§ 1.26.1 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.28
1:11

ARTICLE 3
Aldermen
§ 1.30. Number and term.
Two Aldermen shall be elected to represent each ward of the City. All
Aldermen elected shall hold office for a term of four years and until their
successors are elected and have qualified.
§ 1.31. Qualification and eligibility.
No person shall be eligible to the office of Alderman unless he is a qualified
elector of the municipality and has resided therein and in his ward at least
one year preceding his election or appointment, and he must also meet the
qualifications of the Illinois Municipal Code.
§ 1.32. Fixing of compensation.
The compensation of Aldermen shall be fixed by ordinance at least 180
days before the beginning of the terms of the elected official whose
compensation is to be fixed. In no case may the compensation be raised or
lowered during a term of office.
§ 1.32.1. Aldermen's compensation. [Amended 8-13-2002 by Ord.
No. 7-2002; 7-22-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
The annual salary of Aldermen shall be increased to $3,000 ($250 per
month) effective upon the beginning of the next term of office, respectively,
following the 2015 Consolidated Election or 2017 Consolidated Election, as
the case may be.
§ 1.33. Vacancy.
If a vacancy occurs in the office of Alderman, the following rules shall apply:
§ 1.34. through § 1.39. (Reserved)
(A) If the unexpired term is 28 months or less in length, the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Aldermen, may appoint a person to serve as
Alderman until the next consolidated election under the general
election law.
(B) If the unexpired term is more than 28 months in length, and more than
130 days before the next consolidated election, his successor shall be
filled at said election. Until said election a person may be appointed by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Aldermen, to fill said
vacancy.
§ 1.30 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.34
1:13

ARTICLE 4
City Council
§ 1.40. Composition; records.3
The City Council shall consist of the Mayor and aldermen. It shall meet in
accordance with the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.) and it shall
keep a journal of its own proceedings.
§ 1.41. Quorum; compelling attendance.
A majority of the corporate authorities elected shall constitute a quorum to
do business. A smaller number, however, may adjourn from time to time,
and may compel the attendance of absentees, under whatever penalties,
including a fine for a failure to attend, the Council may prescribe by
ordinance.
§ 1.42. Regular meetings.
Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the second and fourth
Tuesdays of each month at 8:00 p.m. In case said meetings fall on a legal
holiday or on an evening preceding a legal holiday, then, unless otherwise
changed by motion of the City Council to another date at a meeting prior to
said holiday eve or holiday, the meetings shall be held on the day following
the legal holiday at the same time and place.
§ 1.43. Special meetings.
(A) Special meetings may be held at any time, on call of the Mayor or any
three Aldermen. Such call shall be in writing, duly signed, and shall be
presented to the City Clerk, who shall proceed immediately to prepare
notices of the same, and shall cause them to be served on members of
the Council in the usual manner. Such notices shall describe, in brief,
the nature or object of the call.
(B) At every special meeting, the call for such a meeting shall be read and
afterwards filed by the City Clerk; and no business other than that
proposed by the call shall be in order at such meeting.
(C) If the notice states that an emergency exists, one-hour notice shall be
given after such notice is served in person; otherwise, twenty-four-hour
notice from the time of mailing shall be given. In case of an extreme
emergency or disaster, nothing shall limit a call of a meeting by
telephone for the purpose of meeting the emergency or disaster. All
matters taken up at an emergency or disaster special meeting shall be
continued at the next regular meeting.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 1.40 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.44
1:15
§ 1.44. Open meetings.
Meetings of every kind and nature shall be open to the public, except where
specifically exempted by statute. A meeting may be open to the public and
then closed to the public for the purpose of considering matters specifically
allowed to be considered at a closed meeting by statute. Final action on all
matters considered at a closed meeting must be made at an open meeting.
The following meetings may be closed to the public:
§ 1.45. Mayor to preside; deciding vote.
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council, shall preserve
order and decorum, and shall decide all questions of order, subject to an
appeal by any two Aldermen.
(A) Collective negotiation matters between employees or their
representatives.
(B) Where the acquisition of real property is being considered.
(C) Where the sale of personal or real property is being considered.
(D) Where a proposed or pending court proceeding against or on behalf of
the City is being considered or court action is being contemplated.
(E) Where information regarding appointment, employment, or dismissal of
an employee or officer is being considered.
(F) Where testimony on a complaint lodged against an employee or officer
to determine its validity is being considered, but a formal hearing on a
complaint shall be at an open meeting.
(G) When federal regulations require it.
(H) When an advisory committee is appointed with professional
consultation on matters germane to its field of competence to consider
matters of professional ethics or performance.
(I) When hearings are had on conciliatory complaints of discrimination.
(J) Where the appointment of a member to fill a vacancy on the Council is
being considered.
(K) When the presence of the public and media impedes the meeting; in
such cases the Council or committee may limit the attendance.
(L) When meetings are held with department heads or within departments
for administration purposes.
(A) When Mayor shall vote. The Mayor shall not vote on any ordinance,
resolution or motion except:4
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 1.44 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.45
1:16
§ 1.46. through § 1.49. (Reserved)
(1) Where the vote of the Aldermen has resulted in a tie.
(2) Where 1/2 of the Aldermen elected have voted even though there is
no tie vote.
(3) Where the statute requires that he shall vote.
(4) When a vote greater than a majority is needed by law.
(5) If only five Aldermen and the Mayor are present for a quorum or if
over five Aldermen are present and a majority of Council is needed,
he shall vote.
(B) Veto by Mayor.
(1) The Mayor may veto all ordinances, resolutions, and motions
which:
(a) Create any liability against the City.
(b) Provide for the expenditure or appropriation of City money.
(c) Sell any City property.
(2) If he does veto, he shall do so by writing his objections over the face
of the ordinance or resolution, or in writing on the motion, and
report to the next regular meeting of the City Council. Unless he
does so, said motion, resolution or ordinance shall become effective
at such regular meeting date despite the absence of his signature.
If he disapproves of any sums appropriated in any ordinance,
resolution, or motion making an appropriation, he may do so by
writing on the face of such resolution or ordinance, or in writing on
the motion, the item objected to, in which case said items shall not
be appropriated and the balance shall remain effective. Such items,
however, may be reconsidered in the same manner as
reconsidering over the veto. The Mayor may give his approval to
any resolution or motion by signing the same.
(3) The Council may, at the next regular meeting, after the time the
vetoed resolution, ordinance, or motion is returned to the City
Council, reconsider and pass over the Mayor's veto. Two-thirds of
all the Aldermen holding office on the City Council shall agree to
pass an ordinance, appropriation, resolution, or motion over the
Mayor's veto, in which case it shall then become effective. The vote
on the question of reconsideration shall be recorded by ayes and
nays. In the event the Council fails to act on said veto at the next
regular meeting, the veto shall stand.
§ 1.45 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.46
1:17

ARTICLE 5
Rules of Order
§ 1.50. Establishment.
The following rules of order and procedure shall govern the deliberations
and meetings of the City Council.
§ 1.51. Order of business.
At the hour appointed for the meeting, the Mayor shall call order, have the
Pledge of Allegiance recited, and the City Clerk shall proceed to call the
roll of members. When a quorum is present the Council shall proceed to the
business before it, which shall be conducted in the following order:
§ 1.52. Privileges.
(A) The reading of the minutes of the proceedings of the last preceding
meeting or meetings and correction and approval of the same, unless
dispensed with by the Council, and correction of the journal of the
proceedings of previous meetings.
(B) Reports and communications to and from the Mayor.
(C) Reports of other City officers.
(D) Reports of standing committees.
(E) Reports of special committees.
(F) Presentation of petitions, communications, resolutions, orders and
ordinances by Aldermen.
(G) Unfinished business.
(H) New business.
(I) Citizens' hearing.
(J) Adjournment.
(A) Every member, previous to his speaking, shall address himself to the
Mayor and say "Mr. Mayor," but shall not proceed with his remarks until
recognized by the Chair. When two or more members address him at
once, the Mayor shall name the member who is first to speak.
(B) When a member wishes to present a communication, petition, order,
resolution, or other original matter, he shall, after being recognized by
the Mayor, briefly state its nature before presenting the same.
(C) No member shall speak more than twice upon the same subject without
leave of the City Council, nor more than once, in any case, until every
member choosing to speak shall have spoken.
§ 1.50 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.52
1:19
§ 1.53. Motions and resolutions.
(D) A member called to order by the Chair shall immediately be silent,
unless permitted to explain; if there is no appeal, the decision of the
Chair shall be final; but if the member appeals from the decision of the
Chair, the City Council shall decide on the case without debate.
(E) Every member who shall be present when a question is stated from the
Chair shall vote thereon, unless excused by the City Council or unless
he is directly interested in the question, in which case he shall not vote.
Otherwise, a '"pass" vote or failure to vote for any reason shall be
counted with the majority vote of Aldermen.
(A) No motion or resolution shall be put or debated unless it is seconded;
when a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the Mayor before
debate, and every such motion shall be reduced to writing, if required
by a member. No movant shall vote against his own motion.
(B) The passage of all ordinances for whatever purpose, and of any
resolution or motion (1) to create any liability against the City or (2) for
the expenditure or appropriation of its money, shall require the
concurrence of a majority of all members elected to the City Council,
and the yeas and nays shall be recorded.
(C) When a question is under debate, the only motion in order shall be:
(1) To adjourn (no debate).
(2) The previous question (no debate).
(3) To lay on the table (no debate).
(4) To close debate.
(5) To postpone indefinitely.
(6) To adjourn to a day certain.
(7) To refer.
(8) To amend.
(9) To substitute.
and such motions shall have precedence in the order herein
arranged, the first three to be decided without debate.
(D) No vote of the City Council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a
special meeting, unless there are present at the special meeting as
many Aldermen as were present when the vote was taken. A motion to
reconsider may be made at any time but must be made and seconded by
members who voted in the majority.
§ 1.52 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.53
1:20
§ 1.54. Committees.
All committees shall be appointed by the Mayor, unless otherwise
specifically directed by the City Council, in which case they shall be
appointed by ballot. The following committees shall be appointed annually,
and the first person named on the committee shall be Chairman thereof:
§ 1.55. Meeting agenda.
The City Clerk shall prepare an agenda of the meeting, listing in order the
topics for discussion at the meeting.
§ 1.56. Citizens' hearing.
All committee meetings shall be open to the public, except those meetings
permitted by law to be closed. At such open meetings, and prior to
(E) No person not a member of the City Council shall address the City
Council without the unanimous consent of the members present.
(A) Standing.
(1) Finance (including appropriations and tax levy).
(2) Streets, Sidewalks and Municipal Buildings.
(3) Water and Sewer.
(4) Parks and Recreation.
(5) Building.
(6) License.
(7) Code and Ordinances.
(8) Insurance.
(9) Public Health and Safety.5
(10) Police.
(B) Special.
(1) Library.
(2) Legislation.
(3) Fire Department Liaison.
(4) Special Events.
(5) Personnel Review.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 1.53 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.56
1:21
adjournment, a portion of said meeting shall be allocated for public
participation. The Chair may, unless otherwise modified by the majority
of committee members present, limit the time of such participation and
participants' discussion, or right to discussion.
§ 1.57. through § 1.59. (Reserved)
§ 1.56 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.57
1:22
ARTICLE 6
Wards
§ 1.60. Division into wards.
The City of Hometown, Illinois, is for the purpose of conducting municipal
elections, including primaries, and for such other purposes as hereafter may
be provided by law, divided into five wards, which shall be numbered and
comprise the territory as follows:.
§ 1.61. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the various wards shall be as follows:
Ward No. 1 shall comprise the territory bounded by a line starting on the
North at a point where the Norfolk & Western Railroad tracks intersect
Pulaski Road, South along Pulaski Road to 91st Street, West on 91st Street
to the Norfolk & Western Railroad tracks, Northeast along the Norfolk &
Western Railroad tracks to Pulaski Road, the point of origin.
Ward No. 2 shall comprise the territory bounded by a line starting on the
North at a point where 87th Street, Pulaski Road and the Norfolk & Western
Railroad tracks intersect, Southwest along the Norfolk & Western Railroad
tracks to Duffy Avenue, Northwest on Duffy Avenue to Kolin Avenue,
Northeast by North on Kolin Avenue to 87th Place, West on 87th Place
to Kostner Avenue, North on Kostner Avenue to 87th Street, East on 87th
Street to the point of origin.
Ward No. 3 shall comprise the territory bounded by a line starting on
the North at a point where 87th Place intersects Kolin Avenue, South by
Southwest on Kolin Avenue to Duffy Avenue, Southeast on Duffy Avenue
to the Norfolk & Western Railroad tracks, Southwest on the Norfolk &
Western Railroad tracks to a point 265.561 feet South of the center line
of 91st Street, then at right angles Northwest to the Southwesterly line of
the Southwest Highway, then Northeast along said line to 91st Street, West
on 91st Street to Kostner Avenue, North on Kostner Avenue to 88th Street,
Northwest on 88th Street to Kenton Avenue, North on Kenton Avenue to
87th Place, East along 87th Place to Kolin Avenue, the point of origin.
Ward No. 4 shall comprise the territory bounded by a line starting on the
North at a point where 88th Street intersects Kostner Avenue, South on
Kostner Avenue to 91st Street, West on 91st Street to Kilpatrick Avenue,
North on Kilpatrick Avenue to 90th Street, West on 90th Street to Cicero
Avenue, North along Cicero Avenue to 88th Street East by Southeast on
88th Street to Kostner Avenue, the point of origin.
Ward No. 5 shall comprise the territory bounded by a line starting on the
North at a point where 87th Street intersects Kostner Avenue, South on
Kostner Avenue to 87th Place, West on 87th Place to Kenton Avenue, South
on Kenton Avenue to 88th Street, West on 88th Street to Cicero Avenue,
§ 1.60 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.61
1:23
North along Cicero Avenue to 87th Street, East along 87th Street to Kostner
Avenue, the point of origin.
§ 1.62. Street lines defined.
Wherever a street is indicated as the boundary of a ward, the center line
of such street shall be considered to be the boundary line of such ward;
provided, however, that if such street or some part thereof constitutes some
portion or all of the distance for which said street is hereinabove designated
as the boundary of any ward, then that part of the street which is the
boundary of the City shall also be the boundary of such ward; and provided
further that if any streets are not dedicated throughout the entire distance
for which it is indicated as one of the boundary lines of any ward, then the
prolongation of the distance for which it is indicated as one of the boundary
lines of any ward, then the prolongation of the center line of such street
shall be considered to be such boundary line.
§ 1.63. through § 1.69. (Reserved)
§ 1.61 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.63
1:24
ARTICLE 7
Precincts
§ 1.70. Number and designation.
The City of Hometown is for the purpose of conducting municipal elections,
including primaries, and for such other purposes as hereafter may be
provided by law, divided into five precincts, which precincts shall be
coextensive with the wards heretofore established and provided by the
Code herein; however, at the consolidated elections the County Clerk may
designate certain county precincts when the electors of a ward shall vote
whether said precinct is within or without the ward of the residence of the
elector.
§ 1.71. through § 1.79. (Reserved)
§ 1.70 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.71
1:25

ARTICLE 8
City Clerk
§ 1.80. Election; term; vacancy; fixing of compensation.
The City Clerk shall be elected for a four-year term at the same time the
Mayor is elected. If a vacancy occurs in the office of the City Clerk, it shall
be filled by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Aldermen; the
person so appointed shall hold office for the unexpired term of the officer
elected. He shall receive such compensation as is set from time to time by
ordinance of the City Council; provided, however, the compensation may not
be changed during his term of office.
§ 1.81. Clerk's compensation. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No.
14-2004; 7-22-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
The annual salary of the City Clerk shall be increased to $52,000, effective
upon the beginning of the term of office following the 2017 Consolidated
Election. Each succeeding May 1 thereafter, the compensation paid to the
City Clerk shall increase in an amount equal to the rate of increase granted
to all City employees. Said compensation shall be for all services rendered
to the City of Hometown, excluding those rendered in the capacity as exofficio
City Collector, which compensation shall be affixed in the City's
annual budget and appropriation ordinance. The above compensation does
not include benefits or expenses customarily provided to the City Clerk.
§ 1.82. Bond.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the City Clerk shall execute a
bond in such amount as provided by law and with such sureties as may be
required by the Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his
duties.
§ 1.83. Signatures.
The City Clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the City, and all licenses,
permits and other such documents as shall require this formality.
§ 1.84. Records and documents.
The Clerk shall be the keeper of all documents belonging to the City; and
in addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the Clerk
is required by statute to keep, he shall keep a register of all licenses and
permits issued, and a record of the payment thereon.
§ 1.85. Disposition of money collected.
The Clerk shall turn over all money received by him on behalf of the City to
the City Treasurer; and with such money he shall give a statement as to the
source thereof.
§ 1.80 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.86
1:27
§ 1.86. Accounts.
The Clerk shall keep accounts showing all money received by him, and the
source and disposition thereof, and such other accounts as may be required
by statute or ordinance.
§ 1.87. Ex-officio collector.
The City Clerk shall be ex-officio Collector and he shall collect all special
assessments and special taxes and perform all other duties of the City
Collector as provided by law, and he shall be ex-officio Water and Sewer
Collector and shall perform the duties of that office as provided by
ordinance.
§ 1.88. Secretary of Board of Local Improvements.
The Clerk shall be the secretary of the Board of Local Improvements, for
which he shall receive no additional salary.
§ 1.89. Archives.
The City Hall shall be the archive and all records, documents, and papers
not being currently used by the City Clerk shall be kept there.
§ 1.90. Deputy Clerk.
§ 1.91. through § 1.99. (Reserved)
(A) There is hereby created the office of Deputy Clerk, who shall be
appointed by the City Clerk then in office. The term of the Deputy Clerk
shall be at the pleasure of the appointing City Clerk and may not exceed
the term of the City Clerk.
(B) The Deputy Clerk shall have the powers and duties set forth in 65 ILCS
5/3.1-35-95 and such other duties as the City Clerk and the City Council
shall prescribe.
§ 1.86 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.91
1:28
ARTICLE 9
City Treasurer
§ 1.100. Election; vacancy.
The City Treasurer shall be elected for a four-year term at the same time the
Mayor is elected. If a vacancy occurs in the office of the City Treasurer, it
shall be filled by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council,
the person so appointed to hold office for the unexpired term of the officer
elected.
§ 1.101. Fixing of compensation.
The compensation of the Treasurer shall be fixed by ordinance at least
180 days before the beginning of the terms of the elected official whose
compensation is to be fixed. In no case may the compensation be raised or
lowered during a term of office.
§ 1.102. Treasurer's compensation. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord.
No. 14-2004; 7-22-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
The annual salary of the City Treasurer shall be $12,000, effective upon the
beginning of the term following the 2017 Consolidated Election.
§ 1.103. Bond.
The City Treasurer shall give a bond in such sum as may be provided by
law, and required by the Council, but the bond shall not be less than the
amount required by statute. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance by the Treasurer of the duties of his office, and to indemnify
the City for any loss due to any neglect of duty or wrongful act on the part
of the Treasurer.
§ 1.104. General duties.
(A) The City Treasurer shall receive all money paid into the City, either
directly from the person paying it or from the hands of such other
officer as may receive it.
(B) He shall keep records showing all money received by him, the source
from which it was received, and the purpose for which it was paid out.
(C) He shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation, and the
debits and credits belonging thereto.
(D) He shall pay out money only on accounts payable and payroll approved
by the City Council.
(E) He shall make recommendations and furnish to the City Council such
reports and data as may be needed by it in preparing its annual budget
appropriation and levy ordinances. He shall, within six months of the
close of the fiscal year, recommend to the City Council any transfers in
§ 1.100 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.104
1:29
§ 1.105. Monthly statements.
At the end of every month and more often if required by the corporate
authorities, the City Treasurer shall render an account under oath to the
City Council, showing the state of the treasury at the date of the account,
including investments, and the balance of money in the treasury. He shall
accompany the account with a statement of all money received into the
treasury and on what account, together with all warrants redeemed and
paid by him.
§ 1.106. Annual report.
§ 1.107. Deposit of funds.
The Treasurer shall deposit the City funds in such depositaries as may be
selected from time to time by the City Council. He shall keep separate
special funds as are required by law. All deposits in any one bank,
regardless of the number of funds, may not exceed the limitation provided
by law. He shall keep the City money separate and distinct from his own and
shall not intermingle his own money with it or make private or personal use
of the City funds.
§ 1.108. Signatories for checks, withdrawals and transfers.
the appropriation that may be needed, whether there is an
overexpenditure in any itemized numbered account.
(F) He shall deposit funds as provided in § 1.107.
(G) He shall invest all surplus monies of all funds not presently needed, in
investments authorized by law.
(H) He shall otherwise abide by the relevant provisions of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes.
(A) At the end of each fiscal year as soon as practicable, the City Treasurer
shall make out and file with the City Clerk a full and detailed account of
all municipal receipts and expenditures during the preceding fiscal
year, and the state of the treasury at the close of the fiscal year.
(B) The Clerk shall publish this account at least once in one or more
newspapers published in the municipality or circulated therein.
(A) All disbursements made on the accounts payable or payroll or any fund
shall be by check and require two of the following signatories: the City
Treasurer; and countersigned by the Mayor or the City Clerk.
(B) All other withdrawals and transfers of accounts, monies, investments,
reinvestments, securities, or deposits of money shall require any two of
the same signatories.
(C) The City Council shall pass suitable resolutions to that effect.
§ 1.104 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.109
1:30
§ 1.109. (Reserved)
§ 1.109 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.109
1:31

ARTICLE 10
Elected Term of Office
§ 1.110. Commencement of term.
The term of all newly elected officers shall commence at the date of the first
regular or special meeting of the City Council in the month of April following
the proclamation of results of the regular municipal election at which such
officers were elected. The newly elected officers shall be qualified and
inaugurated on that date.
§ 1.110 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.110
1:33

ARTICLE 11
Administration
§ 1.111. Office hours.6
Unless otherwise provided, the offices of the respective City officers whose
offices are located in the City shall be open for business at the City Hall from
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily and 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Tuesdays, except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, and for Christmas and New Year's offices
shall be closed at 12:00 noon on the working day preceding said date.
§ 1.112. Contracts for purchases.
§ 1.113. Equal employment opportunity.
The City provides equal opportunity in the award of any contract and does
not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, handicap, sex, or
national origin.
§ 1.114. Affirmative action.
An Affirmative Action Program provided by the City is hereby adopted
as its Affirmative Action Program. All supervisory personnel, officers and
employees are hereby ordered and directed to carry out the intent of the
policies set forth in said Affirmative Action Program.
(A) All contracts for supplies, material, equipment, and public work of any
kind or nature let by any officer of the City or City Council, where the
amount of such contract exceeds $10,000, shall be furnished by
contract, and let to the lowest responsible qualified bidder after
advertising for the same unless the City Council specifically waives this
provision by two-thirds vote of the Aldermen then holding office. No
advertisement for bids need be made in cases of an emergency and for
contracts which by their nature are not adapted to award by
competitive bidding. The Council, with the consent of 2/3 of the
Aldermen then holding office, may require that all contracts in specific
cases be advertised for bid.
(B) All contractors for public work shall include in the bid specifications the
latest prevailing rate of hourly wages as determined by the Department
of Labor for the City.
(C) Unless otherwise provided by law or Council order, all advertisement
for bids shall be in one or more newspapers published or of general
circulation in the City. The return date of the opening of the bids, unless
otherwise specified by law or the City Council, shall be not less than 10
days from the published date.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 1.111 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.115
1:35
§ 1.115. Contractor compliance with state law.
All contractors on public works projects shall comply with the Veterans
Preference Act (330 ILCS 55/0.01 et seq.); the Employment of Illinois
Workers on Public Works Act (30 ILCS 570/0.01 et seq.); the Drug Free
Workplace Act (30 ILCS 580/1 et seq.); the Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/
1-101 et seq.); and the Prevailing Wage Act (820 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq.); but
nothing herein shall require the application of those acts unless required by
state law.
§ 1.116. Indemnification of officers and employees.
(A) The City shall indemnify any elected or appointed officer or employee
under the conditions imposed herein:
(1) Appoint counsel to appear and defend, or reimburse the fees of an
attorney who appears and defends;
(2) Pay all judgments, verdicts, claims, and costs resulting from any
claim or lawsuit on behalf of any officer or employee of the City or
any former officer or employee of the City. This subsection shall
apply to any threatened, pending or contemplated action, suit or
proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative;
and
(3) Notwithstanding, the City's obligation to indemnify shall be
satisfied by the procurement of liability insurance and any defense
or indemnity provided thereunder.
(B) The appointment of counsel, reimbursement for costs of counsel, and
payment of all judgments shall be a matter of right, but shall cover only
those duties or actions committed by the employee or officer within the
course of employment within the scope of his duties, or by the nature of
the office or employment held if all conditions herein are met. The
appointment of counsel to defend or the reimbursement of other
counsel shall be at the option of the City Council.
(C) Any person desiring to avail himself of the provisions of this section
must, within five days after receiving a notice of claim or summons,
whichever occurs first, notify the Mayor, City Council, and Attorney in
writing of the possible claim. Only claims by individuals other than City
employees or officers are covered by this section. Without limitation,
this section does not cover any claim against the City by an officer or
employee, by the City against any officer or employee, or by any other
employee or officer against any officer or employee.
(D) No person shall be entitled to any of the benefits of this section if any
action or inaction on his part was done with malice or willful
misconduct, where there is a finding of guilty against him in a criminal
or quasi-criminal action, or where there is a finding of malice or willful
misconduct in any civil action or civil rights action, except that if he
acted in good faith and in a manner he reasonably believed to be in, or
§ 1.115 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.116
1:36
§ 1.117. Ethical conduct. [Added 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 6-2004]
not opposed to the best interests of, the City, and, with respect to any
criminal action or proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his
conduct was unlawful. The termination of any action, suit or proceeding
by judgment order, settlement, conviction, or upon a plea of nolo
contendere or its equivalent shall not, of itself, create a presumption
that the person did not act in good faith and in a manner which he
reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to the best interests of
the City, and, with respect to any criminal action or proceeding, had
reasonable cause to believe that his conduct was unlawful.
(E) The provisions of this section do not apply where there is insurance
coverage or where an insurance carrier appears and defends an action.
(F) No reimbursement for any attorney's fee shall be paid until the City
Council is satisfied that the action being defended falls within the
provisions of this section. Should attorney's fees be reimbursed and the
subsequent decision of a court result in the employee or officer not
being eligible under the conditions of this section, then such monies
shall be paid back to the City within 30 days of a demand by the City.
Any rate or fees paid to an attorney shall have prior approval of the City,
and reimbursement shall only be made at such rate of fees as is
approved by the City.
(G) No person who makes any settlement, compromise, or statement
without the knowledge of the City shall be eligible for any of the
benefits of this section.
(H) The provisions of this section shall apply to any lawsuit instituted after
the date of its passage, or any claim or investigation instituted after the
date of its passage.
(I) Notwithstanding any of the above provisions, should the Mayor or any
Alderman be sued on account of any vote they have or have not made on
any action, motion, item, resolution, or ordinance, then the official shall
be entitled to either hire counsel and have those attorneys' fees
reimbursed at a rate approved by the City Council or have the City
Attorney appear on his behalf. That official shall also be entitled to the
right of having the City pay any and all judgments, verdicts, claims and
costs, provided there is no court or jury finding that the official acted
with malice or intentional misconduct.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be
given these definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE — Any activity in furtherance of an
effort to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment
of any individual to any federal, state, or local public office or office
in a political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election
of Presidential or Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include
activities:
§ 1.116 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.117
1:37
CANDIDATE — A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions
for nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been
appointed to fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for
placement on the ballot at a regular election, as defined in Section 1-3
of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/1-3).
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING — Has the same meaning as that term is
defined in Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS
315/3).
COMPENSATED TIME — With respect to an employee, any time
worked by or credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum
work time requirement imposed as a condition of his or her
employment, but for purposes of this section, does not include any
designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory
time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
"compensated time" includes any period of time when the officer is on
premises under the control of the employer and any other time when
the officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless
of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF — Authorized time off earned by or
awarded to an employee to compensate in whole or in part for time
worked in excess of the minimum work time required of that employee
as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION — Has the same meaning as that term is defined in
Section 9-1.4 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).
EMPLOYEE — A person employed by the employer, whether on a fulltime
or part-time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are
subject to the direction and control of an employer with regard to
the material details of how the work is to be performed, but does not
include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER — The City of Hometown.
GIFT — Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary
value, including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria
for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government
employment or the official position of an officer or employee. The value
of a gift may be further defined by rules adopted by the appropriate
ethics commission or by the Auditor General for the Auditor General
and for employees of the office of the Auditor General.7
Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative,
or administrative action;
(1)
(2) Relating to collective bargaining; or
(3) That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
§ 1.117 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.117
1:38
LEAVE OF ABSENCE — Any period during which an employee does not
receive:
OFFICER — A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office
created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY — Any activity in support of or in connection with
any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does
not include activities:
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — A party, committee, association, fund,
or other organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to
file a statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or a
County Clerk under Section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3),
but only with regard to those activities that require filing with the State
Board of Elections or a County Clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY —
(1) Compensation for employment;
(2) Service credit towards pension benefits; and
(3) Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative,
or administrative action;
(1)
(2) Relating to collective bargaining; or
(3) That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
(1)
Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any
political fund-raiser, political meeting, or other political event.
(2)
Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign
contribution.
(3)
Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a
political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question.
(4)
Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection
with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
(5)
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 1.117 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.117
1:39
PROHIBITED SOURCE — Any person or entity who or which:
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum
question.
Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
(6)
Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or
helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.
(7)
Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or filing
any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
(8)
Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
(9)
(10)Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of
any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
(11)
Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
(12)
Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
(13)
Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
(14)
Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
(15)
Is seeking official action (i) by an officer or (ii) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
(1)
Does business or seeks to do business (i) with the officer or (ii) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
(2)
Conducts activities regulated (i) by the officer or (ii) by an
employee, or by the officer or another employee directing that
employee;
(3)
Has interests that may be substantially affected by the
performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer
or employee;
(4)
§ 1.117 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.117
1:40
Is registered or required to be registered with the Secretary of
State under the Lobbyist Registration Act (25 ILCS 170/1 et seq.),
except that an entity not otherwise a prohibited source does not
become a prohibited source merely because a registered lobbyist is
one of its members or serves on its board of directors; or8
(5)
Is an agent of, a spouse of, or an immediate family member who is
living with a prohibited source.9
(6)
(B) Prohibited political activities.
(1) No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein.
No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or
resources of the employer in connection with any prohibited
political activity.
(2) At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political
activity:
(a) As part of that officer or employee's duties;
(b) As a condition of employment; or
(c) During any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off).
(3) No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate
in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer
or employee being awarded additional compensation or any
benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus,
compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor
shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any
prohibited political activity.
(4) Nothing in this Subsection (B) prohibits activities that are
permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or
her official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or
employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this
Subsection (B).
(5) No person either (i) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or (ii) in a position the salary for
which is paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject
to the Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel
Administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs shall be denied
or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he or she is a
8. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
9. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 1.117 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.117
1:41
member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party,
or of a political organization or club.
(C) Gift ban.
(1) Except as permitted by this Subsection (C), no officer or employee,
and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any
officer or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"),
shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited
source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law
or this Subsection (C). No prohibited source shall intentionally
offer or make a gift that violates this Subsection (C).
(2) The provisions of Subsection (C)(1) shall be not applicable to the
following:
(a) Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public.
(b) Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her
spouse or immediate family member, pays the fair market
value.
(c) Any:
(i) Contribution that is lawfully made under the Election
Code; or
(ii) Activities associated with a fund-raising event in support
of a political organization or candidate.
(d) Educational materials and missions.
(e) Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
(f) A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister,
uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew,
niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson,
granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half
brother, half sister, and including the father, mother,
grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's spouse and the
individual's fiance or fiancee.
(g) Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that,
under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the
official position or employment of the recipient or his or her
spouse or immediate family member and not because of the
personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided
§ 1.117 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.117
1:42
on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider
the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
(i) The history of the relationship between the individual
giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any
previous exchange of gifts between those individuals;
(ii) Whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or
sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the
gift; and
(iii) Whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the
individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the
same or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or
their spouses or immediate family members.
(h) Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on
a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments
are (i) consumed on the premises from which they were
purchased or prepared or (ii) catered. For the purposes of this
subsection, "catered" means food or refreshments that are
purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
(i) Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or
outside activities that are not connected to the official duties of
an officer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or
enhanced because of the official position or employment of the
officer or employee, and are customarily provided to others in
similar circumstances.
(j) Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the
purpose of this section, "intragovernmental gift" means any
gift given to an officer or employee from another officer or
employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means any gift given to
an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
(k) Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
(l) Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than
$100.
Each of the exceptions listed above is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other.
(3) An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family
member living with the officer or employee does not violate this
Subsection (C) if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to
§ 1.117 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.117
1:43
§ 1.118. through § 1.120. (Reserved)
return a gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the
gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate charity that
is exempt from income taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended,
renumbered, or succeeded.
(D) Penalties.
(1) A person who intentionally violates any provision of Subsection (B)
may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution
other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
(2) A person who intentionally violates any provision of Subsection (C)
is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not
more than $5,000.
(3) Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of this section to the local enforcement
authorities, the State's Attorney or any other law enforcement
official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than
364 days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
(4) A violation of Subsection (B) shall be prosecuted as a criminal
offense by an attorney specially appointed by the employer by filing
in the Circuit Court an information, or sworn complaint, charging
such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the
rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the
establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable
doubt.
(5) A violation of Subsection (C) may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal
offense by an attorney specially appointed by the employer.
(6) In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates
any provision of Subsection (B) or Subsection (C) is subject to
discipline or discharge.
§ 1.117 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.118
1:44
ARTICLE 12
Reimbursement of Expenses
[Added 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2-201710]
§ 1.121. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them
herein unless the context or use clearly connotes a different meaning.
CITY — The City of Hometown.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES — The City Council.
ENTERTAINMENT — Shows, amusements, theaters, circuses, sporting
events, or any other public or private entertainment or amusement.
REQUIRED DOCUMENTATION —
TRAVEL — Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the City or by wards or charges of the City involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services.
§ 1.122. Reimbursements.
No officer or employee of the City shall be reimbursed with City funds for
any travel, meal or expense incurred unless authorized and in accordance
with the provisions herein specified.
§ 1.123. Reimbursement submission and schedule.
The City, upon receipt of an expense reimbursement request form
accompanied by any required documentation, may reimburse the travel,
meal, and lodging expenses of any officer or employee up to the amounts
hereinafter specified:
Type of Expense Fee
Lodging (per night)
Hotel $200
Meals (per diem)
Breakfast $15
Lunch $20
A supported estimate of the cost of travel, meals, or lodging if such
expenses have not been incurred or contracts and receipts for such
expense if already incurred; and
(A)
A supported explanation of the purpose of the expense incurred in
relation to the City of Hometown.
(B)
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 3-1-2017.
§ 1.121 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.123
1:45
Type of Expense Fee
Dinner $30
Transportation
Private vehicle (per mile) $0.54
Employer-furnished vehicle (per
mile)
$0.19
Private motorcycle (per mile) $0.51
Rental car (per diem) $100
Airplane Published coach fare
§ 1.124. Reimbursement limited.
No officer or employee may be reimbursed for expenses unless they are
actually incurred by the officer or employee in relation to, or in the course
of, official City business, job or office related training or education,
attendance or participation at any event or function as a representative
or agent of the City, or such other matters as may be preapproved by the
Corporate Authorities.
§ 1.125. Reimbursement prohibited.
No officer or employee shall be reimbursed for an entertainment expense
unless such expense is ancillary to the purpose of a program or function
otherwise qualifying for reimbursement.
§ 1.126. Reimbursement in excess of schedule.
No expense reimbursement in excess of the amounts set forth in § 1.123
shall be made to any officer or employee without the approval of the
Corporate Authorities by a separate roll call vote.
§ 1.127. Reimbursement of elected officials.
No expense reimbursement in any amount shall be made to any person
holding an elected office without the approval of the Corporate Authorities
by a separate roll call vote.
§ 1.123 HOMETOWN CODE § 1.127
1:46
Chapter 2
APPOINTED CITY OFFICERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
City government — See Ch. 1.
Board of Building Appeals — See Ch. 21, Art.
7.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 22, Art.
16.
§ 1.127 CITY GOVERNMENT § 1.127
1:47

ARTICLE 1
City Attorney; City Prosecutor
§ 2.01. City Attorney: creation of office.
There is hereby created the office of City Attorney, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor and the Aldermen voting jointly. (Referendum 11-2-1982)
§ 2.02. City Attorney: duties.
§ 2.03. City Attorney: compensation.
The City Attorney shall receive that compensation which shall be set from
time to time by the City Council.
§ 2.04. City Prosecutor: office created.
There is hereby created the Office of City Prosecutor.
§ 2.05. City Prosecutor: appointment; qualifications; responsibility.
The City Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor and the Aldermen
voting jointly. The City Prosecutor shall be an attorney duly licensed to
practice in the state. He shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the City
Attorney and report to him on all legal matters connected with his office.
(Referendum 11-2-1982)
§ 2.06. City Prosecutor: duties.
The City Prosecutor shall prosecute all violations of the traffic ordinances
of the City and the uniform act regulating traffic of the state and shall
prosecute all other Code violations upon the written or oral direction of the
City Attorney.
§ 2.07. City Prosecutor: reports required.
The City Prosecutor shall make such reports as may be required from time
to time by the Mayor or by the Aldermen.
(A) The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the City and to all its
departments, boards and commissions, and shall render advice on all
legal questions affecting the City, whenever requested to do so by any
City official.
(B) He shall draft any contracts, leases or other documents or instruments
to which the City may be a party and he shall draft all ordinances and
resolutions covering subjects within the powers of the municipality.
(C) He shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity
in all courts of record to which the City may be a party.
§ 2.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.08
1:49
§ 2.08. City Prosecutor: compensation.
The compensation of the City Prosecutor shall be as prescribed by the City
Council.
§ 2.09. (Reserved)
§ 2.08 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.09
1:50
ARTICLE 2
Board of Police Commissioners
§ 2.10. Creation.
A Board of Police Commissioners ("Board") has been established in
accordance with Article 10, Division 2.1, of the Illinois Municipal Code.
In general, the Board is responsible for the appointment, suspension and
dismissal of all full-time policemen, and for the establishment of rules of
conduct for all policemen. The provisions of the Code shall supersede any
rules and regulations enacted by the Board should there be a conflict in the
provisions of the same.
§ 2.11. Appointment and terms of members.
The Board of Police Commissioners shall consist of three members to be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. The term of
each member shall be three years and until a successor shall be appointed
and qualified; provided that in making the first appointments, the term of
one member shall be one year, the second member two years, and the third
member three years. Each term will expire with the end of the fiscal year.
No appointment shall be made by the Mayor within 30 days before the
expiration of the Mayor's term of office. No person shall be appointed who
holds a paid office of the United States, this state, or of any municipality,
and no more than two members shall belong to the same political party.
§ 2.12. Powers and duties.
The Board's powers and duties are to be governed by the provisions laid
down in Article 10, Division 2.1, of the Illinois Municipal Code. The Board
does not have the power to terminate, suspend or otherwise discipline, or
hear appeals from any discipline of, any part-time or auxiliary police officer.
§ 2.13. Secretary.
The Board may employ a Secretary or may designate one of its own
members to act as such. The Secretary's duties shall be governed by Article
10, Division 2.1, of the Illinois Municipal Code. He shall receive as his
compensation such sums as the City Council may provide.
§ 2.14. Compensation.
Each member of the Board shall receive such compensation as the City
Council may from time to time provide.
§ 2.15. Annual report.
The Board shall, on or before the last regular meeting of the City Council in
March of each year, make to the Mayor, to be by him transmitted to the City
Council, a report of its actions and duties, rules in force and the practical
§ 2.10 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.15
1:51
effect thereof, and may in such report make such suggestions as the Board
believes will result in the greater efficiency of the Police Department.
§ 2.16. through § 2.19. (Reserved)11
11.Editor’s Note: Former § 2.16, Appointment of Chief of Police Department, was repealed
8-8-2017 by Ord. No. 9-2017.
§ 2.15 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.16
1:52
ARTICLE 3
Police Department
§ 2.20. Creation and composition; employment at will.
The Police Department of the City of Hometown shall consist of a Chief
of Police and such other officers, policemen and employees and auxiliary
officers, policemen, and employees as shall by ordinance from time to time
be determined by the Mayor and City Council. Said department, called
the "Department of Police," is hereby created. Notwithstanding any oral
representation to the contrary, all members of the Police Department may
be suspended or terminated without notice, without a hearing and without
cause.
§ 2.21. Officers and employees; chain of command. [Amended
3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 4-2006; 5-13-2008 by Ord. No. 6-2008]
§ 2.22. Salaries.
The salaries of the members and employees of the Police Department of the
City shall be determined and fixed by the Mayor and City Council in the
annual appropriation ordinance of the City each year, or by ordinance or
resolution.
(A) The Police Department of the City of Hometown shall consist of the
following regular and part-time policemen and employees: [Amended
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 4-2012; 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 7-2016]
(1) One Chief of Police.
(2) One Deputy Chief.
(3) One Lieutenant of Police (part-time).
(4) Eight Sergeants of Police (part-time).
(5) Patrolmen (part-time). The City Council shall, from time to time,
determine the number of patrolmen.
(6) Radio operators, desk clerks, dispatchers, and other persons
working for the Police Department shall be civilian employees of
the Police Department subject to its jurisdiction.
(B) Subsection (A)(1) through (7) shall constitute the chain of command for
the Police Department of the City of Hometown. In the event that an
individual of higher rank is unable to perform his duties, those duties
shall be assumed by an individual who is appointed to the rank
immediately below it in the chain of command. In the event that a rank
is eliminated while that position is being held, the individual holding
that rank shall revert to his prior rank. If the prior rank no longer exists,
he shall assume the rank situated immediately below that rank.
§ 2.20 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.23
1:53
§ 2.23. Discharge; suspensions. [Amended 8-8-2017 by Ord. No.
9-2017]
The power to discipline, suspend or discharge all full-time police officers,
other than the Chief of Police, shall be with the Board of Police
Commissioners. The Chief of Police shall have the power to discipline,
suspend or discharge all auxiliary, part-time or non-full-time police officers.
The Mayor is also authorized to discipline, suspend or discharge all
auxiliary, part-time or non-full-time police officers.
§ 2.24. Chief of Police powers and duties; Fire Inspector. [Amended
3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3-2009; 8-8-2017 by Ord. No. 9-2017]
(A) There is hereby created the office of Chief of Police, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and the Aldermen voting jointly (Referendum
11-02-1982). The Mayor is authorized to appoint an ad hoc committee
of three Aldermen to facilitate the selection of a Chief of Police. The
Mayor is authorized to remove the Chief of Police, with any such
removal being confirmed by a majority of the corporate authority,
within 15 days of the Chief's removal by the Mayor.
(B) The Chief of Police shall have the management and control of all
matters relating to the Department and its officers and members, and of
the books and records belonging to the Department. He shall from time
to time divide the City into such police districts and subdivisions thereof
as he may deem advisable and assign the policemen to duty; all
regulations or orders of the Department shall be promulgated through
the Chief of Police.
(C) He shall, with the consent of the Mayor and City Council, prescribe the
proper uniform and badge for all regular and auxiliary officers, and
shall make suitable regulations, under which they shall be required to
wear an appropriate uniform and badge, by which they may be known
and designated at all times.
(D) He shall have the power to suspend, without pay, any policeman
(including part-time and auxiliary officers) from duty.
(E) The Chief of Police shall keep a suitable record of arrests made by the
members of the Police Department or other officers where prisoners are
brought to the police station for safekeeping or detention, such record
to contain the following information: number of arrests, date, name of
prisoner, charge, name of officer or citizen arresting, name of
magistrate trying charge, amount of fine imposed, costs, and such other
information as may be necessary or essential for the guidance of the
Police Department and information to the proper City authorities.
(F) The Chief of Police, with the consent of the City Council, is hereby
authorized to designate a Fire Inspector. The Fire Inspector shall be a
member of the Hometown Fire Protection District and shall possess the
required technical training, knowledge and certification necessary to
§ 2.23 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.24
1:54
§ 2.25. Department powers and duties; reports. [Amended
3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3-2009]
discharge the duties attendant to the office. The Fire Inspector is
hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of the Municipal Code
of the City of Hometown relating to fire prevention, including the
International Fire Code.
(A) The several members of the police force of the City of Hometown,
including the Chief of Police, shall devote their time and attention to the
discharge of their duties, according to the ordinances and the rules and
regulations which the Mayor and City Council and the Police
Commissioners may adopt and prescribe. It shall be the duty of each
member of the police force of the City to preserve order, peace and
quiet, and enforce the law and ordinances throughout the City. They
shall report to the Chief of Police all cases where buildings may be in
the process of erection prior to the issuance of permit, all sidewalks and
roadways that are in a dangerous condition, all cases of unlawful
obstruction of streets and alleys and other public grounds, all cases of
contagious diseases, all cases of unsanitary conditions, all thefts and
robberies and other infractions of the laws and ordinances of the City,
all serious accidents, and all accidents wherever the City may become
liable; and the Chief of Police shall record such reports in a record to be
provided for the purpose. He shall immediately report in writing to the
department having control of the respective matters all such defective,
unsanitary and illegal conditions, and shall make a complete and full
report thereof, together with a full and complete investigation of the
facts, to the Mayor and City Council at the first following regular
meeting of the Council.
(B) Police officers shall immediately stop the process of any and all such
violations, and they shall have the power to arrest all persons of the City
on view found in violation of any law or ordinance of the City, or aiding
and abetting in any such violation, and shall take all such persons so
arrested before a Judge of the Circuit Court of Cook County, District 5,
if any can be found, and prefer charges or make complaint against such
persons so arrested and prosecute the same. If such arrest is made in
the night time, or on Sunday, and no judge can be found, such person so
arrested shall be confined in some safe place provided for that purpose,
until some judge can be found before whom a trial can be had; and in all
cases where it becomes necessary to confine any person under arrest, if
such person is violent, or if for any other reason the officer having such
person in charge shall be apprehended of any attempt to escape, or if
he shall suspect that such person has concealed upon or about his
person any deadly weapon, and if such weapon shall be found or any
instrument that will aid such person to escape from confinement, the
officer having such person in charge shall remove the same and deliver
the same to the Chief of Police, who shall safely keep the same; when
such person shall be released from arrest or confinement, the Chief of
Police shall return such article to the person from whom the same may
§ 2.24 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.25
1:55
§ 2.26. Reports to Chief; delivery of seized property; badge.
§ 2.27. (Reserved)12
§ 2.28. (Reserved)13
§ 2.29. Gambling devices.
Any member of the police force of the City may seize any instrument, device
or thing used for the purpose of gambling, or by or on which money or other
articles of value may be lost or won, and all such instruments, devices, or
things may be demolished or destroyed.
§ 2.30. Interference with incarceration.
It shall be unlawful for any person to break open any jail of said City, or in
any manner directly or indirectly aid or assist in or counsel or advise the
breaking open of any jail of said City to escape therefrom.
have been taken if the same shall not have been otherwise lawfully
disposed.
(C) The Chief of Police and all policemen shall have power and authority
within the City to serve and execute all warrants, writs and other
process for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with
an offense, or crime, or misdemeanor, or held for examination or trial
for the violation of any law or ordinance of the City. They shall also have
power and authority within the City to serve and execute any and all
writs, warrants, summons or other process or assist in the same. Such
policemen shall have and possess all the power and authority conferred
on constables at common law and by the statutes of the State of Illinois.
(A) It shall be the duty of every police officer to report to the Chief of Police
at such times and places as he may require, at all times to obey the
orders and instructions of said Chief of Police, and also deliver to him
all property seized or found by said officer immediately after the same
shall come into his possession, which property, with the date of delivery,
and a description of the same, and the name of the officer, shall be
entered into a book to be kept for the purpose by said Chief of Police.
(B) Every member of the Department shall wear a suitable badge to be
furnished by the City, and any member who shall destroy the same will
be required to pay the cost of replacing it; and whenever any member of
the Department shall leave, resign, be suspended or discharged, he
shall immediately deliver his badge to the Chief of Police.
12.Editor's Note: Former § 2.27, Civilian duty to assist police, was repealed 3-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 3-2009. See Ch. 19, § 19.95.
13.Editor's Note: Former § 2.28, Resistance to officers, was repealed 3-24-2009 by Ord. No.
3-2009. See Ch. 19, §§ 19.61 and 19.101.
§ 2.25 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.31
1:56
§ 2.31. Falsely impersonating officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself or assume
or pretend to be a policeman of the City of Hometown, or a member of the
police force or Police Department of said City, or, with intent to deceive, use
or wear in public or imitate any of the signs, signals, or devices adopted and
used by the Police Department of said City, or to wear in public the uniform
or badge adopted or used as the police uniform or badge of said City, or any
other which shall be similar in appearance.
§ 2.32. Neglect of duty; ethical conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any police officer to neglect or refuse to perform
any duty required of him by the laws and ordinances of this City or in the
discharge of his official duties to be guilty of fraud, favoritism, partiality,
extortion, oppression, or willful wrong and injustice, and no member of the
Police Department of said City shall receive for his own benefit or share in
any present, gift, or emolument for police services of any nature or any kind,
manner or form; all rewards, gifts, emolument, or gratuities shall be turned
over to the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund.
§ 2.33. (Reserved)14
§ 2.34. (Reserved)15
§ 2.35. Part-time police officers. [Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No.
4-2012]
(A) Appointment. The Police Chief shall examine all applicants for the
position of part-time police officer and make recommendations to the
City Council for original appointment. No one shall be appointed as a
part-time police officer without the prior approval of the City Council.16
(B) Duties. Part-time police officers shall have all the responsibilities of fulltime
police officers as limited by the general orders issued by the Chief
of Police and by Illinois law. Part-time police officers shall not be
assigned to supervise or direct full-time police officers. Part-time
officers shall be trained in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois
Police Training Act (50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.) and the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training and
Standards Board. The number of hours a part-time police officer may
work within a calendar year is restricted.
(C) Discipline. All part-time police officers are under the command of the
Chief of Police and are governed by the rules and regulations of the City
14.Editor's Note: Former § 2.33, Auxiliary police officers, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
15.Editor's Note: Former § 2.34, Police Pension Fund, was repealed 9-22-2009 by Ord. No.
13-2009.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 2.31 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.35
1:57
§ 2.36. through § 2.39. (Reserved)
of Hometown Police Department. The Chief of Police shall have the
authority to discipline, suspend, or terminate a part-time police officer
with or without cause.
(D) Requirements. Any person employed as a part-time police officer must
meet the following standards:
(1) Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties;
(2) Be at least 21 years of age;
(3) Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate;
(4) Possess a valid Illinois driver's license;
(5) Submit to a fingerprint, criminal history and background
investigation;
(6) Have no prior felony convictions;
(7) Be honorably discharged from the United States military if having
served in the military;
(8) Pass medical and other examinations mandated by the City of
Hometown;
(9) Possess a valid FOID card;
(10) Be certified by the Illinois Police Training Standards Board
pursuant to 50 ILCS 705/1; and
(11) Comply with all hiring standards imposed by the Police Chief and
the City of Hometown.17
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 2.35 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.36
1:58
ARTICLE 4
Director of Public Works
§ 2.40. Office created; appointment; compensation.18
There is hereby created the office of Director of Public Works. The Director
of Public Works shall be appointed yearly by the Mayor and Aldermen voting
jointly and shall receive such compensation as fixed by the City Council at
the beginning of each fiscal year. (Referendum 11-2-1982)
§ 2.41. Duties.
§ 2.42. through § 2.49. (Reserved)
(A) The Director of Public works shall be charged with superintendence
and the care and custody of all municipally owned property. The duties
shall include maintenance of and keeping the streets and alleys of the
City clean, free from obstruction and in good repair. He shall see that
the streets and sidewalks are on proper grade and that the drains
thereto are free and unobstructed.
(B) He shall also have the superintendence and the care and custody of the
municipal sewer and water systems, and all equipment, pipes and
machinery pertaining thereto, and shall be responsible for the care of
all such property, and for the efficient management of the sewer and
water system.
(C) He shall also have supervision over all buildings and equipment used in
the furnishing of sewer and water in the City and shall see that the
object and purposes of the Sewer and Water Department are carried
out, and that the sewer and waterworks system is properly maintained;
and for this purpose it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works
and all of the officers and employees of said department to enforce all
the provisions of this chapter, and to observe and obey and carry out the
orders and directions of the City Council.
(D) Where the streets are required to be opened for repairs or extensions,
the Director shall protect the public against accidents during such
repairs and extensions. He shall prepare and keep in his office a
complete atlas of the sewer and waterworks, with all valves, hydrants,
water service connections and other appurtenances distinctly recorded
therein.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 2.40 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.42
1:59

ARTICLE 5
City Engineer
§ 2.50. Office created; appointment; compensation.
There is hereby created the Office of City Engineer, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor and Aldermen voting jointly, yearly, and shall receive such
compensation as fixed by the City Council at the beginning of each fiscal
year. (Referendum 11-2-1982)
§ 2.51. Duties.
§ 2.52. through § 2.59. (Reserved)
(A) The City Engineer shall prepare or supervise the preparation of all
maps, charts, surveys, specifications, plans, and other similar
documents needed by the City.
(B) The City Council, in its discretion, however, may enter into a separate
contract with any engineering firm, when in its opinion the type of work
to be performed must be done by a specialist or in a large-scale manner.
§ 2.50 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.52
1:61

ARTICLE 6
Director of Public Health and Safety; Code Enforcement Officer
§ 2.60. Office created.19
There is hereby established the Office of Director of Public Health and
Safety.
§ 2.61. Appointment and term.
The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor and Aldermen voting jointly.
The term of office shall not exceed the term of the Mayor in office at the
time of appointment. No appointment shall be made within the 30 days
before expiration of his term of office. (Referendum 11-2-1981)
§ 2.62. Duties.20
The Director shall also be the Health Officer and shall have the duties
of the Health Officer as such duties are prescribed by the state statutes,
public health regulations, and the ordinances of the City of Hometown. He
shall examine all cases of contagious, infectious and communicable diseases
arising in the City and shall see to the enforcement of quarantines. He
shall give the City Council information and advice concerning the health of
the residents of the City and shall perform such other duties that may be
assigned to him by the City Council. The Director shall educate regarding
and enforce all safety requirements for the City as specified by this Code
and the relevant provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. His objectives
may include areas of safety in the homes, schools, recreation, traffic, fire
prevention and all departments of the City.
§ 2.63. Enforcement and inspection.
The Director shall assist in the enforcement of all ordinances concerning
the conditions of premises, presence of rodents, debris or material which
may become a health hazard, weeds and noxious plants, animals, fish, birds
or relating to the sale or storage of food and drink intended for human or
animal consumption, and shall make or cause to be made such tests and
analyses of inspections as may be necessary for this purpose.
§ 2.64. Compensation.
The Director shall receive such compensation as the City Council by
resolution may from time to time provide.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 2.60 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.65
1:63
§ 2.65. Reports.
In March of each year, the Director shall, on or before the last regular
meeting of the month of the City Council, submit a report to the Mayor, who,
in turn, will transmit it to the City Council. The City Council may from time
to time require other reports.
§ 2.66. Code Enforcement Officer. [Added 4-9-2002 by Ord. No.
2-2002]
§ 2.67. through § 2.69. (Reserved)
(A) There is hereby established the Office of Code Enforcement Officer. The
Director shall be appointed by the Mayor and Aldermen voting jointly.
The term of the office shall not exceed the term of the Mayor in office at
the time of the appointment. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
receive such compensation as the City Council may from time to time
provide.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce all
ordinances of the City, including those relating to property
maintenance, public health and sanitation. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be authorized to issue citations for any violation of the
Municipal Code of the City of Hometown or the statutes of the State of
Illinois.
§ 2.65 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.67
1:64
ARTICLE 7
Electrical Inspector
§ 2.70. Office created; appointment; compensation.
There is hereby created the Office of Electrical Inspector, who shall be
appointed yearly by the Mayor and Aldermen voting jointly and who shall
receive such compensation as fixed at the beginning of the fiscal year by the
City Council. (Referendum 11-2-1982)
§ 2.71. Powers.
The Electrical Inspector shall have the right during reasonable hours to
enter any building in the discharge of his official duties, or for the purpose
of making an inspection or test of the electrical equipment therein, and he
shall have the authority to enforce all the ordinance provisions relating to
electrical wiring and equipment.
§ 2.72. Emergencies.
The Electrical Inspector shall have the power to cause the current in any
wire or conduit to be turned off whenever this is necessary in an emergency
for the protection of life and property.
§ 2.73. Inspections.
The Electrical Inspector shall make all inspections necessary to see to the
enforcement of the City ordinances; and no electric wiring shall be covered
until it has been inspected.
§ 2.74. Certificate of approval.
The Electrical Inspector shall give a certificate of approval to the owner or
person in charge of premises which he has inspected where he finds that
the electric apparatus and wiring therein fully comply with the ordinances
of the City.
§ 2.75. through § 2.79. (Reserved)
§ 2.70 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.75
1:65

ARTICLE 8
Plumbing Inspector
§ 2.80. Office created; appointment; compensation.
There is hereby created the Office of Plumbing Inspector, who shall be
appointed yearly by the Mayor and Aldermen voting jointly and who shall
receive such compensation as fixed at the beginning of the fiscal year by the
City Council. (Referendum 11-2-1982)
§ 2.81. Duties; qualifications.
It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector, and he is hereby empowered,
to enforce all City ordinances relating to the installation, care and standards
of plumbing. He shall make all necessary inspections and tests which may
be needed in the performance of his duties. He shall be a certified plumbing
contractor or licensed plumber licensed by the State of Illinois under the
supervision of the Building Inspector.
§ 2.82. Stop orders.
Whenever the Plumbing Inspector shall find plumbing work being done in
violation of the City ordinance, he shall have the power to order the work
stopped until the ordinances are complied with. It shall be unlawful to
continue any such work after such a stop order has been issued, except
upon the written permission of the Building Commissioner or of the
Plumbing Inspector; provided that where such stop order is made orally it
shall be followed by a written stop order within an hour.
§ 2.83. Right of entry.
The Plumbing Inspector shall have the power to enter any building or
premises on or in which plumbing fixtures or pipes are being installed,
altered or repaired, at all reasonable hours, to make inspections to ensure
the enforcement of the ordinances relating to plumbing.
§ 2.84. through § 2.89. (Reserved)
§ 2.80 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.84
1:67

ARTICLE 9
(Reserved)21
§ 2.90. through § 2.123. (Reserved)
21.Editor's Note: Former Art. 9, Hometown Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, was
repealed 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 10-2009.
§ 2.90 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.90
1:69

ARTICLE 10
(Reserved)22
§ 2.124. through § 2.129. (Reserved)
22.Editor's Note: Former Art. 10, Public Safety, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2). See now Art. 6 of this chapter, Director of Public
Health and Safety.
§ 2.124 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.124
1:71

ARTICLE 11
Officers and Employees
§ 2.130. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply alike to all officers or employees of
the City, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or of the time of
the appointment of the officer.
§ 2.131. Appointments; terms of office.
The Mayor and Aldermen, voting jointly, shall make appointments to fill all
appointive offices unless otherwise provided by statute. Every appointive
officer or employee of the City shall hold office for a term of one year or
until his successor is anointed and qualified unless it is otherwise provided
by statute or ordinance. (Referendum 11-2-1982)
§ 2.132. Assignment of duties.
The Council shall have the power to assign to any appointive officer any
duty which is not assigned by ordinance to some other specific officer, and
shall determine disputes or questions relating to the respective powers or
duties of officers after consultation with the City Attorney.
§ 2.133. Oath.
Every officer of the City shall, before entering upon his duties, take the oath
prescribed in the Illinois Municipal Code.
§ 2.134. Bond.
Every officer and employee shall, if required by the Council, upon entering
the duties of his office, give a bond in such amount as may be determined
by the Council, and with such sureties as it may approve, conditioned upon
the faithful performance of the duties of his office or position.
§ 2.135. Employees.
(A) The City Clerk, City Treasurer, and City Collector shall employ the
various clerks and subordinates in their respective offices as the City
Council may authorize and shall be responsible for the fidelity of all
persons so employed by them. All other employees not otherwise
provided for in this Code shall be employed by the City Council.
(B) The number of employees, pay, hours of employment, job description,
method of discipline and discharge, and benefits for all employees shall
be fixed by the City Council.
§ 2.130 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.136
1:73
§ 2.136. Termination of office.
Every officer of the City, upon the expiration of his term for any cause
whatsoever, shall deliver to his successor all books and records which may
be the property of the City; and if no successor has been appointed within
one week after the termination of office such property shall be delivered to
the City Clerk, or to the City Treasurer.
§ 2.137. Emergency interim successors.
§ 2.138. through § 2.139. (Reserved)
(A) Should the Mayor, City Clerk or City Treasurer be unable or unavailable
to act during a proclaimed civil emergency, his temporary successors
shall be, respectively, the Mayor Pro Tem, the Deputy Clerk and the City
Collector. The Mayor Pro Tem shall be elected by a vote of the
Aldermen, or in the event that it is impracticable or impossible to have a
vote during the civil emergency, the Alderman with the longest number
of years in office shall be the Mayor Pro Tem until an election by the
Aldermen. The Aldermen may provide by resolution for the manner in
which vacancies may be filled or temporary appointment to their office
made should they be unable or unavailable to act during a proclaimed
civil emergency.
(B) Each appointed department head shall designate by rank of succession
his or her interim emergency successor should he be unable or
unavailable to act during a proclaimed civil emergency. The department
head shall designate not less than three, nor more than seven,
emergency interim successors. The interim emergency successors shall
exercise the powers and discharge those duties attendant to the office
for which they are designated. At the time of their designation by the
department head, each emergency interim successor shall take an oath
of office.
§ 2.136 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.138
1:74
ARTICLE 12
Regulations Governing All Personnel
§ 2.140. Residence requirements.
§ 2.141. through § 2.149. (Reserved)
(A) Officers. No person shall be eligible for any appointive municipal office
unless that person is a qualified elector of the City or as otherwise
provided by law. The residency requirements, however, do not apply to
engineers, health officers, attorneys, or other officers who require
technical training or knowledge.
(B) Employees. All employees, except as provided by Subsection (C), shall
reside in the City within six months of commencing employment. The
City Council may, upon good cause shown, waive the residency
requirement.
(C) Auxiliary and part-time police. The provisions of Subsections (A) and (B)
shall not apply to auxiliary and part-time police officers.
Notwithstanding, all efforts shall be made to appoint said police officers
from qualified residents of the City.
(D) Duty to report nonresident status. All employees are required to report
nonresident status to the City Clerk immediately upon removal from the
City.
(E) Chief of Police. See § 2.16 of this chapter.
§ 2.140 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.141
1:75

ARTICLE 13
Employee and Personnel Regulations
§ 2.150. Personnel Review Committee; hiring and employment
policies.
§ 2.151. Applicability.23
The provisions of §§ 2.140 to 2.199 of this chapter shall apply to all City
personnel, except where the provisions herein are inconsistent, are
modified by the section of this chapter pertaining to the Police Department
and to the rules and regulations or state law applicable to members of the
Police Department subject to the Fire and Police Commissioners Act.24
§ 2.152. Hiring and discharge.
(A) There shall be established a Personnel Review Committee which shall
consist of three members: the Mayor, and one Alderman and one
department head, or two Aldermen. The Mayor shall serve as Chairman
of the Personnel Review Committee. The Aldermen and/or the
department head who serve as members of the Personnel Review
Committee shall be appointed by vote of the Aldermen. This Committee
will be charged with the overseeing and monitoring of all personnel
rules and regulations and the enforcement of same. In arriving at
decisions on policy, the Committee may consult with the Council,
department heads, the City Attorney, or others whose expertise may
bring light to a specific area involving personnel procedures.
(B) It is the policy of the City that the following principles be adhered to:
(1) All appointments shall be made on the basis of merit and fitness for
public service and in compliance with the statutory or ordinance
provisions that may apply.
(2) Hiring practices will conform to the Affirmative Action Program
adopted by the City on October 26, 1976, Ordinance No. 6-1976.
See § 1.114 of the City Code.
(3) All employees are entitled to prompt and fair adjustment of
grievances. Notwithstanding, all employees may be terminated or
suspended without notice, a hearing, or assigning cause.
(A) All employees shall be hired by the department head with the approval
of the City Council. All employees may be discharged by the department
head.
(B) All hiring shall be performed following the guidelines of City ordinance,
including affirmative action and residency requirements.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
24.Editor's Note: See 5 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.
§ 2.150 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.152
1:77
§ 2.153. Accountability.
City employees shall observe, obey and carry out the orders and directions
solely of the head of the department in which they are employed.
§ 2.154. through § 2.159. (Reserved)
(C) Any employee discharged for a reason other than reduction of
personnel may file a written petition with the City Council within 48
hours after his discharge, stating the reason he feels the discharge is
unfair. If a petition is filed, the City Council shall conduct a closed
meeting with the employee and the person responsible for the firing
present. Witnesses and counsel may be present. At this meeting, the
City Council shall hear whatever either party wishes to state. The
Aldermen may override a discharge by a majority vote at the next
regular meeting of the City Council, if they so see fit.
(D) Nothing in this chapter establishes any right to employment by the City,
nor any tenure, civil service or right to notice and a hearing prior to
termination or suspension. All employees may be terminated with or
without cause. All employees hold their employment subject to the
provisions of this section.
§ 2.152 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.154
1:78
ARTICLE 14
Obtaining Employment
§ 2.160. Application for employment.
§ 2.161. Examinations.
§ 2.162. through § 2.169. (Reserved)
(A) The operation of a merit system requires, with some exceptions, that all
positions be filled by persons who have proven their superiority by
competitive examination (written or oral). Exceptions include the
position of department head and the positions of a professional or
technical nature for which a certificate of professional competency is a
prerequisite for employment.
(B) Prior to taking any examination, however, an applicant must file an
employment application on the form supplied to him by the City Clerk.
An applicant may be asked to supply any or all of the following
documents:
(1) Birth certificate or equivalent;
(2) Military service record;
(3) Education record and certificates of specialization or professional
qualifications.
(A) The examination process is designed to test the applicant's general
intelligence and acquired skills for the position for which application is
made, and to determine the applicant's physical fitness and character.
(B) Written and oral examinations will be given to test the applicant's
general knowledge and a report of physical fitness will be by a qualified
physician. In some positions, the applicant may be required to submit to
a physical agility and coordination test.
§ 2.160 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.162
1:79

ARTICLE 15
Types of Employment
§ 2.170. Temporary employees.
Temporary employees are those persons who are hired to fill a position
of less than six months' duration. Such employees are not entitled to any
of the privileges or benefits enjoyed by permanent employees. Temporary
employees may be appointed without examination for no longer than six
months. If continued employment is desired, reclassification is necessary.
§ 2.171. Part-time employees.
Part-time employees are hired to fill positions which require year-round
occupancy by an employee but do not require such service during all
regular work days or work hours of the year. Part-time employees will be
entitled to no benefits.
§ 2.172. Probationary employees. [Amended 10-14-2008 by Ord. No.
12-2008]
§ 2.173. Regular employees. [Amended 10-14-2008 by Ord. No.
12-2008; 4-13-2010 by Ord. No. 4-2010]
(A) All appointments other than department heads and temporary
employees with the City are subject to a probationary period. A new
employee must prove satisfactory in a ninety-day period prior to being
confirmed as a permanent employee of the City. Any employee currently
employed with the City who is to attain the status of a regular employee
must complete an additional ninety-day probationary period before
being confirmed as a regular employee.
(B) During the probationary period an employee will not be entitled to
benefits.
(C) During the probationary period the employee will be counseled by his
supervisor or department head as to the progress he is making.
(D) It is the intent of the City to properly train and develop new and regular
employees; if the employee's service proves satisfactory, he will be
certified by his department head as a permanent or regular employee
as the case may be.
(A) A regular employee shall be defined as one who is regularly scheduled
to work 32 hours per week or more. A part-time employee shall not be
classified as a regular employee due to his occasionally working 32 or
more hours per week.
(B) Regular employees shall be entitled to the following benefits upon
completion of the probationary period and certification: vacation,
health-care contributions, sick leave, and holidays.
§ 2.170 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.174
1:81
§ 2.174. Promotions.25
With the exception of department heads, all promotions shall be filled by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Aldermen.
§ 2.175. through § 2.179. (Reserved)
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 2.174 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.175
1:82
ARTICLE 16
Conditions of Employment
§ 2.180. Hours of work.
Working hours of City employees vary among the different departments
and may vary by assignment within a department. Lunch periods will be
determined by departmental regulations.
§ 2.181. Transfers.
Under certain conditions it may become necessary for the City to request an
employee to transfer to another position. If such a requirement is temporary
in nature, the employee is required to make such a change. Refusal to
accept temporary assignment to another position will result in either
disciplinary action or dismissal. An employee may request a transfer to
another assignment for which he is qualified if such can be done without
violation of the regulations governing examinations and appointment from
the eligibility roster. However, any such transfer must be approved by the
employee's department head and the department head of the department
to which a transfer is requested. All benefits and privileges accruing to an
employee will be transferred with him.
§ 2.182. Pay period.
Pay days will be as described in the pay and pay period resolution adopted
with the budget each year.
§ 2.183. Pay rate.
It is the policy of the City through its personnel program to classify positions
according to the skills demanded; level of work responsibilities and training
experience; the salary range established for all positions are based on these
factors. The Mayor and the City Council, from time to time, will revise
salaries for a position or group of positions and make any adjustments in
pay which the review reveals to be necessary. Every position will be subject
to such a review at least once a year. It is not the policy to automatically
increase salaries on a perfunctory basis annually or biannually. Normally
a new employee will be employed at the first step of the pay range for
his position. Occasionally, however, in positions requiring special skills and
qualifications, it might be necessary to employ at a step beyond the first
step.
§ 2.184. Payroll deductions.
The City shall withhold from all paychecks federal income tax, social
security, insurance premiums payable by the employee, and all other taxes
and deductions required by state and federal law.
§ 2.180 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.185
1:83
§ 2.185. Separation for lack of work.
It may become necessary to require an employee to involuntarily separate`
from the City service without pay due to lack of work or lack of funds.
Such separation is not disciplinary in nature and, therefore, is not subject
to the appeals procedure. Such separation shall be in writing and notice
shall be transmitted by certified mail at least 15 days in advance of the
date separation begins. Such separation shall not interrupt an employee's
service if the employee is rehired within one year.
§ 2.186. Resignation.
Any employee who desires to terminate his service with the City shall notify
his department head, in writing, at least two weeks in advance of the date
he proposes to terminate his employment. Failure to do so will result in
the loss of pay for unused vacation. Such employee shall not be eligible for
reemployment by the City.
§ 2.187. through § 2.189. (Reserved)
§ 2.185 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.187
1:84
ARTICLE 17
Regular Employee Benefits
§ 2.190. Sick leave.
§ 2.191. Vacations. [Amended 5-31-2005 by Ord. No. 4-2004]
(A) Regular employees of the City shall be eligible for up to six days of sick
leave at full pay in any single calendar year.
(B) Sick leave shall be granted for the following reasons:
(1) Personal illness or physical incapacity resulting from causes
beyond the control of the employee.
(2) Enforced quarantine of the employee in accordance with health
regulations.
(3) Personal care requiring the services of a legally qualified medical
doctor, dentist, optometrist, or other professional service of this
nature.
(C) An employee requesting sick leave shall inform his immediate superior
of the fact and the reason therefor prior to the normal starting time for
his position, and failure to do so may be cause for denial of sick leave
pay for the period of absence.
(D) Sick leave pay for three or more consecutive working days for reasons
of personal illness or physical incapacity shall be granted only after
presentation of a written statement by a licensed medical doctor or
other satisfactory evidence certifying that the employee's condition
prevented him from performing the duties of his position.
(E) There shall be no accumulation of sick leave. Employees taking sick
leave may be required to furnish proof of illness to the department head
or Mayor.
(A) Each regular employee shall be entitled to a vacation as follows:
Years of Continuous
Employment
Weeks of Vacation
1 1
3 2
10 3
15 4
(B) The period shall be counted from the day of first employment. Vacations
may not be accumulated and shall be taken in an employee's regular
employment year.
§ 2.190 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.191
1:85
§ 2.192. Holidays. [Amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No. 8-2005]
§ 2.193. Military leave.
(C) Employees are required to file a request for vacation leave with their
department head by the date stipulated in department orders. The
department head will grant vacation leave at his discretion so as to not
unduly disturb the activities of the City. In case of conflict, seniority will
prevail in allotting vacation dates.
(A) Each regular employee shall be entitled to 12 holidays:
New Year's Day Labor Day
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day (state
observance)
Columbus Day (state
observance)
Presidents' Day Veterans' Day
Good Friday Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day Day after Thanksgiving
Independence Day Christmas
(B) Employees are to work a half day the day before the City's observance
of Christmas Day or New Year's Day. The half day shall be considered a
holiday for which half of the day shall be paid. In the event that
Christmas or New Year's falls on a Saturday, the City shall observe that
holiday on the Friday before with a half day on Thursday. In the event
that Christmas or New Year's falls on a Sunday, the City shall observe
that holiday on the Monday after with a half day on the preceding
Friday.
(A) Any employee who has completed his probationary period and who
leaves the City service for compulsory military duty as required by act
of Congress of the United States shall be placed on military leave
without pay, such leave to extend through a date 30 days after his
release from the service.
(B) Any employee who has completed his probationary period shall be
granted a leave of absence for the purpose of being inducted or
otherwise entering compulsory military service as required by act of
Congress of the United States; if not accepted for such duty the
employee shall be reinstated in his position without loss of seniority or
status or reduction in pay. During such period of induction the
employee for all purposes shall be considered to have rendered service
and shall be compensated therefor at his regular pay; such period,
however, shall not exceed three working days.
(C) An employee returning from military leave shall be entitled to
restoration to his former position, provided he makes application within
10 days after his release from duty, under conditions other than
dishonorable or bad conduct discharge, and is physically and mentally
§ 2.191 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.193
1:86
§ 2.194. Leave of absence without pay.
Leave of absence without pay may be granted to department heads by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Leave of absence without pay
may be granted to employees by the department head with the approval of
the Mayor. Leaves of absence may not exceed six months and shall not count
as continuous employment.
§ 2.195. Worker's compensation; reporting injuries.
While working for the City, an employee will be covered by worker's
compensation laws and insurance. The cost of this insurance is borne by the
City. All injuries on the job must be reported immediately to the supervisor.
No one can tell when an apparently minor injury may have serious aftereffects.
§ 2.196. Retirement benefits.
Eligible employees will be entitled to retirement benefits of the Illinois
Municipal Retirement Fund as provided by state law.
capable of performing the duties of the position involved. In the event
the position vacated no longer exists at the time of qualification for
return to work, such person shall be entitled to reemployment in
another position of the same class; provided such reemployment does
not necessitate the laying off of another person with greater seniority.
A regular employee who leaves the City service directly for military
leave without pay may elect to be paid for any accrued vacation leave
credits as he may be entitled to as if he were actually separating from
the City service. If the employee elects not to be paid for such leave, the
accrued leave credits shall be reinstated upon return of the employee.
Employees returning to duty shall also have sick leave credits restored
to them.
(D) An employee who has completed his probationary period and is a
member of any reserve or National Guard Unit of the United States
Armed Forces will be allowed leave of absence for required training for
a period not to exceed 15 working days during any one calendar year
and for any special or emergency duty; in the event that the time for
such training is optional, the time shall be decided upon by the
department head or the Mayor. Any employee on leave as designated in
this subsection will receive compensation from the City which, together
with the compensation received for the training or duty, will equal his
salary at the time his leave was initiated.26
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 2.193 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.197
1:87
§ 2.197. Funeral leave.
Each regular employee shall be entitled to up to three days of funeral leave
for a death in his or his spouse's immediate family. "Immediate family"
is herein defined as a legal spouse, natural or adopted children, parents,
brothers and sisters and their natural or adopted children. Leave shall not
extend beyond the date of the funeral. The employee shall be paid only for
work days counted as funeral leave.
§ 2.198. Family and medical leave.
(A) To the extent required by the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
("FMLA"), employees are hereby entitled to the benefits thereof.
Nothing herein shall be construed to expand the benefits granted under
the FMLA. The City reserves the right to require that any employee on
FMLA leave exhaust his or her sick days, accrued or otherwise, while on
said leave.
(B) To be eligible for FMLA benefits, an employee must:
(1) Have worked for a total of at least 12 months; and
(2) Have worked at least 1,250 hours over the previous 12 months.
(C) An eligible employee is entitled to receive up to a total of 12 work weeks
of leave during each fiscal year for one or more of the following
reasons:
(1) Birth of the employee's child;
(2) Care for the employee's newborn child;
(3) Placement of a child with the employee for adoption;
(4) Placement of a child with the employee for foster care;
(5) Care of a child, spouse or parent who has a serious health
condition; and
(6) A serious health condition of the employee.
(D) FMLA leave may be taken intermittently whenever medically necessary
to care for a seriously ill family member, or because the employee is
seriously ill or unable to work. FMLA leave may not be taken
intermittently for birth, placement for adoption or placement in foster
care of a child.
(1) A "serious health condition" means an illness, injury, impairment,
or physical or mental condition that involves:
(a) An overnight stay for treatment in a hospital, hospice, or
residential medical care facility;
§ 2.197 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.198
1:88
(b) Any period of incapacity requiring absence from work or other
daily activities of more than three calendar days which also
involves continuing treatment by a health care provider; or
(c) Continuing treatment by a health care provider for a chronic or
long-term health condition that is incurable or so serious that if
not treated would likely result in a period of incapacity of more
than three calendar days and for prenatal care.
(2) When FMLA leave is requested to care for an immediate family
member or the employee's planned medical treatment, the
employee must try to schedule treatment so as to not unduly
disrupt work operations.
(E) All FMLA leave shall be unpaid except if the employee has earned or
accrued vacation, sick leave, or compensatory time, in which event such
days must be taken and used prior to using any unpaid FMLA leave. In
all cases, paid leave for existing accrued benefits shall be substituted
for unpaid FMLA leave.
(F) In any case where the necessity of the FMLA leave is foreseeable, the
employee shall provide at least 30 days' notice, except if the leave is to
begin in less than 30 days, notice shall be given as soon as practicable.
Medical certifications supporting the need for leave due to a serious
health condition affecting the employee or an immediate family member
must be provided when requesting the FMLA leave and periodically on
the first day of every month during such FMLA leave.
(G) While on FMLA leave, the employee's coverage under a group health
plan shall be provided on the same basis as when the employee was
working and as for present employees. Any share of group health plan
premiums paid by the employee must be paid by the same time as it
would be made if by payroll deduction. Group health benefits will cease
when the employee fails to return to work from the FMLA leave,
terminates employment, or gives notice of not returning from the leave.
Group health plan benefits will cease if an employee's premium
payment is more than 30 days late. No other benefits will be paid,
accrued, or earned by an employee while on unpaid FMLA leave. FMLA
leave will be treated as continued service with respect to municipal
pension plans.
(H) Upon return from FMLA leave, an employee (except a key employee) is
entitled to return to the same position as when leave commenced, or to
an equivalent position with equivalent benefits, pay, and other terms
and conditions of employment. A key employee is an employee among
the highest-paid 10% of all employees. Restoration to a key employee
position upon completion of FMLA leave may be denied if it is
determined that restoration of the employee will cause substantial and
grievous economic injury to the employer's operations. A key employee
will be notified of the potential consequences with respect to
reinstatement upon requesting FMLA leave.
§ 2.198 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.199
1:89
§ 2.199. Health insurance. [Added 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 12-2008]
The City shall reimburse regular employees hereinafter certified for 80% of
the cost of the employee's health insurance premiums.
§ 2.199 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.199
1:90
ARTICLE 18
Other Regulations
§ 2.200. Corporate seal.
§ 2.201. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of May of each year
and end on the last day of April on the year following.
(A) The Corporate Seal of the City shall be as follows:
(B) The Clerk shall be the custodian of the City Seal, and shall affix its
impression on documents whenever this is required.
§ 2.200 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.202
1:91
§ 2.202. Injury to public property.
It shall be unlawful to injure, deface or interfere with any property
belonging to the City without proper authority from the Council.
§ 2.203. through § 2.299. (Reserved)
§ 2.202 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.203
1:92
ARTICLE 19
Public Library
§ 2.300. Establishment.
There is hereby established within the City of Hometown a public library
and reading room for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of said City.
The use and maintenance of said public library shall be governed by the
provisions of Local Library Act, Chapter 75 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
§ 2.301. Directors.
The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint a board of
nine directors from City residents. Not more than one member of the City
Council shall be at any time a member of said board.
§ 2.302. Term of office for directors; removal.
Said directors shall hold office for three years. The Mayor shall, before the
first of July of each year, appoint as before three directors, to take the place
of the retiring directors, who shall hold office for three years, and until their
successors are appointed. The Mayor may, by and with the consent of the
City Council, remove any director for misconduct or neglect of duty.
§ 2.303. Failure to return books.27
Any person who fails to return any book belonging to the Hometown public
library, or any of its branches, after the due date, according to the rules and
regulations duly made and adopted by the directors of such library for the
government thereof, shall be fined not less than $20 nor more than $750 for
each offense.
§ 2.304. Injury to property.28
(A) Any person who shall willfully or maliciously cut, write upon, injure,
deface, tear or destroy any books, newspaper, plate, picture, engraving
or other thing of value belonging to the Hometown public library, or any
of its branches, shall be fined not less than $20 nor more than $750 for
every such offense.
(B) Any person who shall willfully or maliciously commit any injury upon or
to the Hometown public library, or upon or to the grounds, buildings,
furniture, fixtures, or other property thereof, shall be fined not less than
$20 nor more than $750 for each offense.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 2.300 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.305
1:93
§ 2.305. Notice of violation.
When any person has violated the terms of § 2.304, the officer or persons
making the arrest may issue, in lieu of a formal complaint, a notice to
appear at the police station in the City of Hometown within 10 days after
said arrest with the books and pay the minimum fine of $20 for each offense.
If the books are not returned he shall pay for the value of such books
plus the minimum fine of $20. Every person issued such a notification of
violation, after consenting to a waiver of court hearing and trial, may pay
the sums for the violation at the police station, Hometown, Illinois, in lieu
of said person's appearance in court. If a second notice to appear is issued,
an additional sum of double the amount shall be added to the fines herein
provided. Failure to pay the fine herein provided within the time provided
shall subject said person to whom the notification was given to an issuance
of a warrant for his arrest, and the police officer or person issuing such
notification shall swear out a complaint for the arrest.
§ 2.306. Disposition of fines.
All monies collected for fines shall be turned over by the City Treasurer
to the Board of Library Directors of the City of Hometown, to be used for
library purposes.
§ 2.307. Unreturned books.
Nothing in this article shall prevent the library from recovering the value of
the books, where the books have not been returned.
§ 2.308. through § 2.309. (Reserved)
§ 2.305 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.308
1:94
ARTICLE 20
Playground and Recreation Board
§ 2.310. Establishment; appointment; term; compensation.
There is hereby established a Playground and Recreation Board to consist
of five members to be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City
Council. Each member of the Board shall serve for a term of five years until
his successor is appointed and qualified. Each member shall be designated
as a "Commissioner" and shall serve without compensation. The Board shall
operate under the name and style of "Playground and Recreation Board,
City of Hometown."
§ 2.311. Officers; fiscal year.
The members of said Board shall annually at the beginning of the fiscal year
elect among themselves a President and Vice President and shall appoint a
Secretary, who need not be a member of said Board. The fiscal year of said
Board shall correspond with the fiscal year of the City of Hometown.
§ 2.312. Administration.29
The Board shall establish rules and regulations concerning administrative
procedures. In any matter not covered by its own administrative procedure,
Roberts Rules of Order Revised shall govern.
§ 2.313. Hiring of employees.
The Board shall have the right to hire and fire employees; except, however,
that the number of employees are to be limited to the budget, and the
wages of said employees are to be comparable to those established for City
employees. The Board shall have the same right with officers with the same
limitations.
§ 2.314. Annual budget.
Before the end of the fiscal year, the Board shall prepare an annual budget,
which budget shall be in line with its expected income. Said budget shall
not exceed a maximum of 0.09% of the full, fair cash value of the assessed
valuation as equalized of the City of Hometown or such other maximum rate
that may be established by law and shall never be less than 0.0333% of said
assessed valuation, or such other minimum rate that may be established by
law. Said annual budget is subject to approval of the City Council.
§ 2.315. Finances.
All monies of said Board shall be paid over to the City Treasurer and shall be
deposited in the name of the City of Hometown and earmarked in a separate
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 2.310 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.315
1:95
account labeled "Playground and Recreation Board." All warrants for the
payment of any sum shall be submitted to the City Treasurer for payment
and shall comply with established procedure of the City of Hometown for
the payment of monies in similar cases.
§ 2.316. Duties and powers.
The Board shall be vested with the duty and power to provide, maintain
and conduct playgrounds and recreation centers. In connection with such
duties, the Board shall have the powers and limitations provided in 65 ILCS
5/11-95-1 et seq., and such other incidental powers that are necessary to
carry out its functions.
§ 2.317. through § 2.319. (Reserved)
§ 2.315 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.317
1:96
ARTICLE 21
Other Boards, Commissions and Special Funds
§ 2.320. Electrical Commission created.30
There is hereby established a commission which shall be known as the
"Electrical Commission of the City of Hometown," and which shall consist
of six members. The Electrical Inspector, who shall be known as the "Chief
Electrical Inspector," shall be a member of said Commission. Of the other
five members, one shall be an electrical contractor, one shall be a registered
professional engineer, one a journeyman electrician, one a representative
of an inspection bureau maintained by the fire underwriters, if such a
representative resides in the municipality, and if no such representative
resides in the municipality, then the Chief of the Fire Department of the
Hometown Fire Protection District, and one a representative of an electrical
supply company; if there is no person in the municipality who is qualified
under any one of these descriptions, then the Mayor of that municipality
may appoint such other persons who fill that position. All members of the
Electrical Commission are to be appointed by the Mayor of the municipality
with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Chief Electrical
Inspector shall be ex-officio Chairman of the Commission and shall serve
on said Commission without additional compensation therefor. The other
members shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the City
Council.
§ 2.321. Electrical Commission powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the Electrical Commission to formulate and
recommend safe and practical standards and specifications for the
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment, but shall exclude
those items set forth in 65 ILCS 5/11-37-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code,
but shall include cable TV systems, designed to meet the necessities and
conditions that prevail in the City; to recommend reasonable rules and
regulations governing the issuance of permits by the electrical inspection
department, and to recommend reasonable fees to be paid for inspections
made by the electrical inspection department. The standards and
specifications, rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits
and fees so recommended shall become effective upon the passage of an
ordinance adopting the same by the City Council. All such fees shall be paid
to the City Treasurer.
§ 2.322. Violations of electrical standards.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install or alter any
electrical equipment after the approval of the standards and specifications,
and the fees prescribed therefor, except such as is exempt from the
provisions of this article, by the terms of the Illinois Compiled Statutes,
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 2.320 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.322
1:97
without first having secured a permit, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with the rules, standards or
specifications established by the Electrical Commission.
§ 2.323. through § 2.329. (Reserved)
§ 2.322 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.323
1:98
ARTICLE 22
(Reserved)31
§ 2.330. through § 2.339. (Reserved)
31.Editor's Note: Former Art. 22, Police Pension Fund and Board of Trustees, was repealed
9-22-2009 by Ord. No. 13-2009.
§ 2.330 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.330
1:99

ARTICLE 23
Plan Commission
§ 2.340. Creation and appointment.
There is hereby created a Plan Commission for the City of Hometown,
Illinois, which Commission shall consist of seven members to be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council, in the
same manner as other officers of the City are appointed and subject to the
provisions of this article and all articles relating to appointments of officers
of the City. With the advice and consent of the City Council, and until this
article is otherwise amended, the Mayor hereby appoints the members of
the Zoning Board of Appeals as members of the Plan Commission, the terms
to run concurrently therewith, and the Chairman to be the same Chairman.
§ 2.341. Secretary and employees.
The Plan Commission shall have a Secretary and such other employees
as shall be deemed necessary for the use of this program. However, no
Secretary or employee shall be employed without the consent of the City
Council.
§ 2.342. Compensation.
The compensation of the members of the Plan Commission, the Secretary,
the staff or the employees shall be fixed by the City Council in the annual
appropriation ordinance.
§ 2.343. Powers and duties.
The Plan Commission shall have powers and duties as follows:
(A) To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities a
Comprehensive Plan for the present and future development or
redevelopment of the City. Such plan may be adopted in whole or
separate geographical or functional parts, each of which, when
adopted, shall be the official Comprehensive Plan, or part thereof, of the
City. This plan may include reasonable requirements with reference to
streets, alleys, public grounds, and other improvements hereinafter
specified. The plan, as recommended by the Plan Commission and as
thereafter adopted in any municipality in this state, may be made
applicable, by the terms thereof, to land situated within the corporate
limits and contiguous territory not more than 1 1/2 miles beyond the
corporate limits and not included in any municipality. Such plan:
(1) May be implemented by ordinance establishing reasonable
standards of design for subdivision and for resubdivision of
unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment in respect
to public improvements as herein defined;
§ 2.340 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.343
1:101
§ 2.344. Quorum.
A majority of the Plan Commission shall constitute a quorum, but no final
action shall be taken on any measure before it except with the concurrence
of a majority of the members. The Chairman shall vote with the other
members of the Commission.
§ 2.345. Meetings.
The Plan Commission shall meet at such times as it may determine. Special
meetings may be called by the Mayor, the Chairman, or by any two members
of the Commission; provided, however, that such notice must be in writing.
If all the members are present at a special meeting, written notice thereof
shall be deemed waived. However, no meeting, special or otherwise, shall
(2) May be implemented by ordinance establishing reasonable
requirements governing the location, width, course, and surfacing
of public streets and highways, alleys, ways for public service
facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, streetlights, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential
purposes, stormwater drainage, water supply and distribution,
sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment; and
(3) May designate land suitable for annexation to the municipality and
the recommended zoning classification for such land upon
annexation.
(B) To recommend changes, from time to time, in the official
Comprehensive Plan.
(C) To prepare and recommend to the corporate authorities, from time to
time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of the official
Comprehensive Plan.
(D) To give aid to the City officials charged with the direction of projects for
improvements embraced within the official plan, to further the making
of these projects, and, generally, to promote the realization of the
official Comprehensive Plan.
(E) To provide for development of a planning program; the preparation of
regulations, projects and programs pertinent to the development,
redevelopment and renewal of the City and such surrounding territory
over which the City exercises subdivision jurisdiction; and the
preparation and revision of the Official Map.
(F) To exercise such other powers as are germane to the powers granted by
the statutes of the State of Illinois to Plan Commissions.
(G) To initiate and review applications for projects to be financed in whole
or in part by state or federal grants. No application shall be approved
which is not consistent with the overall Comprehensive Plan of the City.
§ 2.343 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.345
1:102
be held without posting the notices and notifying the news media, as
required by statute.
§ 2.346. through § 2.349. (Reserved)
§ 2.345 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.346
1:103

ARTICLE 24
Board of Building Appeals
§ 2.350. Creation and regulation.
The provisions concerning the Board of Building Appeals are found in
Chapter 21, Building Code, Article 7, § 21.80 et seq.
§ 2.351. through § 2.359. (Reserved)
§ 2.350 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.351
1:105

ARTICLE 25
Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 2.360. Creation and regulation; Zoning Ordinance.
§ 2.361. City Council as Zoning Commission.
The City Council may hold hearings and otherwise act as a "committee"
or "commission" pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-13-14 of the
Illinois Municipal Code.
§ 2.362. through § 2.369. (Reserved)
(A) The provisions concerning the Zoning Board of Appeals are found in
Chapter 22, Zoning, Article 16.
(B) The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hometown is separately published
as special statute provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code govern its
enactment and amendment.
§ 2.360 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.362
1:107

ARTICLE 26
Board of Local Improvements
§ 2.370. Creation and authority.
There is hereby created a Board of Local Improvements, pursuant to 65
ILCS 5/9-2-1 et seq. of the Illinois Municipal Code, with the powers, duties,
and authority therein and herein conferred and as may hereafter be
conferred upon such Board by statute or by ordinance.
§ 2.371. Composition.
The Board of Local Improvements shall consist of four members, namely:
the Mayor, two Aldermen, and the Director of Public Works, if one is
appointed. If no permanent Director of Public Works is appointed, an
Alderman shall serve in his place and stead.
§ 2.372. Compensation.
No member of the Board shall receive compensation for acting as such
member.
§ 2.373. Secretary.
The Secretary shall be the City Clerk.
§ 2.374. Attorney.
The City Attorney shall be the attorney for the Board and shall receive as
his compensation a sum equal to 4% of the total amount of the assessment
as confirmed by the court. In the event said assessment is rejected by court
or discontinued, he shall receive 1% of the engineer's estimate as his fee.
§ 2.375. Officer levying assessment.
The officer levying the assessment shall receive $50 for each improvement
for his service in spreading and levying the special assessment.
§ 2.376. Engineer.
Unless modified by contract, the engineer shall receive as his compensation
an amount according to the latest Illinois Professional Engineers scale for
work done; and if said improvement is rejected by court or discontinued by
vote of the Council, he shall be paid for his work on a quantum-merit basis,
plus 100% for his cost, profit and overhead.
§ 2.377. through § 2.379. (Reserved)
§ 2.370 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.377
1:109

ARTICLE 27
Emergency Telephone System Board
§ 2.380. Creation; composition; term; compensation.
§ 2.381. Meetings.
The ETSB shall:
§ 2.382. Powers and duties; surcharge exemptions.
(A) There is hereby created an Emergency Telephone System Board,
abbreviated to and called "ETSB," consisting of five members who shall
be called "Directors." Each member shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Aldermen. The Directors shall serve
for a term of three years and shall serve without pay. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Directors shall be furnished an office, telephone
equipment, secretarial help, and clerical assistance, which clerical
assistance may be paid.
(B) The Directors shall be representatives of the Police Department,
Hometown Fire Protection District, or any representative of a public
safety agency. One Director may be a resident who is not affiliated with
any public safety agency. Elected officials are eligible to serve as
Directors.32
(A) Hold regular meetings at least once a month at the City Hall.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the ETSB may meet less than once each
month if the same will not adversely impact its operations or the
operations of the 9-1-1 emergency telephone system.
(B) Approve its own constitution and bylaws. City rules of order shall be
followed as to its practical applicability. Minutes of all meetings shall be
kept. The Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.) shall be complied
with.
(C) Copies of minutes of all meetings shall be mailed to the
telecommunications carrier and the Illinois Commerce Commission
(Commission).33
(A) The powers and duties of the ETSB are:
(1) Planning the 9-1-1 system; timetable all work.
(2) Coordinating and supervising the implementation, upgrading, or
maintenance of the system, including establishment of equipment
specifications and coding systems.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 2.380 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.382
1:111
§ 2.383. Monies received.
(3) Receiving monies from the surcharge and from other sources for
deposit into the Emergency Telephone System Fund.
(4) Authorizing all disbursements from the fund.
(5) Hiring, on a temporary or permanent basis, any staff necessary for
the implementation or upgrading of the system.
(6) Filing all plans with the Commission.
(B) No surcharge exemptions shall be granted, except the City-assigned
network may be exempted. Application for such exemption can only be
granted by the Commission.
(A) All monies received shall be deposited in a special fund called the
"Emergency Telephone System Fund (City of Hometown)."
(B) The City Treasurer shall be custodian of the fund.
(C) Interest accruing shall remain with the fund and be used for 9-1-1
purposes.
(D) All expenditures shall be made by a resolution approved by a majority of
Directors present at a Board meeting.
(E) Expenditures may be made only for the following purposes:
(1) The design of the emergency telephone system.
(2) The coding of an initial Master Street Address Guide (MSAG)
database, its update, and maintenance.
(3) The charges for automatic number identification and automatic
location identification equipment, and the maintenance,
replacement, and update thereof.
(4) The nonrecurring charges related to installation of the emergency
telephone system and the ongoing network charge.
(5) Other products and services necessary for the implementation,
upgrading, and maintenance of the system and any other purpose
related to the operation of the system, including costs attributable
directly to the construction, leasing, or maintenance of any
buildings or facilities or costs of personnel attributable directly to
the operation of the system. This includes office expenses,
including help, assistants, and usual and extraordinary expenses
incurred in the usual course of business. Costs attributable directly
to the operation of an emergency telephone system do not include
the costs of public safety agency personnel and equipment
dispatched in response to an emergency call.
§ 2.382 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.383
1:112
(6) Consultant hired to design and implement 9-1-1 system, including
installation.
(7) Hiring a 9-1-1 coordinator.
§ 2.383 CITY GOVERNMENT § 2.383
1:113
Chapter 3
TAXES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses — See Ch. 11. Locally imposed and administered tax rights
and responsibility procedures — See Ch. 18,
Art. 6.
§ 2.383 HOMETOWN CODE § 2.383
1:114
ARTICLE 1
Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax, Service Occupation Tax and
Use Tax, Police Protection Tax
§ 3.01. Taxes imposed.
§ 3.02. Reports required.
Every such person engaged in such business or service in the City shall
file on or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the
State Department of Revenue required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes
and approved and more particularly as set forth under Section 3 of "An
Act in Relation to a Tax Upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling
Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption" and
under Section 9 of the Service Occupation Tax Act (65 ILCS 5/8-11-5).
§ 3.03. Payment to state.
At the time such report is filed there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipt from
such sales during the preceding month.
§ 3.04. Nonapplicability of exclusions.
The exclusions set forth by statute for machinery and equipment used
directly and exclusively in the manufacture of tangible personal property for
resale shall not apply to the taxes imposed by this chapter.
(A) A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail in this City at the rate of 1%
of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business while this article is in effect, in accordance with the provisions
of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 et seq. of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(B) A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in
the business of making sales of service at the rate of 1% of the cost
price of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen,
either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real
estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the
provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 et seq. of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(C) A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this municipality
any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside
Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with
any agency of the state, at the rate of 1% of the selling price of such
tangible personal property, in accordance with the provisions of 65
ILCS 5/8-11-1 et seq. of the Illinois Municipal Code.
§ 3.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.05
1:115
§ 3.05. Police protection tax.
A tax is hereby imposed for the purpose of police protection on all the
taxable property in the City at a rate of 0.075% of the value as equalized
or assessed by the Department of Revenue for all taxable property therein,
in all succeeding years, all in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/
11-1-3 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
§ 3.06. through § 3.09. (Reserved)
§ 3.05 HOMETOWN CODE § 3.06
1:116
ARTICLE 2
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
[Added 9-24-2002 by Ord. No. 9-2002]
§ 3.10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
AMOUNT PAID — The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in
the City, regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT — The Illinois Department of Revenue.
GROSS CHARGE — The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating
or receiving telecommunications in the City and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of
the materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever.
In case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and
when paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges
imposed at each channel point within this state, charges for the channel
mileage between each channel point within this state, and charges for
that portion of the interstate inter-office channel provided within Illinois.
However, "gross charge" shall not include:
Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
(1) The tax imposed by this article;
The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act (35
ILCS 630/1 et seq.);
(2)
(3) The tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
(4) 911 surcharges; or
Charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of 220
ILCS 5/9-221 or 5/9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, as amended, or
any similar charges added to customers' bills by retailers who are
not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission
for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or other
amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act;
(5)
(A)
Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the
City;
(B)
Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data
or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment
(C)
§ 3.10 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.10
1:117
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment
and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing
agreement;
Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other
charges;
(D)
Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under 220 ILCS 5/
9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and
during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and
Economic Opportunity;34
(E)
Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when
the tax imposed under this Act has already been paid to a retailer and
only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation
and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries
represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the
generation of profit for the corporation rendering such service;
(F)
Bad debts ("Bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined
under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the
payment is made.);
(G)
Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices;
(H)
Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act (35
ILCS 635/1 et seq.); or
(I)
Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if (i) those
charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications
that are taxable, (ii) those charges are not separately stated on the
customer bill or invoice, and (iii) the retailer can reasonably identify
the nontaxable charges on the retailer's books and records kept in the
regular course of business. If the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably
be identified, the gross charge from the sale of both taxable and
nontaxable services or telecommunications billed on a combined basis
shall be attributed to the taxable services or telecommunications. The
(J)
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 3.10 HOMETOWN CODE § 3.10
1:118
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS — All telecommunications that
either originate or terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS — All telecommunications that
originate and terminate within this state.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint-stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited-liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed
by order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state
universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political
subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL — The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
RETAILER — Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales
at retail as defined in this section. The Department may, in its discretion,
upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by
any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to
the satisfaction of the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure
collection and payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without
charge, a permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the
duty of such retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in this state in the same manner and subject to the
same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within this
state. The permit may be revoked by the Department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE —
Includes any retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by
a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales
office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer
or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or
other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether
such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL — The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state
governments, and state universities created by statute and other than
between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between
wholly owned subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS — The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this
may not be a defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging
systems, and maritime systems, "service address" means the customer's
burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the retailer of the
telecommunications.35
35.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 3.10 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.10
1:119
place of primary use as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing
Conformity Act (35 ILCS 638/1 et seq.). For air-to-ground systems and
the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's primary
use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER — A person who individually or through his or her agents,
employees, or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the City and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by this article.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — In addition to the meaning ordinarily and
popularly ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide-area telephone
service, private-line services, channel services, telegraph services,
teletypewriter, computer exchange services, cellular mobile
telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way
radio, paging service, or any other form of mobile and portable one-way
or two-way communications, or any other transmission of messages or
information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by
wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar
facilities. As used in this article, "private line" means a dedicated nontraffic-
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to
exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels,
from one or more specified locations to one or more other specified
locations. The definition of "telecommunications" shall not include valueadded
services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchases
of telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as
a component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate
retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end
communications. Carrier access charges, right-of-access charges, charges
for use of intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in
the subsequent provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into
end-to-end telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for
resale. Prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered
"telecommunications" subject to the tax imposed under this article. For
purposes of this definition, "prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means
that term as defined in 35 ILCS 120/2-27 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax
Act.
§ 3.11. Tax imposed.
(A) A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or
privileges:
(1) The act or privilege of originating in the City or receiving in the
City intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6.0% of
the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail
from a retailer.
§ 3.10 HOMETOWN CODE § 3.11
1:120
§ 3.12. Collection by retailers.
§ 3.13. Returns to Department.
Commencing on February 1, 2003, the tax imposed under this article on
telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the Department pursuant to the Illinois
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (35 ILCS 636/5-50) and
any accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department to
implement this Act.
§ 3.14. Resellers.
(2) The act or privilege of originating in the City or receiving in the
City interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6.0% of
the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail
from a retailer. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or
privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any
taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another
state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax
enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the extent of
the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state
which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
state or local tax in this state.
(B) The tax imposed by this article is not imposed on such act or privilege to
the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
City.
(A) The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the taxpayer
by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall be
remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this article and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the
Department shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state.
Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the
gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner prescribed by the
Department. The tax authorized by this article shall constitute a debt of
the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid, is recoverable at
law in the same manner as the original charge for such sale at retail. If
the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer
shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the
manner provided by the Department.
(B) Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this article shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
§ 3.11 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.14
1:121
§ 3.15. through § 3.19. (Reserved)
(A) If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which
will show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax
authorized by this article on any of such purchases and shall furnish
such additional information as the Department may reasonably require.
(B) Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant.
The Department may cancel any number which is obtained through
misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such
telecommunication tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale,
or which no longer applies because of the persons having discontinued
the making of resales.
(C) Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be
made tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person
has an active resale number from the Department and furnishes that
number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that
any sale to such person is nontaxable because of being a sale for resale.
§ 3.14 HOMETOWN CODE § 3.15
1:122
ARTICLE 3
Cable/Video Service Provider Fee; PEG Access Support Fee
[Added 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
§ 3.20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ACT — The Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-100
et seq.).36
CABLE SERVICE — That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
COMMISSION — The Illinois Commerce Commission.
GROSS REVENUES — That term as defined in 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c) of the
Act.
HOLDER — A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS
5/21-401 of the Act.
PEG — Public, educational and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE — The amount paid under this article and 220
ILCS 5/21-801(d) of the Act by the holder to the City for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE — The provision of cable service or video service to subscribers
and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has
received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the
Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401 of the Act.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE — The amount paid under this article and 220
ILCS 5/21-801 of the Act by the holder to a city for the service areas within
its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE — Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part
in the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in
47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail, or other services offered over the public internet.
§ 3.21. Cable/Video service provider fee imposed.
(A) Fee imposed. A fee of 5% of the holder's gross revenues is hereby
imposed on any holder providing cable service or video service in the
City.
36.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 3.20 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.21
1:123
§ 3.22. PEG access support fee imposed.
(B) Notice to the City. A holder shall notify the City at least 10 days prior to
the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video
service in the City.
(C) Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the City. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of
the ordinance adopting this article by the holder. The ordinance
adopting this article shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the
address listed on the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220
ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) of the Act to the City.
(D) Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.
(E) Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise
agreement with the City in which a fee is paid.
(F) Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) of
the Act with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes
under this section.
(A) PEG access support fee imposed. A PEG access support fee of 1% of the
holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues
that incumbent cable operators pay to the City or its designee for PEG
access support in the City is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service or video service in the City in addition to the fee imposed
pursuant to § 3.21 of this article.
(B) Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the City or
to the entity designated by the City to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set
forth in § 3.21 of this article.
(C) Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due
on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the
calculation of the fee.
(D) Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) of
the Act shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the
§ 3.21 HOMETOWN CODE § 3.22
1:124
§ 3.23. Accounting principles.
All determinations and calculations under this article shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
§ 3.24. Impact on other taxes due from holder.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt a holder
from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the City, including any
tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder
with respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of
the City's simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as
it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect
to payment of the local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or
charges.
§ 3.25. Audit of cable/video service provider.
§ 3.26. Late fees and payments.
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by the
provisions of Chapter 3, Article 3, of the Municipal Code of the City of
Hometown.
§ 3.27. through § 3.29. (Reserved)
remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant
to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable operator
pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that
that operator owes under this section.
(A) Audit requirement. The City will notify the holder of the requirements it
imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to
an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same
requirements the City imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and
to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the
requirements of the City. If all local franchises between the City and
cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those
adopted by the City in Chapter 18, Article 6, Locally Imposed and
Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Procedures, of the City
Code. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an
accord that the amounts are correct.
(B) Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the City's submission of an invoice for the
sum.
§ 3.22 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.27
1:125

ARTICLE 4
Electric Utility Tax
[Added 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 6-2010]
§ 3.30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CITY — The City of Hometown.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint-stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited-liability
company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE — Any
person having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary
or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent, or other representative operating within the state under
the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of
whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located
in the state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary
or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL — Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include
the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in Section 8-11-2 of
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER — Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate
limits of the City, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
TAX COLLECTOR — The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
§ 3.31. Tax imposed; effective date.
(A) Pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
8-11-2), a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within
the corporate limits of the City at the following rates, calculated on a
monthly basis for each purchaser:
Consumption in a Month
(kilowatt hours) Rate per Kilowatt Hour
First 2,000 $0.610
Next 48,000 $0.400
Next 50,000 $0.360
§ 3.30 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.31
1:127
§ 3.32. Collection of tax.
Consumption in a Month
(kilowatt hours) Rate per Kilowatt Hour
Next 400,000 $0.350
Next 500,000 $0.340
Next 2,000,000 $0.320
Next 2,000,000 $0.315
Next 5,000,000 $0.310
Next 10,000,000 $0.305
More than 20,000,000 $0.300
(B) The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the City, the State of Illinois or any other political
subdivision of the state.
(C) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the tax shall not be
imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax
would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the
Constitution of the State of Illinois.
(D) The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers and nonresidential customers
beginning with the first bill issued on or after July 1, 2010.
(A) Subject to the provisions of § 3.34 regarding the delivery of electricity
to resellers, the tax imposed under this article shall be collected from
purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this state
who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a
debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the
purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner
as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
(B) Any tax required to be collected by this article, and any tax in fact
collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the person
delivering the electricity, provided that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity
the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided,
further, that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering
supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.
(C) Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by
adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity.
Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such
gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax they collect to reimburse
them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the
City upon request. For purposes of this section, any partial payment of a
§ 3.31 HOMETOWN CODE § 3.32
1:128
§ 3.33. Tax remittance and return.
§ 3.34. Resales.
billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be
deemed to be for the delivery of electricity.
(A) Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in a form
prescribed by the City Clerk. The return and accompanying remittance
shall be due on or before the last day of the following month.
(B) If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax, then the purchaser
shall file a return in a form prescribed by the City Clerk and pay the tax
directly to the City on or before the last day of the following month.
(A) Electricity that is delivered to a person in the City shall be considered to
be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving
the electricity has an active resale number issued by the City Clerk and
furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and
certifies that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale
for resale.
(B) If a person who receives electricity in the City claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the City
Clerk for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it
is not liable for the tax imposed by this article and shall furnish such
additional information as the City Clerk may reasonably require.
(C) Upon approval of the application, the City Clerk shall assign a resale
number to the applicant.
(D) The City Clerk may cancel the resale number of any person if the person
fails to pay any tax payable under this article for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number:
(1) Was obtained through misrepresentation; or
(2) Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued
making resales.
(E) If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and
partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this article on
the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall
collect the tax pursuant to § 3.31 and remit the tax on the amount of
electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
(F) Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale
number and complying with all other conditions of this article shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the
electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to
§ 3.32 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.34
1:129
§ 3.35. Books and records.
Every person required to pay the tax imposed by this article shall keep
accurate books and records of its business or activity, including
contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave
rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this article. The books
and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times
during business hours of the day.
§ 3.36. Credits and refunds.
Notwithstanding any other provision, in order to permit sound fiscal
planning and budgeting by the City, no person shall be entitled to a refund
of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this article unless the person files a
claim for refund or credit within one year after the date on which the tax
was paid or remitted.
§ 3.37. through § 3.39. (Reserved)
the City Clerk the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller,
and such other information that the City Clerk may reasonably require.
§ 3.34 HOMETOWN CODE § 3.37
1:130
ARTICLE 5
Gas Utility Tax
[Added 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 7-2010]
§ 3.40. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CITY — The City of Hometown.
GROSS RECEIPTS — The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as
the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith
valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash,
credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all services
rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost
of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever;
provided, however, that "gross receipts" shall not include any amounts
specifically excluded from the definition of gross receipts in 65 ILCS 5/
8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
PERSON — Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint-stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited-liability
company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.
§ 3.41. Tax imposed; effective date.
(A) Pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
8-11-2), a tax is imposed upon persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or
consumption within the corporate limits of the City, and not for resale,
at the rate of 2% of the gross receipts therefrom.
(B) No tax is imposed by this article with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business
may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be
made subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision
thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas be subject to taxation under the
provisions of this article for such transactions as are or may become
subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax Act authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code.37
(C) Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of
products or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as
37.Editor's Note: See Art. 1 of this chapter.
§ 3.40 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.41
1:131
§ 3.42. Collection of tax.
§ 3.43. Penalties.
The penalty clause contained in § 1.03 of the Municipal Code of the City of
Hometown is adopted herein by reference and shall govern any violation for
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles,
wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's
business.
(D) The tax imposed by this article shall be based on the gross receipts
actually paid to the taxpayer for services delivered on or after July 1,
2010.
(A) On or before the last day of each month commencing August 2010, each
taxpayer shall make a return to the City Clerk for the previous month
stating:
(1) His name;
(2) His principal place of business;
(3) His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed;
(4) Amount of tax;
(5) Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
(B) The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of
making such return, pay to the City Clerk the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may,
if he so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is
made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed), with prompt
adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between
such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
(C) If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any
tax due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who
made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously
paid more than three years prior to the filing of claim therefor shall be
so credited.
(D) No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
article shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of
such amount.
§ 3.41 HOMETOWN CODE § 3.43
1:132
a taxpayer's failure to make a return, the submission of a false return or the
willful violation of any provision of this article.
§ 3.44. through § 3.49. (Reserved)
§ 3.43 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.44
1:133

ARTICLE 6
Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibilities
Procedures38
§ 3.50. Title.
This article shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Locally Imposed
and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Procedures."
§ 3.51. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to the City's procedures in
connection with all of the City's locally imposed and administered taxes.
§ 3.52. Definitions.
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT — The Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act (50 ILCS 45/1 et
seq.).
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX — Each tax imposed
by the City that is collected or administered by the City, but does not include
any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code or fees
collected by the City other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR — The City Clerk, who is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The local
tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
article to give full effect thereto. The exercise of such authority by the local
tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this article and the Act.
NOTICE — Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the City's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE — Any ordinance adopted by the City that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER — Any person required to pay any locally imposed and
administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal
incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes
the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally imposed and
administered tax to the City.
38.Editor's Note: This article was moved from Ch. 18, Art. 6, at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 3.50 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.53
1:135
§ 3.53. Notices.
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the
notice is to be in writing and mailed not less than seven calendar days
prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled
act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
§ 3.54. Late payment.
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to
the City pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it
is (a) physically received by the City on or before the due date, or (b)
received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S.
Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the City,
with adequate postage prepaid.
§ 3.55. Payment order.
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order:
§ 3.56. Credits and refunds.
(A) First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons
concerned at the persons' last known address; or
(B) Personal service or delivery.
(A) First, to the tax due for the applicable period;
(B) Second, to the interest due for the applicable period; and
(C) Third, to the penalty for the applicable period.
(A) The City shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a
taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the
taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the taxes
at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
(B) The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four
years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The City shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid
the amounts directly to the City.
(C) The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows:
§ 3.53 HOMETOWN CODE § 3.56
1:136
§ 3.57. Audit procedure.
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax
shall comply with the notice requirements of this article.
(1) The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator, in writing,
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
(a) The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject
to the claim;
(b) The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
(c) The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
(d) The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
(e) A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties
overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount
overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and
only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies
to the City.
(2) Within 10 days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any
claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
(a) Grant the claim; or
(b) Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
(D) In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a
claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit
shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment
to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(A) Each notice of audit shall clearly identify who will be conducting the
audit and shall contain the following information:39
(1) The tax;
(2) The time period of the audit; and
(3) A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 3.56 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.57
1:137
§ 3.58. Appeals.
(B) Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours; and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to
the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer
within 30 days after the originally designated audit and during normal
business hours.
(C) The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor
more than 30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time.
In the event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date
in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days,
approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax
administrator.
(D) Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of
entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given
rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept
in the English language and shall be subject to and available for
inspection by the City.
(E) It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its
books and records for inspection by the City. If the taxpayer or the City
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best
estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
(F) If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of
the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30
days of the City's determination of the amount of overpayment.
(G) In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, then, upon request by a local government entity,
the audit information must be given to any unit of local government that
may be affected by an overpayment.40
(A) The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon
the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax.
The notice shall include the following information:
(1) The reason for the assessment;
(2) The amount of the tax liability proposed;
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 3.57 HOMETOWN CODE § 3.58
1:138
§ 3.59. Hearing.
(3) The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
(4) The obligations of the City during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
(B) A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator
of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth
the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator
within 45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination
and assessment.
(C) If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax
administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
(D) If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the fortyfive-
day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
(E) Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of
the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or
extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In
no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for
hearing be reopened or extended for more than 90 days after the
expiration of the forty-five-day period.
(A) Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest
and petition for hearing under § 3.58 above, the local tax administrator
shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
(B) No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance
granted shall not exceed 14 days except by agreement of all parties.
(C) At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear
testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination,
audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial
proceedings shall not apply.
(D) At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make
a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of
the written decision.
§ 3.58 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.60
1:139
§ 3.60. Interest and penalties.
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
§ 3.61. Abatement of penalties.
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
§ 3.62. Installment contracts.
The City may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for
the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days' delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure
the delinquency within the fourteen-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.
§ 3.63. Statute of limitations.
The City, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
(A) The City hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a
late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be 1% per
month or part thereof that a payment is late.
(B) If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty of 5% of the amount of
tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late
payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is
filed within the time or manner provided by the controlling tax
ordinance and prior to the City issuing a notice of tax delinquency or
notice of tax liability, then a failure-to-file penalty shall be assessed
equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for
which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment
penalty shall not apply if a failure-to-file penalty is imposed by the
controlling ordinance.
§ 3.60 HOMETOWN CODE § 3.63
1:140
§ 3.64. Voluntary disclosure.
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of
tax due, along with interest of 1% per month or part thereof, for all periods
prior to the filing of the application but not more than four years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty
for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the
taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the
taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on
the underpaid tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the
part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid
and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than
90 days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts
owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid
under this section must be paid within 90 days after a final determination
and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date
agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.
§ 3.65. Publication of tax ordinances.
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk's office.
(A) No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return
for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
(B) If any tax return is not filed or if, during any four-year period for which a
notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the City, the
tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall
be six years after the end of the calendar year in which return for the
applicable period was due or the end of the calendar year in which the
return for the applicable period was filed.
(C) No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed
by the taxpayer.41
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 3.63 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.66
1:141
§ 3.66. Review of liens.
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be improper,
the local tax administrator shall:
§ 3.67. Applicability; conflicts among ordinances.
This article shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement
all of the City's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this article, this article shall be controlling.
(A) Timely remove the lien at the City's expense;
(B) Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
(C) Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
§ 3.66 HOMETOWN CODE § 3.67
1:142
Chapter 4
POLICIES
§ 3.67 CITY GOVERNMENT § 3.67
1:143

ARTICLE I
Sexual Harassment Policy
[Adopted 12-12-2017 by Ord. No. 13-2017]
§ 4-1. Prohibition on sexual harassment.
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts
have determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under
Title VII of the United States Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in
1991. All persons have a right to work in an environment free from sexual
harassment. Sexual harassment is unacceptable misconduct which affects
individuals of all genders and sexual orientations. It is a policy of the City of
Hometown to prohibit harassment of any person by any municipal official,
municipal agent, municipal employee or municipal agency or office on the
basis of sex or gender. All municipal officials, municipal agents, municipal
employees and municipal agencies or offices are prohibited from sexually
harassing any person, regardless of any employment relationship or lack
thereof.
§ 4-2. Definition of sexual harassment.
(A) This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
Illinois Human Rights Act,42 which currently defines sexual harassment
as:
SEXUAL HARASSMENT — Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests
for sexual favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when:
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment;
(1)
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
(2)
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
(3)
(B) Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
(1) Verbal: sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor,
and jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual
propositions, threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements
about other employees, even outside of their presence, of a sexual
nature.
(2) Nonverbal: suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, catcalls,
smacking or kissing noises.
42.Editor's Note: See 775 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
§ 4-1 CITY GOVERNMENT § 4-2
1:145
§ 4-3. Procedure for reporting allegation of sexual harassment.
(3) Visual: posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
(4) Physical: touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
(5) Textual/electronic: sexting (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually
explicit language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all
forms of electronic communication (e-mail, text/picture/video
messages, Intranet/on-line postings, blogs, instant messages and
social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
(C) The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment
is more subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception
and interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a
standard of what would offend a reasonable person.
(A) An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes
herself/himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with
the incident(s) as directly and firmly as possible by clearly
communicating her/his position to the offending employee, and her/his
immediate supervisor. It is not necessary for sexual harassment to be
directed at the person making the report.
(B) Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
(1) Electronic/Direct Communication. If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly
and clearly express her/his objection that the conduct is
unwelcome and request that the offending behavior stop. The
initial message may be verbal. If subsequent messages are needed,
they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
(2) Contact with Supervisory Personnel.
(a) At the same time direct communication is undertaken, or in the
event the employee feels threatened or intimidated by the
situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a
department head, a director of human resources, an ethics
officer, the city manager or administrator, or the chief
executive officer of the municipality.
(b) The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be
sexual harassment must not assume that the employer is aware
of the conduct. If there are no witnesses and the victim fails to
notify a supervisor or other responsible officer, the
§ 4-2 HOMETOWN CODE § 4-3
1:146
§ 4-4. Prohibition on retaliation for reporting sexual harassment
allegations.
municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the
harassment.
(3) Resolution Outside Municipality. The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for
responding to every report and incident so that problems can be
identified and remedied by the municipality. However, all municipal
employees have the right to contact the Illinois Department of
Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal
complaint with those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed
within 180 days of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing
offense. A complaint with the EEOC must be filed within 300 days.
(C) Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what
was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not
limited to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone
messages.
(D) All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual
harassment charges and the difficulties associated with their
investigation and the questions of credibility involved, the claimant's
willing cooperation is a vital component of an effective inquiry and an
appropriate outcome.
(A) No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
municipal employee due to a municipal employee's:
(1) Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this policy;
(2) The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into
any violation of this policy; or
(3) Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
(B) For the purposes of this policy, "retaliatory action" means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or
transfer, or change in the terms or conditions of employment of any
municipal employee that is taken in retaliation for a municipal
employee's involvement in protected activity pursuant to this policy.
(C) No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a report
made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will be
protected from retaliation.
§ 4-3 CITY GOVERNMENT § 4-4
1:147
§ 4-5. Consequences of violation of prohibition on sexual
harassment.
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant
to municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee
handbooks and/or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates
this policy or the prohibition on sexual harassment contained in 5 ILCS
430/5-65, may be subject to a fine of up to $5,000 per offense, applicable
discipline or discharge by the municipality and any applicable fines and
penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, state law or federal law.
Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed by
the municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by
an ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law
or a state or federal agency.
§ 4-6. Consequences for knowingly making false report.
(D) Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act [740 ILCS 174/15(a)], an employer
may not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a
court, an administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or
committee, or in any other proceeding, where the employee has
reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a violation of
a state or federal law, rule, or regulation. In addition, an employer may
not retaliate against an employee for disclosing information to a
government or law enforcement agency, where the employee has
reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a violation of
a state or federal law, rule, or regulation. [740 ILCS 174/15(b)].
(E) According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it is a
civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to conspire,
to retaliate against a person because he/she has opposed that which he/
she reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in
employment, because he/she has made a charge, filed a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or
hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act.
(F) An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or
EEOC, may file a retaliation charge - due within 180 days (IDHR) or 300
days (EEOC) of the alleged retaliation.
(A) A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser
using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than
stopping sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual
harassment. A false report is a report which is not made in good faith
and which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness of the consequences
for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe offense that can
itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who intentionally makes a
false report alleging a violation of any provision of this policy shall be
subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable municipal
§ 4-4 HOMETOWN CODE § 4-6
1:148
policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks
and/or collective bargaining agreements.
(B) In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging
a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics
Act to an ethics commission, an inspector general, the State Police, a
State's Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement
official is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may
levy an administrative fine of up to $5,000 against any person who
intentionally makes a false, frivolous or bad-faith allegation.
§ 4-6 CITY GOVERNMENT § 4-6
1:149
Chapter 5
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plants and weeds — See Ch. 18, Art. 3.
Signs — See Ch. 18, Art. 8.
Building Code — See Ch. 21.
Zoning — See Ch. 22.
§ 4-6 HOMETOWN CODE § 4-6
1:150
ARTICLE 1
General Provisions
§ 5.01. Supervision.
All public streets, sidewalks and other public ways in the City shall be
under the supervision of the Director of Public Works. He shall be charged
with the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to such public
places (except traffic ordinances) and is hereby authorized to enforce such
ordinances.
§ 5.02. Construction. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 7-2016]
It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street,
sidewalk, or other public way, or to repair the same, without first having
secured a permit pursuant to Article 6 of this chapter. In the event of a
conflict between this Article 1 and Article 6 of this chapter, the provisions
of Article 6 shall prevail.
§ 5.03. Bond.43
Each applicant shall file a bond in the amount of at least $10,000, with
surety to be approved by the Council, conditioned to indemnify the
municipality for any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or
the manner of doing the same.
§ 5.04. Construction specifications.
All street and sidewalk pavements shall be made in conformity with
specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the Council.
§ 5.05. Injury to new pavements.
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or
injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is guarded
by a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft, newly laid
pavement.
§ 5.06. Repairs.
All public streets and sidewalks shall be maintained in a reasonably safe
condition. Such repair work, whether done by the City or by the abutting
owner, shall be under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 5.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.07
1:151
§ 5.07. Defects.
It shall be the duty of every City officer or employee becoming cognizant of
any defect in any street or sidewalk, or any obstruction thereof, to report
the same to the Director of Public Works as soon as possible.
§ 5.08. Obstructions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause, create or
maintain any obstruction of any street, sidewalk or other public way, except
as may be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the Director of Public
Works.
§ 5.09. Barricades.
§ 5.10. Disturbing barricades.
It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights
lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or
opening in any public street or sidewalk.
§ 5.11. Private use.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use any street,
sidewalk or other public place as space for the display or sale of goods or
merchandise; or to write or mark any signs or advertisements on any such
pavements.
§ 5.12. Encroachments.
(A) Any person, firm or corporation laying or repairing any pavement on a
street, sidewalk or other public place, or making an excavation in any
such place, shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any
person or vehicle by reason of the work; such barricades shall be
protected by lights at nighttime.
(B) Any defects in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent any
such injury, and any person, firm or corporation properly maintaining
any opening or excavation in any such place shall guard such opening
or excavation while the same remains open by proper barricades and
lights.
(A) It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building, structure or sign
which encroaches upon any public right-of-way.
(B) As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENCROACHMENT — Any building, fence, sign, including banners, or
any other structure or object of any kind (with the exception of utilities
and public road signs), which is placed, located or maintained in, on,
under or over any portion of the public right-of-way.
§ 5.07 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.12
1:152
§ 5.13. Injury.
It shall be unlawful to injure any sidewalk, street, pavement, trees,
shrubbery, grass, or other public property in the public right-of-way.
§ 5.14. Deposits on streets.
§ 5.15. Deposits on sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any material other
than merchandise or articles intended for immediate delivery into the
adjacent premises.
§ 5.16. Drains.
It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street. Further, it
shall be unlawful to dispose of any organic or inorganic material which may
obstruct an aforementioned drain by depositing said materials in or upon
any sidewalk, street or gutters.
§ 5.17. Use of storm sewers on 87th Street.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the State of Illinois, to use
the storm sewers constructed by the State of Illinois and installed on 87th
Street or elsewhere in the City. The discharge of stormwaters, sanitary
sewage, industrial waste matter, or any other material therein, by any other
person, is hereby prohibited.
PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT — Any existing awning, marquee,
advertising sign or similar overhanging structure supported from a
building immediately adjacent to the limits of the platted street where
there is a sidewalk extending to the building line and which does not
impair the free and safe flow of traffic on the highway; the permissive
retention of overhanging signs is not to be construed as being
applicable to those signs supported from poles constructed outside the
project right-of-way line and not confined by adjacent buildings.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Those areas existing or acquired by
dedication or by fee simple for street, sidewalk, alley or parkway
purposes or other similar property owned or maintained by the City.
(A) It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material which may be
harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass, or
other articles which may bring injury to any person, animal or property.
(B) Lawful materials may be deposited in streets preparatory to delivery or
use, provided such deposit does not reduce the usable width of roadway
at that point to less than 18 feet and provided that such material shall
not be permitted to remain on such streets for more than 24 hours.
(C) Any such material shall be guarded by lights if the same remains upon
any street after nightfall.
§ 5.12 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.18
1:153
§ 5.18. Poles and wires.
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any poles or wires on or over any
public street or other public way without having first secured permission
from the Council.
§ 5.19. Excavations.
§ 5.20. Games.
It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place where such games cause unnecessary noise, or interfere with
traffic or pedestrians. This section shall not be construed so as to include
areas designated as public playgrounds or recreational areas.
§ 5.21. through § 5.29. (Reserved)44
(A) It shall be unlawful to make any excavation in or tunnel under any
public street, sidewalk or other public place in the City without having
first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be
made to the City Clerk and shall specify the intended location and
purpose of the excavation.
(B) Any person making any such excavation shall refill the same properly
and shall restore the surface to its condition before the excavation was
made, as soon as possible. All such excavations, refills and resurfacing
shall be made subject to the supervision and direction of the Director of
Public Works.
44.Editor's Note: Former § 5.21, Barbed wire fences, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 5.18 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.21
1:154
ARTICLE 2
Driveways
§ 5.30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY PROPERTY — An area approximately 33 feet in both directions from
the center of all streets in Hometown except the 87th Street access road
and Southwest Highway access roads. "City property" is defined as the full
street, plus four feet of sidewalk and approximately 15 feet on either side of
the sidewalk to the homeowner's lot line. Notwithstanding, the term "City
property" shall include all property located in the "public right-of-way" as
defined in § 5.12 of this chapter.
§ 5.31. Maintenance of City property.
(A) It shall be the duty of every person residing on property abutting on
City property to maintain that area between the sidewalk and lot line
free of ruts, weeds, noxious herbage and otherwise in a sightly, clean
and safe condition.
(B) It shall be unlawful to park or drive a vehicle of a weight exceeding 300
pounds across the strip of land between the sidewalk and the
homeowner's lot line, or any City property, unless a proper driveway or
car stand, consisting of concrete, asphalt, or approved concrete or brick
"pavers" has been installed. It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on any
City property adjacent to the area designated as a driveway. A driveway
shall not exceed 12 feet in width from the side lot line.
(C) All driveways shall be installed free of defects, with sufficient subbase
materials, proper surface water drainage and otherwise in a
workmanlike manner consistent with construction standards. The
surface shall be prepared in such a manner that no material shall wash
down into the street and clog the sewer system. All concrete or brick
paver driveways shall include an approved compacted subbase of at
least eight inches in depth, at least one inch of an approved bedding
course, a layer of fine sand or similar material between the pavers, with
the concrete or brick pavers being properly compacted.
(D) Driveway access to the required parking space in a single-family
dwelling district as set forth in Chapter 22, Zoning, of the City Code
shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt, solid type, and shall conform
to the grade of the existing ground. Any side drive so constructed may
extend to the side lot line and shall not exceed 12 feet in width between
the front building line and the street, except corner lots where the
maximum width shall not exceed 20 feet and provided that no part of
the side drive shall protrude in front of the residential portion of the
dwelling. Any addition to an existing driveway shall be constructed of or
paved with the same materials. Driveways shall have the same width
§ 5.30 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.31
1:155
§ 5.32. Permit required.
§ 5.33. Fees. [Amended 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
§ 5.34. Grade of surface.
No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to leave a step, or sharp
depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade shall be as
nearly as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It shall be
unlawful to have the surface finish of any driveway where the same crosses
the sidewalk constructed of such materials as to render it slippery and
hazardous for pedestrians, or to have the grade of such portion vary from
the grade of the sidewalk, or be other than level.
§ 5.35. Penalty.46
Any person, firm or corporation who or which defaces City property, as
herein defined, or who or which violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article, shall be fined
not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense, and each day upon
which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 5.36. through § 5.39. (Reserved)
throughout and shall extend to the paved portion of the street or
roadway. No driveway shall be located on the five-foot easement in the
rear of a lot.45
(A) No person, firm or corporation shall construct a driveway over any City
property without having obtained a permit therefor. Any request for a
driveway permit shall include a surety bond in the amount of $5,000 per
driveway, for the purpose of insuring that all public property is restored
to its previous condition after the installation of the driveway.
(B) Application for such permits shall be made to the City Clerk and shall
be approved by the Director of Public Works before a permit shall be
issued.
(A) A permit for a private driveway, that is, one to be used only by the
owner or occupant of the premises served, shall be issued at a fee of
$25. There shall be no annual fee.
(B) Permits for commercial driveways shall be issued at an initial permit fee
of $25 and $25 annually thereafter. For the purposes of this section, the
ingress and egress of any vehicle runway shall be considered as one
driveway.
45.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 5.31 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.36
1:156
ARTICLE 3
Trees and Shrubbery
§ 5.40. Planting.
It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any public street or parkway
or other public place without having secured a permit therefor. Applications
for such permits shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be referred by
him to the Director of Public Works before issuance. All trees and shrubs
so planted shall be placed subject to the directions and approval of the
Director of Public Works.
§ 5.41. Removal.
It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any trees or shrub in any such
public place without having secured a permit therefor. Applications for
such permits shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be referred to and
approved by the Council before issuance.
§ 5.42. Injury.
It shall be unlawful to poison or injure any tree or shrub planted or growing
in any such public place.
§ 5.43. Advertisements or notices.
It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree
or shrub in any such public place.
§ 5.44. Dangerous trees.
§ 5.45. Wires.
(A) Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public
place in the municipality in such a way as to impede or interfere with
traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises
or of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the
obstruction shall cease.
(B) Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across
any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises
on which such tree grows or stands.
(C) The Director of Public Works may trim any such tree or shrub or remove
any such tree or branch thereof so that the obstruction or danger to
traffic or passage shall be done away with.
(A) It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope to any tree or shrub in
any public street, parkway or other public place without the permission
of the Council.
§ 5.40 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.45
1:157
§ 5.46. Gas pipes.
Any person or company maintaining any gas pipe in the municipality shall
keep such pipes free from leaks so that no injury shall be done thereby to
any trees or shrubs.
§ 5.47. Excavations.
In making excavations in streets or other public places, proper care shall be
taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub, wherever possible.
§ 5.48. through § 5.49. (Reserved)
(B) Any person or company who or which maintains poles and wires in the
streets or other public places shall, in the absence of provision in the
franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from
and away from any trees and shrubs in such places so far as may be
possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs near such wires and
poles properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the Director of
Public Works, so that no injury shall be done either to the poles or wires
or to the shrubs and trees by their contact.
§ 5.45 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.48
1:158
ARTICLE 4
(Reserved)47
§ 5.50. through § 5.59. (Reserved)
47.Editor's Note: Former Art. 4, Signs and Awnings, was repealed 3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004. See now Ch. 18, Art. 8, Signs, of the City Code.
§ 5.50 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.50
1:159

ARTICLE 5
House Numbering
§ 5.60. Numbering.
All lots, buildings and structures in the City shall be numbered in
accordance with the existing plan of the City of Chicago. The base lines shall
be 87th Street on the north and Crawford Avenue on the east. Numbers
shall begin at 8700 and increase south. Numbers shall begin at 4000 and
increase west. Numbers shall be assigned by the Building Commissioner.
§ 5.61. Chart.
The City Clerk shall keep a chart showing the proper street number of each
lot in the City, which chart shall be open to inspection by anyone interested.
§ 5.62. Numbers on buildings. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No.
7-2016]
It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant of every building in the City
to have placed thereon in a place visible from the street, figures showing the
number of the building and in compliance with the building code adopted
by the City (see Chapter 21, Article 1, of the City Code).
§ 5.63. Dispute over numbers.
In case of dispute over a given number, any person aggrieved may appeal
to the City Council, which shall make a determination by resolution, which
shall be final.
§ 5.64. through § 5.70. (Reserved)
§ 5.60 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.64
1:161

ARTICLE 6
Standards for Construction of Facilities in Rights-of-Way
[Added 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008; amended 7-24-2018 by Ord.
No. 12-2018]
§ 5.71. Purpose, intent and scope; interpretation.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities in rights-of-way within the City's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the City
rights-of-way and the City as a whole.
(B) Intent. In enacting this article, the City intends to exercise its authority
over the rights-of-way in the City and, in particular, the use of the public
ways and property by utilities and wireless providers, by establishing
uniform standards to address issues presented by utility and wireless
facilities, including without limitation:
(1) Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
(2) Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(3) Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the City's
utilities and of other facilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
(4) Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility and wireless facilities;
(5) Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
(6) Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
(7) Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the City's residential neighborhoods;
(8) Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
(9) Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to facilities' locations.
(C) Facilities subject to this article. This article applies to all facilities on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
within the jurisdiction of the City. A facility lawfully established prior to
the effective date of this article may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility or wireless provider as presently
§ 5.71 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.71
1:163
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any
applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
(D) Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The City, in its discretion
and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise,
license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the City rights-ofway.
Utilities or wireless providers that are not required by law to enter
into such an agreement may request that the City enter into such an
agreement. In such an agreement, the City may provide for terms and
conditions inconsistent with this article.
(E) Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements.
(1) Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event that
a utility has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the City,
such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and
control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal
or extension thereof.
(2) Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the
provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between
the City and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of
such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and
control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal
or extension thereof.
(3) Wireless providers.
(a) Existing agreements between the City and wireless providers
that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the
right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless
facilities on City utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018,
remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on
the City's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to
the City before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination
provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after
June 1, 2018, shall comply with this article.
(b) A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the
City on the effective date of the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act, P.A. 100-0585,48 may accept the rates, fees
and terms that the City has currently adopted for the
collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new
utility poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that
are the subject of an application submitted two or more years
after the effective date of the Act by notifying the City that it
opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing
agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination
48.Editor's Note: See 50 ILCS 835/1 et seq.
§ 5.71 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.71
1:164
§ 5.72. Definitions.
As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, unless the context in which they are used shall indicate otherwise.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the singular number include the plural number,
and words in the plural number include the singular number. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. Any term not defined
in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code
530.30, as amended, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO — American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.
ANSI — American National Standards Institute.
ANTENNA — Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.
APPLICABLE CODES — Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or
local amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety
Code.
APPLICANT — A person applying for a permit under this article.
provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless
provider has collocated on the City's utility poles pursuant to
applications submitted to the City before the wireless provider
provides such notice and exercises its option under this
subsection.
(F) Conflicts with other articles. This article supersedes all articles or parts
of articles adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
(G) Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of
this article, the utility or wireless provider shall comply with the
requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without
violating federal or state laws or regulations.
(H) Sound engineering judgment. The City shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this article and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the City so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
City to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare.
§ 5.71 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.72
1:165
APPLICATION — A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a
permit to install a facility, or a request by a wireless provider to install a
new utility pole for collocation purposes.
ASTM — American Society for Testing and Materials.
BACKFILL — The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in
a trench or pit.
BORE or BORING — To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR — That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5), as
amended.
CABLE SERVICE — That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6), as amended.
CABLE SYSTEM — That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7), as amended.
CARRIER PIPE — The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
CASING — The structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such
as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CITY — The City of Hometown.
CLEAR ZONE — The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of
the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may
consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a
clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes
and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the
AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.
COATING — Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE — The Municipal Code of Hometown.
COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION — To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as
amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or
wireless service other than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER — A cable operator, as defined in
47 U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
CONDUCTOR — Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT — Casing or encasement for wires or cables.
§ 5.72 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.72
1:166
CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT — The installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or
abandonment in place of facilities.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES — City Council.
COVER — The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY — A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way
lines of a right-of-way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of Public Works of the City,
or designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any work that obstructs the right-of-way
or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its
intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following:
excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent)
of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and
compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of
vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow
of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY — Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served
by the utility or wireless provider.
ENCASEMENT — Any provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER — The City Engineer, or designee.
EQUIPMENT — Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION — The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE — Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe
designation.
FACILITY — All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but
not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this article.
For purposes of this article, the term "facility" shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the City.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE — A one-time charge.
FREESTANDING FACILITY — A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
§ 5.72 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.72
1:167
FRONTAGE ROAD — A roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any substance or material which, due to
its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is
determined by the Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to
the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to,
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or
gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any
substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state
law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY — A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway
land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments,
bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE — Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK — A building, property, or
site or group of buildings, properties or sites that are either:
HOLDER — A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable
and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401, as amended.
ICC — Illinois Commerce Commission.
IDOT — Illinois Department of Transportation.
J.U.L.I.E. — Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
JACKING — Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.
Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register,
the individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal
agency to list properties and determine their eligibility for the National
Register, in accordance with §§ VI.D.2.a.i. through VI.D.1.a.v of the
Nationwide Programmatic Agreement, codified at 47 CFR Part 1,
Appendix C; or
(A)
Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic
district by an ordinance adopted by the City pursuant to a preservation
program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local
Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office
or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois
State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
(B)
§ 5.72 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.72
1:168
JETTING — Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE — The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities or wireless providers.
LAW — A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order
or local ordinance or resolution.
MAJOR INTERSECTION — The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY — A small wireless facility that is not larger
in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width and 12 inches in
height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE — A utility pole owned or operated by the City
in public rights-of-way.
OCCUPANCY — The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
PARALLEL FACILITY — A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
PARKWAY — Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT — The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility
or for the construction of a facility.
PERMIT — A written authorization required by the City to perform an action
or initiate, continue or complete a project.
PERMITTEE — That entity to which a permit has been issued under this
article.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust or other entity or organization.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES — Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
PRACTICABLE — That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE — The internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT — That which is done within a period of time specified by the City.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
PUBLIC ENTITY — A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY — The functional division of the federal
government, the state, a unit of local government or a special purpose
district located in whole or in part within this state that provides or has
§ 5.72 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.72
1:169
authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical or other
emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE — A recurring charge.
RESTORATION — The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY — Any street, alley, other land or
waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic
or other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the City
has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location
of facilities, other than those of the City. "Right-of-way" or rights-of-way"
shall not include any real or personal City property that is not specifically
described in the previous two sentences and shall not include City buildings,
fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they
are situated in the right-of-way.
ROADWAY — That part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL — The transmitting,
supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered
in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to
another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the
retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND — That amount of security required pursuant to § 5.82.
SHOULDER — A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY — A wireless facility that meets the following
qualifications:[Amended 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 14-2018]
The facility:
Is mounted on a structure 50 feet or less in height, including
antennas, or
(1)
Is mounted on a structure no more than 10% taller than other
adjacent structures; or
(2)
Does not extend an existing structure on which it is located to a
height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10%, whichever is
greater;
(3)
(A)
Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated
antenna equipment, is no more than three cubic feet in volume;
(B)
All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including
the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any
(C)
§ 5.72 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.72
1:170
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT — A decision(s) consistent with
generally accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — Includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide-area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services,
stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile or
portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission
of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or
among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite,
or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic-sensitive
service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or
priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value-added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content,
code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
"Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications
by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part
of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer
who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services
through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of
1984, (47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or
other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable
to the City through an open video system as defined in the rules of the
Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. 76.1500 et seq.), as now or
hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — Any person that installs, owns,
operates or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be
used to transmit telecommunications.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER — Includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH — A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY — The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this article, except that, for purposes of this article, "utility" shall
preexisting associated equipment on the structure, is no more than 28
cubic feet in volume;
CFR § 17.1 — does not require antenna structure registration with the
Federal Communications Commission under 47 CFR § 17.1 - 17-57;
(D)
The facility is not located on tribal lands, as defined under 36 CFR
800.16(x); and
(E)
The facility does not result in human exposure to radiofrequency
radiation in excess of applicable safety standards.
(F)
§ 5.72 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.72
1:171
not include a wireless provider applying for a permit to collocate, or already
collocating, a small wireless facility in the City's right-of-way.
UTILITY POLE — A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control or a similar function.
VENT — A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE — That term as defined in § 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v), as amended.
WATER LINES — Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING — Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
WIRELESS FACILITY — Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including equipment associated with wireless communications, and radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless
facility does not include the structure or improvements on, under or within
which the equipment is collocated, or wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or
fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structure or utility poles
or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to
or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER — Any person authorized to
provide telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs
wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities,
wireless support structures or utility and poles and that is not a wireless
services provider but is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless
services provider for the application submitted to the City.
WIRELESS PROVIDER — A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider applying for a permit to collocate, or already collocating,
a small wireless facility in the right-of-way in the City.
WIRELESS SERVICES — Any services provided to the general public,
including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at
a fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER — A person who provides wireless
services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as
a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other
existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting
wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.
§ 5.72 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.73
1:172
§ 5.73. Annual registration required; annual recurring rate for
wireless providers.
§ 5.74. Permit required; application requirements.
(A) Annual registration. Every utility or wireless provider that occupies a
right-of-way within the City shall register on January 1 of each year with
the Director of Public Works, providing the utility's or wireless
provider's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy
numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on
behalf of the utility or wireless provider in connection with emergencies
involving the utility's or wireless provider's facilities in the right-of-way
and a twenty-four-hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in § 5.80 of this article, in the form of
a certificate of insurance.
(B) Wireless provider recurring annual rate. A wireless provider shall pay
to the City an annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility
on a City utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals $200 per year
or the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider's use of space on the City utility pole. If the City has not billed
the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be $200
payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the
issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each
annual anniversary date thereafter.
(A) Permit required. No person shall construct any facility on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within any City right-of-way which
changes the location of the facility, adds a new facility, disrupts the
right-of-way, or materially increases the amount of area or space
occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within
the right-of-way without first filing an application with the Director of
Public Works and obtaining a permit from the City therefor, except as
otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall be required for
installation and maintenance of service connections to customers'
premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.
(B) Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this article
shall be filed on a form provided by the City and shall be filed in such
number of duplicate copies as the City may designate. The applicant
may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
"proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such
materials accordingly.
(C) Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility, wireless provider or duly authorized representative
and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) The utility's or wireless provider's name and address and telephone
and telecopy numbers;
§ 5.73 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.74
1:173
(2) The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility or
wireless provider, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address,
and its interest in the work;
(3) The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and email
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;
(4) A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put.
The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the
nature and character of the work to be performed, with special
emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the
work proposed;
(5) Evidence that the utility or wireless provider has placed on file with
the City:
(a) A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with
the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to
prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to
minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
(b) An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature
of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the
intended response by the applicant. The intended response
shall include notification to the City and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public.
Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency
plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the City
finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
(6) Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans,
and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and
regulations;
(7) Evidence of insurance as required in § 5.80;
(8) Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in § 5.82;
(9) The applicable application fee, as described in § 5.75;
(10) Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
article (See § 5.93); and
(11) Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
City.
§ 5.74 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.74
1:174
(D) Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities or
wireless providers. In addition to the requirements of Subsection (C) of
this section, the permit application shall include the following items, as
applicable to the specific utility or wireless provider that is the subject
of the permit application:
(1) In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service,
video service or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any
"certificate of public convenience and necessity" or other
regulatory authorization that the applicant is required by law to
obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has been issued
by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
(2) In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
(3) In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water
Supplies, have been satisfied;
(4) In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District have been satisfied; or
(5) In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and
the design standard to be followed.
(E) Consolidated applications for small cell wireless facilities. An applicant
seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of
the City shall be allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to file a
consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation
of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve
substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially
the same type of structure. If an application includes multiple small
wireless facilities, the City may remove small wireless facility
collocations from the application and treat separately small wireless
facility collocations for which incomplete information has been
provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are
denied. The City may issue separate permits for each collocation that is
approved in a consolidated application.
(F) Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the
permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit
application shall be submitted by the utility or wireless provider in
writing to the City within 30 days after the change necessitating the
amendment.
§ 5.74 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.75
1:175
§ 5.75. Application fees. [Amended 12-11-2018 by Ord. No.
14-2018]
§ 5.76. Action on permit applications.
(A) Utility facilities. For utility facilities, unless otherwise provided by
franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits
pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of
$1,000. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity
utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance
Fee Act (35 ILCS 645/5-1 et seq.).
(B) Small wireless facilities. The following fee schedule shall apply to
applications to collocate wireless facilities in the City's rights-of-way:
(1) Applicants shall pay an application fee of $500 for an application to
collocate up to five small wireless facilities within the right-of-way
and $100 for each additional collocation in excess of five.
(2) The City will not impose fees on wireless service providers for:
(a) Routine maintenance;
(b) The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the
wireless provider notifies the City at least 10 days prior to the
planned replacement and includes equipment specifications
for the replacement of equipment consistent with § 5.79 of this
article; or
(c) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables
that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance
with applicable safety codes.
(C) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local ordinance,
applications pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be nonrefundable.
(A) City review of utility permit applications. Completed permit
applications for utility facilities which contain all required
documentation shall be examined by the Director of Public Works
within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform
to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the Director of Public Works shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Director of Public Works is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this
article and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
the Director of Public Works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as
practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that the
§ 5.75 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.76
1:176
construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance
with the requirements of this article.
(B) Additional City review of applications of telecommunications retailers.
(1) Pursuant to § 4 of the Telephone Company Act (220 ILCS 65/4), a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the City that it intends to
commence work governed by this article for facilities for the
provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist
of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to
demonstrate the purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be
provided by the telecommunications retailer to the City not less
than 10 days prior to the commencement of work requiring no
excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of
work requiring excavation. The Director of Public Works shall
specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may
be placed, used and constructed.
(2) In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within
either 10 days after service of notice to the City by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving
excavation for new construction or 25 days after service of notice
by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving
excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer
may commence work without obtaining a permit under this article.
(3) Upon the provision of such specification by the City, where a permit
is required for work pursuant to § 5.74 of this article the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the City an application
for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed.
Such application shall be subject to the requirements of Subsection
(A) of this section.
(C) Additional City review of applications of holders of state authorization
under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a
utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days
after submission to the City, unless otherwise acted upon by the City,
provided the holder has complied with applicable City codes,
ordinances, and regulations.
(D) City review of wireless provider permit applications. The City shall
process applications for wireless facilities as follows: [Amended
12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 14-2018]
(1) The first completed application shall have priority over applications
received by different wireless facility applicants for collocation on
the same utility pole or wireless support structure.
§ 5.76 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.76
1:177
(2) Within 30 days after receiving an application, the City shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the
applicant. If an application is incomplete, the City must specifically
identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the City fails to provide notification to the applicant
within 30 days after all documents, information and fees
specifically enumerated in the City's permit application form are
submitted by the applicant to the City. Processing deadlines are
tolled from the time the City sends the notice of incompleteness to
the time the applicant provides the missing information.
(3) An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed
approved if the City fails to approve or deny the application within
60 days after the submission of a completed application. However,
if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than 45 days after the submission of a completed
application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the later of
the 60th day after submission of the complete application or the
10th day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the
City. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude
the City's denial of the permit request within the time limits as
provided under this section.
(4) An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the
installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission
of a completed application. However, if an applicant intends to
proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis,
the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its intention to
invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after
the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be
deemed approved on the later of the 90th day after submission of
the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the City's denial of the permit
request within the time limits as provided under this section.
(5) An application to collocate a wireless facility that does not meet the
definition of a "small wireless facility" under this article and seeks
installation on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure
shall be approved or denied by the City within 90 days.
(6) An application to collocate a wireless facility that does not meet the
definition of a "small wireless facility" under this article and
§ 5.76 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.76
1:178
requires construction of a new wireless support structure shall be
approved or denied by the City within 150 days.
(7) The City shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this article. If the City determines that applicable
codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the
requirements of § 5.79 of this article, require that the utility pole or
wireless support structure be replaced before the requested
collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of
the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the
provider.
(a) The City shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the
denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant
on or before the day the City denies an application. The
applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and
resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after
notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an
additional application fee. The City shall approve or deny the
revised application within 30 days after the applicant
resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall
require the applicant to submit a new application with
applicable fees and result in recommencement of the City's
review period.
(b) The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention to
proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved
basis, which may be submitted with the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial, except in cases in which the
cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility.
(8) Pole attachment agreement. Upon approval of an application to
collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the
City and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment
agreement provided by the City for the initial collocation on a
municipal utility pole by the application. The City and the applicant
shall enter into a license supplement master pole attachment
agreement for any permits necessary for collocation on a municipal
utility pole.
(9) Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
(a) An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
City; or
(b) A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
§ 5.76 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.77
1:179
§ 5.77. Effect of permit.
(A) Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A permit
from the City authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities
in accordance with this article on City rights-of-way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge
upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
(B) Duration of utility facility permits. No permit issued under this article
for the construction of utility facilities shall be valid for a period longer
than six months unless construction is actually begun within that period
and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
(C) Duration of small wireless facility permits.
(1) For permits to collocate wireless facilities, the collocation must be
complete within 180 days after the issuance of the permit, unless
the City and the wireless provider agree to extend the period or a
delay is cause by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by
the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60
days after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or
backhaul services, and the additional time to complete installation
does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise,
the permit shall be void unless the City grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
(2) Wireless facility permits which meet the requirements of the
preceding paragraph shall be for a period of not less than five
years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations
unless the City makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or
the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable
City codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in
this article.
(D) Preconstruction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this article prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will
perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The
preconstruction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place
designated by the City with such City representatives in attendance as
the City deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of
reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special
considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including,
without limitation, presence or absence of other facilities in the area
and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other facilities,
use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access and
egress by adjacent property owners.
(E) Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the City
does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements
§ 5.77 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.77
1:180
§ 5.78. Revised permit drawings.
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material
respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the City within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit
also deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as
a request for variance in accordance with § 5.93 of this article. If the City
denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove
the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to
the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.
§ 5.79. Collocation of wireless facilities.
The following requirements and conditions shall apply only to collocation of
small wireless facilities, as defined by this article:
of the City and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations.
(A) Permitted use. Collocation of small wireless facilities on City utility
poles is a permitted use in the City rights-of-way as long as such
facilities meet the requirements of this article.
(B) Public safety space reservation. The City may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the City's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not
preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City
reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot
accommodate both uses.
(C) Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in a safe
condition and in good repair and in compliance with the requirements
and conditions of this article. The wireless provider shall ensure that its
employees, agents or contractors that perform work in connection with
its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in
accordance with all applicable industry and governmental standards
and regulations.
(D) Make-ready requirements.
(1) The City may require make-ready work on an existing utility pole to
ensure structural integrity, compliance with an approved City plan,
or to comply with any ordinance, law or regulation. The City will
not require more make-ready work than required to meet
applicable codes or industry standards. Make-ready work may
include work needed to accommodate additional public safety
§ 5.77 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.79
1:181
communications needs that are identified in a documented and
approved plan for the deployment of public safety equipment as
specified and included in an existing or preliminary City or public
service agency plan. Fees for make-ready work, including any City
utility pole attachment, shall not exceed actual costs or the amount
charged to communications service providers for similar work and
shall not include any consultants' fees or expenses for City utility
poles that do not support aerial facilities used to provide
communications services or electric service. Make-ready work,
including any pole replacement, shall be completed within 60 days
of written acceptance of the good-faith estimate by the City at the
wireless provider's sole cost and expense.
(2) For City utility poles that support aerial facilities used to provide
communications services or electric services, a wireless provider
shall comply with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C.
224 and its implementing regulations. Wireless providers shall
follow a substantially similar process for such make-ready work
except to the extent that the timing requirements are otherwise
addressed by this article. The good-faith estimate of the person
owning or controlling City's utility pole for any make-ready work
necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation
shall include City utility pole replacement, if necessary. Make-ready
work for utility poles that support aerial facilities used to provide
communications services or electric services may include
reasonable consultants' fees and expenses.
(E) No interference with public safety communication frequencies.
(1) The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities
shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications. A wireless provider shall
install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will
not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's
communications equipment. Unacceptable interference will be
determined by and measured in accordance with industry
standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
(2) If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference
by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own
expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with
the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with
public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR
22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675. The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless
facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in
compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations. Failure to
§ 5.79 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.79
1:182
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public
nuisance.
(F) Electric distribution or transmission system. The wireless provider shall
not collocate small wireless facilities on City utility poles that are part
of an electric distribution or transmission system within the
communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply
zone of the pole. However, the antenna and support equipment of the
small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on
the City utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise
unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for
work involving the top of the pole. For purposes of this section, the
terms "communications space," "communication worker safety zone,"
and "electric supply zone" have the meanings given to those terms in
the National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
(G) Public safety. The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable
codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety.
(H) Design standards. The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility
poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements
that are set forth in any City ordinance, written policy adopted by the
City, a comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to
other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on an historic landmark
or in an historic district.
(I) Alternate placements.
(1) Except as provided in this section, a wireless provider shall not be
required to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility
pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate
multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with
respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless
facility associated with a new utility pole, the City may propose that
the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or
existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to
use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions,
and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
(2) If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property
rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate
location does not satisfy the criteria in this subsection.
(J) Height limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall
be no more than 10 feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated. New or
§ 5.79 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.79
1:183
§ 5.80. Insurance.
replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
(1) Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a
utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the
date the application is submitted to the City, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the City, provided the City may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
(2) Forty-five feet above ground level.
(K) Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a height for a
new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility has proposed for collocation, the
applicant shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures,
terms and conditions set forth in § 5.93 of this article.
(L) Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and
a private property owner that concern design or construction standards
applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in
the right-of-way.
(A) Required coverages and limits for utilities.
(1) Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying rights-of-way or constructing
any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named
insured and naming the City, and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on the
policies listed in Subsection (A)(1)(a) and (b) below:
(a) Commercial general liability insurance, including premisesoperations,
explosion, collapse, and underground hazard
(commonly referred to as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and
products-completed operations coverage with limits not less
than:
(i) For bodily injury or death to each person: $5,000,000;
(ii) For property damage resulting from any one accident:
$5,000,000; and
(iii) For all other types of liability: $5,000,000.
§ 5.79 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.80
1:184
(b) Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;
(c) Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
(d) Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
(2) If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such
contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.
(B) Required coverages and limits for wireless providers.
(1) Wireless providers shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
(a) Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against
all risks;
(b) Worker's compensation insurance, as required by law; or
(c) Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the City right-of-way to afford minimum protection
limits as described in Subsection (A)(1)(a) above.
(2) The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide
certification and documentation of inclusion of the City in a
commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any
wireless facility.
(C) Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any
excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over
underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss
covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary
policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such
loss.
(D) Copies required. The utility or wireless provider shall provide copies of
any of the policies required by this section to the City within 10 days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the City.
(E) Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.
(1) The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that
this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be
stated until 30 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail or
certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice
§ 5.80 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.80
1:185
§ 5.81. Indemnification.
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility or
wireless provider shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold
the City and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees,
agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including
reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of,
resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent,
careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the
utility or wireless provider or their affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy
of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this
article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that the utility's or wireless provider's indemnity obligations hereunder
shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses
or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or
addressed to the City President of such intent to cancel or not to
renew."
(2) Within 10 days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no
event later than 10 days prior to said cancellation, the utility or
wireless provider shall obtain and furnish to the City evidence of
replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this
section.
(F) Self-insurance. A utility or wireless provider may self-insure all or a
portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements under this
section. A utility or wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to
the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for
the naming of additional insureds under this section. A utility or
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the City
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required under Subsections
(A) and (B) of this section, such as evidence that the utility or wireless
provider is a "private self insurer" under the Workers Compensation
Act.
(G) Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's or wireless provider's
liability. The legal liability of the utility or the wireless provider to the
City and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the
insurance policies or self-insurance required by this section shall not be
limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery
of any amounts thereunder.
(H) Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State
of Illinois.
§ 5.80 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.81
1:186
breach of this article by the City, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
§ 5.82. Security.
(A) Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in
an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the
permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work
authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security
for:
(1) The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this article;
(2) Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the City occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the City issued
pursuant to this article; and
(3) The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the City may pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this article
including, without limitation, any damage to public property or
restoration work the permittee is required by this article to
perform that the City must perform itself or have completed as a
consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the City from the permittee
pursuant to this article or any other applicable law.
(B) Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the City in the
form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the City, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the City. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
(1) Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the City
and the permittee;
(2) Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the City of any amounts covered by it; and
(3) Provide a location convenient to the City and within the State of
Illinois at which it can be drawn.
(C) Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to
at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction
under the permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works, and
may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the City
estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such
restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the
§ 5.81 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.82
1:187
permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the City, with
each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a
related group of locations, and where construction in another phase
will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration
in the previous phase or phases, the Director of Public Works may, in
the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single
amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for
phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would
have been required under the provisions of this Subsection (C) for any
single phase.
(D) Withdrawals. The City, upon 14 days' advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the City for such
amount within the fourteen-day notice period. Withdrawals may be
made if the permittee:
(1) Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
(2) Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
(3) Fails to reimburse the City for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the City has been compelled to pay or incur by
reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
(4) Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the City
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
security fund.
(E) Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
City that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
Subsection (C) of this section.
(F) Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the
City, upon written request for said withdrawal to the City, provided that
any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the
minimum balance required in Subsection (C) of this section.
(G) Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on
deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets
necessary to compensate the City for failure by the permittee to comply
with any provisions of this article or other applicable law. In the event of
any revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued
interest therein, shall become the property of the City to the extent
§ 5.82 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.82
1:188
§ 5.83. Permit suspension and revocation.
necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by
the City as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts in
excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
(H) Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the City with respect to the
security fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether
reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall
affect any other right the City may have. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the City shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery
with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise
violated.
(A) City right to revoke permit. The City may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following reasons:
(1) Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
(2) Noncompliance with this article;
(3) Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-ofway
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare; or
(4) Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
(B) Notice of revocation or suspension. The City shall send written notice of
its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
(C) Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.
(1) Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the City, the permittee shall have the following options:
(a) Immediately provide the City with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
(b) Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the City, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written
proof of such correction to the City within five working days
after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
(c) Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and
restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the City
§ 5.82 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.83
1:189
§ 5.84. Change of ownership or owner's identity or legal status.
§ 5.85. General construction standards.
providing written proof of such removal to the City within 10
days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
(2) The City may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this subsection.
(D) Stop-work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or
suspension, the City may issue a stop-work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within
Subsection (A) of this section.
(E) Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails to
comply with the provisions of Subsection (C) of this section, the City or
its designee may, at the option of the City:
(1) Correct the deficiencies;
(2) Upon not less than 20 days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or
(3) After not less than 30 days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure
the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the City.
The permittee shall be liable in all events to the City for all costs of
removal.
(A) Notification of change. A utility or wireless provider shall notify the City
no less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in
the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility or wireless provider.
The new owner shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by
the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article, with respect to
the work and facilities in the right-of-way.
(B) Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a
new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be
presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and
conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to
remain on the City's right-of-way.
(C) Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding
must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(A) Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where
§ 5.83 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.85
1:190
§ 5.86. Traffic control.
applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT
publications, as amended from time to time:
(1) Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
(2) Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
(3) Highway Design Manual;
(4) Highway Standards Manual;
(5) Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
(6) Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code 545, as amended);
(7) Flagger's Handbook; and
(8) Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
(B) Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by
this article, the Director of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise
of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such
decision shall be final. If requested, the Director of Public Works shall
state which standard or principle will apply to the construction,
maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future.
(A) Minimum requirements. The City's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and this Code.
(B) Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility or wireless
provider is responsible for providing and installing warning signs,
protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable
federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and
the utility's or wireless provider's workers when performing any work
on the rights-of-way.
(C) Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(D) Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility or wireless provider shall notify the
resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and
duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving
emergency repairs pursuant to § 5.92 of this article, the utility or
wireless provider shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
§ 5.85 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.86
1:191
§ 5.87. Location of facilities.
(E) Compliance. The utility or wireless provider shall take immediate action
to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are
brought to the utility's or wireless provider's attention by the City.
(A) General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of facilities, all facilities, regardless of type, shall be
subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
(1) No interference with City facilities. No facilities shall be placed in
any location if the Director of Public Works determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any
of the City's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the
operation or maintenance of any of the City's utility facilities.
(2) Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall
cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the
right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact
upon and interference with the rights and reasonable convenience
of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way.
(3) No interference with travel. No facility shall be placed in any
location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
(4) No limitations on visibility. No facility shall be placed in any
location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
(B) Size of utility facilities. For utility facilities only, the proposed
installation shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment
enclosures, power pedestals, and/or cabinets then in use by the facility
owner, regardless of location, for the particular application. Wireless
facilities shall comply with size limitations described in § 5.79 of this
article.
(C) Parallel facilities located within highways.
(1) Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
(a) Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line
and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable
pole alignment will permit;
(b) Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m)
behind the face of the curb, where available;
(c) Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from
pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four
feet (1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and
are not within the clear zone;
§ 5.86 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.87
1:192
(d) No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
(e) Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the
right-of-way line.
(2) Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
(a) The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and
parallel to the right-of-way line;
(b) A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new
cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting
the pavement); and
(c) In the case of an underground power or communications line,
the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than five feet (1.5 m) from the rightof-
way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be
located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as
near as practicable.
(D) Facilities crossing highways.
(1) No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of City
highways may require the incorporation of materials and
protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid
settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the
installation of such crossing facilities.
(2) Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
(3) Ninety-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90° angle to the center line as practicable.
(4) Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
(a) It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines" (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305);
(b) Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
(c) Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
§ 5.87 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.87
1:193
(5) Underground power or communication facility. An underground
power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
(a) The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
(b) Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
(6) Markers. The City may require the utility or wireless provider to
provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground
facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a
highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility or
wireless provider, and an emergency phone number. Markers may
also be eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations [49
C.F.R. 192.707(1989), as amended].
(E) Utility facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The City
may require that utility facilities be located within particular rights-ofway
that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
(F) Freestanding facilities.
(1) The City may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
(2) The City may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
(G) Utility facilities installed above the ground. Aboveground utility
facilities may be installed only if:
(1) No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
(2) New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
(3) The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest
protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not
limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with
vertical configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles
and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the
installation of additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
(H) Utility facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
(1) Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other
means shall include, but are not limited to, underground,
underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports,
all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway
§ 5.87 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.87
1:194
structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and
such installations are not permitted.
(2) A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval
or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge
or roadway structure will be based upon the following
considerations:
(a) The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons
and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
(b) The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
(c) The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
(d) The proposed method of attachment;
(e) The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
(f) The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and
painting;
(g) The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
(h) The public benefit expected from the utility service as
compared to the risk involved.
(I) Not applicable to wireless providers. The requirements under
Subsections (G) and (H) of this section are only applicable to utilities,
and shall not apply to wireless provider seeking to collocate or already
collocating small wireless facilities in the rights-of-way. Wireless
providers must comply with the requirements of § 5.79 of this article.
(J) Appearance standards.
(1) The City may require that utilities or wireless providers install
screening or otherwise camouflage facilities in particular locations
in order to preserve visual quality.
(2) A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and
property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of
the lands being traversed.
§ 5.87 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.88
1:195
§ 5.88. Construction methods and materials.
(A) Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
(1) Boring or jacking.
(a) Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by Director of Public Works from the edge of the
pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no
more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations
and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be
designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that
it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be
imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
(b) Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
(c) Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over
six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an
auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall
not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more
than one inch (25 mm).
(d) Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking
guided with auger or auger and following pipe method.
(e) Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the City to be preserved or protected
shall be bored under or around the root system.
(2) Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the
applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT's Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
(a) Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline
testing. Only 1/2 of any intersection may have an open
trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from
the Director of Public Works.
(b) Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and
windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required
by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where
practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between
the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated
§ 5.88 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.88
1:196
material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion
of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the
roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road
location.
(c) Drip line of trees. The utility or wireless provider shall not
trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the City to
be preserved.
(3) Backfilling.
(a) Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length
using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for
backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
(b) For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility or wireless provider shall be
responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has
settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the
Director of Public Works, the utility or wireless provider, at its
expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to
the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new
backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs,
and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the
Director of Public Works.
(4) Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall
be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is
closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this
Subsection A(4) is permitted under § 5.93, the following
requirements shall apply:
(a) Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and
compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of
CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the Director of
Public Works.
(b) Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as
soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure
of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be
rebuilt upon notification by the City.
(c) All saw cuts shall be full depth.
(d) For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in
the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such
§ 5.88 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.88
1:197
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work
considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the
reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
(5) Encasement.
(a) Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall
be continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or
jointed installation approved by the City.
(b) The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes
shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that
particular section of the highway.
(c) In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Cityapproved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may
be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway
construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the City. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
(d) In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
(e) In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if:
(i) Extra-heavy pipe is used that precludes future
maintenance or repair; and
(ii) Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
(f) If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.
(6) Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type of Facility Minimum Cover
Electric lines 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video
service lines
18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as
determined by City)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
§ 5.88 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.88
1:198
Type of Facility Minimum Cover
Water line Sufficient cover to provide
freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or
drainage line
Sufficient cover to provide
freeze protection
(B) Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
(1) Electric power or communication lines.
(a) Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within City rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm.
Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois
Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of
Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National
Electrical Safety Code.
(b) Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication
facilities shall use single-pole construction and, where
practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities or
wireless providers shall make every reasonable effort to design
the installation so guys and braces will not be needed.
Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and
if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum
visibility.
(c) Underground facilities.
(i) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided
that special consideration is given to boring in order to
minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and
side roads.
(ii) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
Encasement may be eliminated only if:
1. The crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip
augers," or other approved method which compress
the earth to make the opening for cable installation;
or
2. The installation is by the open trench method which is
only permitted prior to roadway construction.
(iii) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
(d) Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year,
also known as "snowdrops," shall be buried by May 31 of the
§ 5.88 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.88
1:199
current year, weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted
by the City. Weather permitting, utilities shall bury all
temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within 10 business
days after placement.
(2) Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:
(a) The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
(b) Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between
the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
(c) Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch
lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or
(d) Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
(3) Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a
City-approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code
of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of
Transportation, Part 192 - Transportation of Natural and Other Gas
by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR 192),
IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
(4) Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI
Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum
Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).
(5) Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, stormwater sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines,
and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current Standard Specifications for Water
and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.
(6) Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted appurtenances
to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area
extending one foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in
all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an
extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar
material approved by the Director of Public Works. With the
approval of the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding
the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The
§ 5.88 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.88
1:200
housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a
neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
(C) Materials.
(1) General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards
of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's
Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the
requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the
standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the
appropriate industry.
(2) Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on the
right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Director of
Public Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit,
wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed
along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner
to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way
maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If
material is to be stored on the right-of-way, prior approval must be
obtained from the City.
(3) Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility or wireless
provider to the City shall identify any hazardous materials that may
be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of
any existing facilities.
(D) Operational restrictions.
(1) Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the City, be required to be discontinued when such operations
would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and
welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued
or restricted when conditions are such that construction would
result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.
(2) These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
(3) Unless otherwise permitted by the City, the hours of construction
are those set forth in the Code.
(E) Location of existing facilities. Any utility or wireless provider proposing
to construct facilities in the City shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain
the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground
facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed
facilities. The City will make its permit records available to a utility or
wireless provider for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When
notified of an excavation or when requested by the City or by J.U.L.I.E.,
a utility or wireless provider shall locate and physically mark its
underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and
§ 5.88 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.88
1:201
§ 5.89. Vegetation control.
holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities
Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.).
(A) Electric utilities: compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws
and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other
agreement with the City as permitted by law.
(B) Other utilities or wireless providers: tree trimming permit required.
Tree trimming that is done by any other utility or wireless provider with
facilities in the right-of-way and that is not performed pursuant to
applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically governing the same,
shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall
require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to
any other permit required under this article.
(1) Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are
experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming
permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of
assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
(2) Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of
damages. The City will require compensation for trees extensively
damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula
developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used
as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or
unauthorized removal of trees. The City may require the removal
and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would
leave them in an unacceptable condition.
(C) Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The City may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher
poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
(D) Chemical use.
(1) Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility or
wireless provider shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or
near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the City for any purpose,
including the control of growth, insects or disease.
(2) Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility or wireless provider
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works
§ 5.88 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.89
1:202
§ 5.90. Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility or wireless
facilities.
that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation
control.
(A) Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the City, a utility or
wireless provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support,
temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or
alter the position of any facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the
corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction,
repair, maintenance, or installation of any City improvement in or upon,
or the operations of the City in or upon, the rights-of-way.
(B) Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the City, any utility or wireless provider that owns, controls,
or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within
the rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
(1) Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
(2) If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of
a license or franchise, if required;
(3) If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of
a required permit in violation of this article; or
(4) If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
(C) Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The City retains the right
and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-ofway
of the City, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility
or wireless provider, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and
shall notify the utility or wireless provider, if known, after cutting or
removing a facility.
(D) Wireless provider options upon removal of a City utility pole. The City
may eliminate aboveground utility poles as long as such decision is
made on a nondiscriminatory basis. In the event the City chooses to
eliminate a utility pole upon which a small wireless facility is collocated,
the City will either:
(1) Install and maintain a reasonable alternative utility pole or wireless
support structure for the collocation of the small wireless facility;
§ 5.89 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.90
1:203
§ 5.91. Clean-up and restoration.
The utility or wireless provider shall remove all excess material and restore
all turf and terrain and other property within 10 days after any portion of
the rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction
or maintenance by the utility or wireless provider, all to the satisfaction of
the City. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration
of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved
by the Director of Public Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required
to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other
requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project.
The time period provided in this section may be extended by the Director of
Public Works for good cause shown.
§ 5.92. Maintenance and emergency maintenance.
(2) Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a reasonable
cost; or
(3) Allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole so it can
maintain service from that location.
(E) Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the City, the utility or wireless provider shall notify the
City within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the City may direct
the utility or wireless provider to remove all or any portion of the
facility if the Director of Public Works determines that such removal will
be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the
event that the City does not direct the utility or wireless provider that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to
the City, the abandoning utility or wireless provider shall be deemed to
consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility
by another utility or person.
(F) Small wireless facilities deemed abandoned. A small wireless facility
that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be
considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the small
wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the
City notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment. The notice
shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
by the City to the owner at the last known address of the wireless
provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days of
such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
(A) General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility or wireless
§ 5.90 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.92
1:204
§ 5.93. Variances.
provider in a manner satisfactory to the City and at the utility's or
wireless provider's expense.
(B) Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
(1) If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility or wireless provider shall take immediate
steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway
or the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights,
barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled
way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the
parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair
operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on
the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no
other means of access to the facility is available.
(2) In an emergency, the utility or wireless provider shall, as soon as
possible, notify the Director of Public Works or his or her duly
authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what
steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and
what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature
of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the City police shall be notified immediately.
(3) In an emergency, the utility or wireless provider shall use all means
at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the
least inconvenience to the traveling public.
(C) Emergency repairs. The utility or wireless provider must file in writing
with the City a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way
within 48 hours after an emergency repair.
(A) Request for variance. A utility or wireless provider requesting a
variance from one or more of the provisions of this article must do so in
writing to the Director of Public Works as a part of the permit
application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from
which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be
granted.
(B) Authority to grant variances. The Director of Public Works shall decide
whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
(C) Conditions for granting of variance. The Director of Public Works may
authorize a variance only if the utility or wireless provider requesting
the variance has demonstrated that:
(1) One or more conditions not under the control of the utility or
wireless provider (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-
§ 5.92 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.93
1:205
§ 5.94. Dispute resolution for wireless facilities.
The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the City
shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates
of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to be
determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
§ 5.95. Penalty.
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of § 1.03 of this Code. There may be times when
the City will incur delay or other costs, including third-party claims, because
the utility or wireless provider will not or cannot perform its duties under
its permit and this article. Unless the utility or wireless provider shows
that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action
is appropriate, the utility or wireless provider shall bear the City's costs
of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating,
or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit
related cost apportionment of the City. Sanctions may be imposed upon a
utility or wireless provider that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement
of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be
achieved by the provision; and
(2) All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
(D) Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require the
utility or wireless provider requesting the variance to meet reasonable
standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained
within this article but which carry out the purposes of this article.
(E) Right to appeal. Any utility or wireless provider aggrieved by any order,
requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance,
made by the Director of Public Works under the provisions of this article
shall have the right to appeal to the City Council, or such other board or
commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be
submitted in writing to the City Clerk within 30 days after the date of
such order, requirement, decision or determination. The City Council
shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the Council's next
regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven days after the
filing of the appeal. The City Council shall timely decide the appeal.
§ 5.93 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.96
1:206
§ 5.96. Enforcement.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this article.
§ 5.97. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
§ 5.96 CITY GOVERNMENT § 5.97
1:207
Chapter 11
LICENSES
§ 5.97 HOMETOWN CODE § 5.97
1:208
ARTICLE 1
Administration
§ 11.01. Interpretation; applications.
§ 11.02. Persons subject to license. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord.
No. 7-2016]
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other entity
operating, engaging in or otherwise conducting any business (or the
solicitation of any business) or occupation requiring a license, through itself
or its agents, shall be required to obtain a license prior to engaging in any
such activity.
§ 11.03. Forms and signatures.
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the City Clerk. Each license or permit issued
shall bear the signature of the Mayor and the City Clerk in the absence of
any provisions to the contrary.
§ 11.04. Investigations; issuance or denial of license.
(A) As used in this chapter, the word "license" includes the word "permit,"
and the word "permit" includes the word "license," where the context
requires. [Added 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 7-2016]
(B) Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk. Each application shall contain: (1) the
name of the applicant; (2) the permit or license desired; (3) the location
to be used, if any; (4) the time covered; and (5) the fee to be paid. Each
application also shall contain the number of the certificate of
registration required under the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, Service
Occupation Tax Act, and/or Use Tax Act, if applicable.49 Each
application shall contain such additional information as may be needed
for the proper guidance of the City officials in the issuing of the license
or permit applied for. The issuance of and the conduct of the business of
alcoholic liquor licenses and dealers is governed exclusively by the
provisions of Article 2 of this chapter.
(A) Upon the receipt of an application for a license, the City Clerk shall
forward the application to the appropriate official(s) for the purpose of
performing any necessary investigation or inspection. The purpose of
the investigation is to ensure that the applicant will conduct his
business in accordance with all building, zoning, health, fire safety and
similar requirements of the Municipal Code and any other relevant
regulations. A copy of the investigations shall be forwarded to the City
Clerk. If the application and related investigative reports are
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 3, Taxes, Art. 1, of the City Code.
§ 11.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.04
1:209
§ 11.05. Payment of fees; vending machine fees; term; rebates.
§ 11.06. Term of licenses.51
Licenses, permits or fees, unless otherwise provided, shall be for the fiscal
year beginning May 1 and ending April 30 of the next succeeding year;
provided, however, that any person applying for a license who commences
business at any time subsequent to November 1 of the fiscal year shall pay
an amount equal to 50% of the annual fee or charge for said license or
permit, which shall expire on April 30 of the fiscal year.
§ 11.07. Buildings and premises.
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit
shall be issued for any purpose or activity, if the premises and building to be
satisfactory, the license shall be approved and the City Clerk shall notify
the applicant accordingly.
(B) If a license application is denied, the City Clerk shall apprise the
applicant in writing relative to the reasons for the denial. The applicant
will be allowed an opportunity to be heard before the City Council and
present evidence on its behalf in appealing the initial denial of any
business license.
(C) In addition to failing to comply with all relevant provisions of the
Municipal Code or other life safety regulations, a business license
application will be rejected for the failure to provide truthful
information in the application or the failure to cooperate with any City
investigation or inspection.
(A) In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application
therefor is made to the City Clerk in the amounts prescribed in the
schedule set forth herein.
(B) In addition, a license fee is required for each vending machine, which
must be paid at the time the machine is installed. There shall be no
prorating of vending machine license fees.
(C) 50Unless otherwise provided, all fees shall become a part of the general
corporate fund.
(D) In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license or permit
fee, or part thereof, by reason of bankruptcy, death or departure of the
licensee or permittee; nor shall any rebate or refund be made by reason
of the revocation of his license or permit.
50.Editor's Note: Original Subsection (C), regarding license terms, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2). See now § 11.06 below.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.04 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.07
1:210
used for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable ordinances and
regulations of the City and the State of Illinois.
§ 11.08. Change of location.
The location of any licensed business or occupation, or the location of any
permitted act, may be changed, provided that 10 days' notice thereof is
given to the City Clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary;
provided, however, that all applicable ordinances and regulations of the City
shall be complied with before the business or occupation may commence in
the new location.
§ 11.09. Number of locations.
No license for the operation of a business or establishment in the City shall
be construed to permit the operation of a licensed business or establishment
in more than one location. A separate license shall be required for each
location of a licensed establishment. For the purpose of this Code, the
existence of a single location shall be evidenced by the fact that all buildings
containing the principal or accessory uses shall be connected or shall be
located on the same lot or parcel, shall be operated and managed by
the same person or owner, and shall be an establishment with the same
classification.
§ 11.10. Frontage consents.
(A) Whenever the consent of adjoining or neighboring owners is required
as a prerequisite to the conduct of any business or occupation, or the
location of any establishment, such consents must be obtained by
securing the necessary signatures to a written consent petition. Such
petition shall be filed with the City Clerk when signed.
(B) Consents, once given and filed, shall not be withdrawn; and such
petitions need not be renewed for the continuous conduct of the same
business, whether by the same proprietor or not.
(C) It shall be unlawful to forge any names to such a petition, or to falsely
represent that the names thereon have been properly placed thereon if
such is not the fact.
(D) Each consent, when filed, shall be accompanied by the affidavit of the
person securing the signature that each signature appearing thereon
was properly secured and written on and that the petition contains the
necessary number of signatures required by ordinance.
(E) The frontage consent requirements contained in this chapter shall not
be construed as amended or changing any zoning ordinance or
provision of the City; and no such provision shall be construed as
permitting the erection of a structure or building, or the conduct of a
business, or the commission of any act in any location where such
§ 11.07 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.10
1:211
§ 11.11. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
structure, building, business or act is prohibited by any zoning
ordinance of the City.52
(A) When the conduct or operation of any business or establishment,
whether or not licensed, shall constitute an immediate nuisance and
present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare, the
Mayor shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business,
the closing of the premises, and the suspension of any license or permit.
The Mayor shall conduct a hearing within seven days of the emergency
closure and suspension, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard
or otherwise contest the Mayor's actions. If insufficient evidence is
presented by the licensee at the hearing, the Mayor is authorized to
order that the premises remain closed and the license suspended until
the licensee has submitted sufficient evidence showing that the
operation of the licensed premises is in conformance with all relevant
regulations required by the City.
(B) If no emergency or immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare
exists, the Mayor, after notice and hearing, is hereby authorized to
suspend or revoke any license for, but not limited to, any of the
following causes:
(1) Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
(2) Any violation by the licensee or permittee of any provision of the
Municipal Code or health safety regulations relating to the
operation of the licensee's business or business premises;
(3) Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
(4) Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty owing
to the City;
(5) Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling, or any interference
with a duly authorized City officer or employee.
(C) Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be given
in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and
the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by mail to
the licensee or permittee at his last known address at least five days
prior to the date set for the hearing.
(D) At the hearing, the City Attorney shall present the complaint and shall
represent the City. The licensee or permittee shall be permitted counsel
and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine
witnesses. The Mayor shall preside and shall render the decision.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Zoning.
§ 11.10 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.11
1:212
§ 11.12. Appeals.
Any licensee aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor under §§ 11.04 and
11.11 may appeal that decision to the City Council. The licensee shall
request the appeal by notifying the City Clerk in writing. The City Council
shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and
notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee. The
licensee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence before the City
Council. The decision of the City Council on such appeal shall be final.
§ 11.13. Posting of licenses.
It shall be the duty of every person conducting a licensed business in the
City to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used
for such business at all times. Vending machine licenses shall be affixed to
each machine where they can be clearly seen.
§ 11.14. Business vehicle stickers.
Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis, in whole or in part, for a
license fee, the City Clerk shall furnish the licensee with a tag or sticker for
each vehicle covered by the license, and such tag or sticker shall be posted
or affixed in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle.
§ 11.15. Penalties.53
Unless another penalty is provided in this chapter, any person, firm, or
corporation who or which shall be convicted of violating any provision of
this chapter shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 11.16. Regulatory fees.
(E) The City is not limited to the remedies provided herein and is otherwise
authorized to prosecute the licensee for any violations administratively
or in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(A) Purpose.
(1) The City may directly license certain businesses or occupations
under powers granted under the Illinois Municipal Code; however,
because each commercial establishment located in the City is a
basic part of and affects the physical and economic well-being of
the City, necessitating special services from the City in the form of
fire, health, sanitation, building and police inspections and
services, such commercial establishments shall in all respects be in
full compliance with the provisions of this section. This section is
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.11 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.16
1:213
designed to provide for the means whereby the City may render the
necessary inspections and services to commercial establishments
and commercial areas in order to promote, protect, and safeguard
the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Hometown
and to enable the effecting of an accurate record of commercial
establishments located in and carrying on commercial activities or
commerce within the City of Hometown.
(2) The commercial establishments so regulated may or may not have
their principal place of business located within the City of
Hometown.
(3) The business regulation fees provided for herein are not intended
to license any business or profession nor are they to be construed
as an endorsement of the competency or skill of any individual,
company, corporation or other entity. Only governmental activities
and other approved eleemosynary activities will be issued a
certificate without charge, except as may be required herein.
(4) The business regulatory fee is not intended to deprive the City of its
power to license said business under the provisions of the Illinois
Municipal Code.
(B) Basis of fee.
(1) Business regulation fees based upon square foot area are
predicated upon the premise that there is a finite amount of square
footage in all of the commercial zoning districts within the City.
These commercial districts require substantial services over and
above the services provided for single-family homes and other
residential districts. The business activities conducted within the
finite square foot area of the commercial districts of the City
require these extra services regardless of the activity being
conducted within each commercial space. Therefore, the fee is
based equitably upon the square foot area of each place of business
as a minimum fee.
(2) All measurements are expressed in square feet and shall be to the
nearest integral square foot; if a fraction is one-half square foot or
more, the integral square foot next above shall be taken.
(3) "Floor area" is the sum total of the gross horizontal areas of all of
the several floors of a building and its accessory buildings
measured in square feet from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls or from the center line of party walls separating two buildings
or business establishments on each of the respective floors, and
shall include the basement floor, cellar floor, motor vehicle parking
space when such space is used in conjunction with a drive-in
commercial establishment, and commercial establishments
devoted to the sale, service, and/or repair of motor vehicles, floor
space used for mechanical equipment, whether open or enclosed,
penthouse attic space, balconies, mezzanines, porches and
§ 11.16 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.16
1:214
verandas, and floor area devoted to and occupied by accessory
uses, even though such floor area may be temporarily vacant or not
in use.
(C) Other factors.
(1) The basis for the fee schedule may be based on additional factors
other than the square foot area of the business establishment.
(2) Other fee charges are added for activities listed in § 11.17.
(D) Fees. [Amended 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
(1) The minimum regulatory fee schedule shall be based on square feet
of floor/land area as herein defined. Commercial establishments
using surface area of land for storage, display and/or sales and
services shall be based on square feet of area. Special enumerated
fees shall be in addition to this minimum. See § 11.17.
Classification Step
Floor/Land Area
(square feet)
Yearly
Registration Fee
Office,
manufacturing,
retail, service
storage,
wholesale
1 1 to 1,500 $72
2 1,501 to 3,000 $96
3 3,001 to 6,000 $120
4 6,001 to 9,000 $144
5 9,001 to 12,000 $168
6 12,001 to 15,000 $192
7 15,001 to 20,000 $228
8 20,001 to 30,000 $270
9 30,001 to 40,000 $330
10 40,001 to 60,000 $390
11 60,001 to 80,000 $480
12 80,001 to 100,000 $570
13 100,001 to
140,000
$780
14 140,001 to
180,000
$900
15 180,001 to
220,000
$1,200
§ 11.16 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.16
1:215
§ 11.17. Fee schedule. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 15-2004;
4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
The following schedule of fees are the fees to be charged for all businesses
or commercial establishments located or doing business in the City, whether
the fees are based on the regulatory provisions of this chapter, powers
granted under the Illinois Municipal Code, statutory provisions, or factors
which cannot feasibly be determined on a square-foot basis. Automatic
vending machine licenses, driveway permit fees, and sign fees are to be paid
in addition to the square foot area or fixed annual fees. Other fee references
such as driveway, sign, animal, and so forth, are included for convenience.
Businesses or commercial establishments not scheduled shall be licensed
on a square-foot-area basis. All solicitors and itinerant vendors must comply
with Article 30 and pay the fee required in addition to other fees required
herein:
1. Alcoholic liquors (Article 2)54
a. Class A $1,200 plus square feet of
area
b. Class A-1 $240
c. Class B $960 plus square feet of
area
d. Class B-1 $500
e. Class C $1,080
f. Class D $1,200
g. Temporary permits
6% alcohol or less $6 per day
Over 6% alcohol $6 per day
h. Veterans permits $1
2. Ambulance services
a. For each ambulance $42
b. For attendant or attendant driver $42
3. Amusements
a. Automatic amusement devices
(1)Jukeboxes or other musical
devices
$90
(2)Coin-operated rides $90
(3)Coin-operated games $90
(2) Floor/Land area shall be calculated as herein defined in Subsection
(B)(3).
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.16 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.17
1:216
b. Public places of amusement, includes
circus or sideshow, commercial
playground or amusement park,
theater (motion-picture or dramatic)
and cabaret, public dance hall, public
skating rink, automobile show,
balloon contest, concert, minstrel, or
musical entertainment given under
canvas, fireworks display, horse or
dog show, rodeo and stock or poultry
show not otherwise classified herein
Square feet
c. Miniature golf courses $300 plus square feet
4. Animals (Chapter 17)
a. Dogs $5 each
b. Cats $5 each
5. Animal care and sale
a. Dealers in small animals (Chapter 17,
Article 6)
$300 plus square feet
b. Animal kennels $120 plus square feet
c. Veterinary hospitals (§ 17.73) $120 plus square feet
6. Appraisal and consultant services $60 plus square feet
7. Auctioneers
a. Per day $24
b. Per month $60
c. Per year $90
d. In addition, per employee, not to
exceed 2
$12
8. Bakeries (Article 6)
a. Bakery vehicles for each delivery
vehicle (also itinerant vendor)
$60 plus square feet
9. Barber shops (Article 7) $60 plus square feet
10. Beauty shops (sale of cosmetics) $60 plus square feet
11. Billiard and pool halls $120 plus square feet
a. For each table not coin-operated, add $60
b. Coin-operated, each $90
12. Brokers (Article 8)
a. General brokers $60 plus square feet
b. Passenger ticket brokers $60 plus square feet
13. Businesses, occupations and commercial
not otherwise classified
§ 11.17 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.17
1:217
a. Using stores or land area $60 plus square foot
b. Services only, asphalt contractors,
cement contractors, general
contractors, fence contractors,
garage contractors, paving
contractors and similar contractors,
or services or contractors (all types),
only having no permanent location in
the City.
$90
1. Licenses, permits or fees covered
under Subsection (13)(b) shall be
for the calendar year beginning
January 1 and ending December
31 of the next succeeding year;
provided, however, that any
person applying for a license who
commences business at any time
subsequent to June 1 of the
calendar year shall pay an amount
equal to 50% of the annual fee or
charge for said license or permit,
which shall expire on December
31 of said calendar year.
14. Candy vending machines $50
15. Carters and expressmen $60
16. Catering services and establishments $90 plus square feet
17. Car washes (other than filling stations)
a. Automatic, each wash bay $42
b. Self-cleaning, each wash $30
c. Vacuum machines, each machine $12
18. Chemical and paint stores (wholesale) $60 plus square feet
19. Cigarette machines (Article 5) $75
20. Currency exchanges, for other than
cashing checks or selling of money orders
$60 plus square feet
21. Confectionery stores $60 plus square feet
22. Delicatessens $90 plus square feet
23. Detective agencies and private detectives $60 plus square feet
24. Dispensaries (medical) (other than
licensed doctors)
$60 plus square feet
25. Drain layers and sewer builders (Article
11)
$60
26. Driveways (Chapter 5, Article 2) $25 each
§ 11.17 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.17
1:218
27. Driving schools $60 plus square feet
28. Drugstores $60 plus square feet
29. Dry-cleaning establishments $60 plus square feet
a. Vending machines $50 each
30. Electrical contractors (if not registered in
another municipality)
$60
31. Filling stations (Article 12) Gallonage
a. Portable wheel tank (extra) $9.90 each
b. Car wash (adjunct thereto) Square feet
c. Automotive mechanic's bay $100 each
32. Finance companies $60 plus square feet
33. Fire extinguisher service and repair $60 plus square feet
34. Fish markets $60 plus square feet
35. Flammables and hazardous chemicals and
gases - storage, sale, handling
$120 plus square feet
36. Florists - itinerant or sale of flowers
(Article 13)
$60 plus square feet
37. Flower vending machines $50
38. Food dealers (Article 14) $90 plus square feet
39. Food delivery vehicles and mobile food
dispensers (Article 15)
$60
40. Food dispensers, retail (Article 16) $90 plus square feet
41. Food vending machines, coin-operated
(Article 5)
a. Candy $50 each
b. Soft drinks $50 each
c. Food [except (a) and (b)] $50 each
d. Not-for-profit $1 each
42. Fruit and vegetable stores or stands $60 plus square feet
43. Funeral homes and undertaking
establishments
$60 plus square feet
44. Garages (public) (Article 33) $60 plus square feet
45. Grocery stores $120 plus square feet
46. Hardware stores and paint stores (retail) $60 plus square feet
47. Heating, air conditioning and
refrigeration contractors (not licensed by
another municipality)
$60
48. Hotels and motels (inspection fee, annual)
(per accommodation unit)
$30
§ 11.17 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.17
1:219
49. House movers (Article 19) $120
50. Ice cream stores or parlors (retail) $60 plus square feet
51. Ice cream vendors, street (Article 20) $42
52. Ice manufacturers and dealers $60 plus square feet
a. Plus for each vehicle or vending
machine operated in the course of
wholesale or retail business (Article
22)
$50
53. Itinerant merchants and transient
vendors (Article 22)
$90
a. Plus solicitor fee $24
54. Jewelry stores $60 plus square feet
55. Junk dealers and junk peddlers (Article
23)
a. Junk peddler for each vehicle, per
day
$90
b. Plus solicitor fee $24
56. Laboratories $90 plus square feet
57. Laundries and laundry vehicles (including
diaper services)
a. Laundries (Article 24) $60 plus square feet
b. For each vehicle (Article 25) $60
58. Laundromats (self-service coin-operated
machines)
Square feet
a. Vending machines $50 each
59. Lumber yards and lumber storehouses $60 plus square feet
60. Machine shops $60 plus square feet
61. Meat dealers and meat markets $90 plus square feet
62. Motor vehicle wrecking and repair
establishments (Art. 27)
$60 plus square feet
a. Auto parts and accessories $60 plus square feet
63. Nursing homes and homes for the aged $60 plus square feet
64. Opticians - sales or manufacture of
glasses only
$60 plus square feet
65. Paint stores (Article 28) $60 plus square feet
66. Parking lots (Article 29) (See "Garages.") $60 plus square feet
67. Pawnbrokers $60 plus square feet
68. Peddlers (Article 30)
a. Solicitor fee [plus (b) and (c)] $24
§ 11.17 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.17
1:220
b. Operating from vehicle, each $42
c. No vehicle used $24
69. Photo shops $60 plus square feet
70. Photography studios $60 plus square feet
71. Photographers, itinerant, per day $60
a. Plus solicitor fee $24
72. Restaurants $120 plus square feet
73. Scavengers (Article 34) $240
74. Secondhand dealers $60 plus square feet
75. Signs (Chapter 18, Article 8) Square feet of advertising
surface
76. Soft drink vending machines (Article 5) $50
77. Solid fuel and fuel oil dealers $60 plus square feet
78. Solicitors (Article 31) card fee $24
a. Duplicate card $6
79. Taxicabs and limousines (Article 35)
a. For each vehicle (Article 35) $60
b. For each operator (Article 9) $30
80. Tobacco dealers
a. Wholesale tobacco dealers $75 plus square feet
b. Retail vending machines (Article 5) $75
c. Retail tobacco dealers (Article 36) $75 plus square feet
81. Transfer fees (except alcoholic) (same
owner same commodities - new location)
$30
82. TV sales or repair or both $60 plus square feet
83. Undertakers $60 plus square feet
84. Variety stores $60 plus square feet
85. Vending machines - veterans (Article 5) $1 each
86. Vending machines not classified above
(Article 5)
$50
87. Wearing apparel stores (Article 39) $60 plus square feet
88. Wholesale provision dealers (Article 40) $60 plus square feet
§ 11.18. through § 11.29. (Reserved)
§ 11.17 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.18
1:221

ARTICLE 2
Alcoholic Liquor Dealers
§ 11.30. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
article shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by volume, which is fit for
beverage purposes.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, copartnership, association,
corporation, club, lodge, fraternity order or post.
RETAIL SALE — The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
RESTAURANT — Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals
are actually served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment
and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its quests.
§ 11.31. Licenses required.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale at retail of any
alcoholic beverage of any kind without first obtaining a license therefor
from the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of, or
conduct a business where patrons are allowed to bottle, blend, deliver,
furnish, give, divide, distribute, barter, use, consume, possess, or store
alcoholic liquors in any commercial establishment where food is stored
or consumed or there is amusement or entertainment, without first
obtaining a license therefor from the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to bottle, blend, deliver, furnish, give,
divide, distribute, barter, use, consume, possess, or store alcoholic
liquors on any premises in conjunction with amusement or
entertainment which has not been licensed by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
(D) It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish containers, water or other
beverages for the mixture thereof for alcoholic liquors in any
commercial establishment which has not been licensed by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner.
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person, business, licensee, agent, servant,
or employee to allow or permit any persons to commit any of the acts
prohibited in Subsections (A), (B), (C) and (D) hereof.
§ 11.30 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.31
1:223
§ 11.32. Retail liquor dealer's license.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the City any alcoholic
liquor without having a retail liquor dealer's license, or in violation of the
terms of such license.
§ 11.33. Application for license.
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Mayor in writing, on
forms furnished by the City, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by
a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by oath
or affidavit, and shall contain the following information and statements, and
such other information as may be required:
(F) It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of leasing
any premises to allow the use, sale, giving away, or consumption on the
premises of alcoholic liquor, without first securing a license or without
the lessee first securing a license from the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
(A) The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of an individual;
in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the
profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation, for profit, or a club, the
date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names
and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority in interest
of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his
nominees, the name and address of such person;
(B) The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and, if a naturalized
citizen, the time and place of his naturalization;
(C) The character of business of the applicant,, and in case of a corporation,
the objects for which it was formed;
(D) The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character, or, in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter
was issued;
(E) The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made;
(F) The location and description of the premises or place or business which
is to be operated under such license;
(G) A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar other license on premises other than described in this
application, and the disposition of such application;
(H) A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this article, laws of this state, or the ordinances of this
City;
§ 11.31 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.33
1:224
§ 11.34. Restrictions on license.
No such license shall be issued to:
(I) Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by the
federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
(J) A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
State of Illinois or of the United States, or any ordinance of the City in
the conduct of his place of business.
(A) A person who is not a resident of the City;
(B) A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides;
(C) A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
(D) A person who has been convicted of a felony under federal and state
laws, if the Commissioner, after investigation, determines that such
person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public
trust;55
(E) A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
place of prostitution or keeping a place of juvenile prostitution,
promoting prostitution that involves keeping a place of prostitution, or
promoting juvenile prostitution that involves keeping a place of juvenile
prostitution;56
(F) A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality, under this Code or the
ordinance of any other municipality;
(G) A person whose license issued under this article has been revoked for
cause;
(H) A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
(I) A copartnership, unless any general partnership thereof, or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than 5% of the aggregate limited
partner interest in such copartnership shall be qualified to obtain a
license;57
(J) A corporation or limited-liability company, if any officer, manager or
director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.33 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.34
1:225
aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such corporation, would not
be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than
citizenship and residence within the political subdivision;58
(K) A corporation or limited-liability company unless it is incorporated in
Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation or foreign limited-liability
company which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation Act
(805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.) or the Limited Liability Company Act (805
ILCS 180/1-1 et seq.) to transact business in Illinois;59
(L) An association, not incorporated, where any member thereof would not
be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than
citizenship and residence within the political subdivision. A majority of
the members of such an association must be residents of the City;
(M) A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications
required of the licensee;
(N) A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this article, or shall have forfeited his
bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;
(O) Any person, association, or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer's license;
(P) A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license
is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which
the license is to be issued;
(Q) Any law-enforcing public official, any Mayor, Alderman, or member of
the City Council or commission.60
(1) No such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or
indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic
liquor; except that a license may be granted to such official in
relation to premises that are not located within the territory subject
to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is
approved by the State Liquor Control Commission; and except that
a license may be granted to any Alderman, member of City Council,
in relation to premises that are located within the territory subject
to the jurisdiction of that official, if:
(a) The sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is incidental
to the selling of food;
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.34 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.34
1:226
(b) The issuance of the license is approved by the State
Commission;
(c) The issuance of the license is in accordance with all applicable
local ordinances in effect where the premises are located; and
(d) The official granted a license does not vote on alcoholic liquor
issues pending before the City Council.
(2) Notwithstanding any provision of this Subsection (Q) to the
contrary, an Alderman or member of the City Council or
commission may have a direct interest in the manufacture, sale, or
distribution of alcoholic liquor as long as he or she is not a lawenforcing
public official or the Mayor. To prevent any conflict of
interest, the elected official with the direct interest in the
manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor shall not
participate in any meetings, hearings, or decisions on matters
impacting the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
Furthermore, the Mayor may have an interest in the manufacture,
sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor as long as the City Council
has made a local liquor control commissioner appointment that
complies with the requirements of 235 ILCS 5/4-2;
(R) A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated by
the licensee;
(S) A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed
by any of Subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of Section 28-1 of, or as
proscribed by Section 28-1.1 or Section 28-3 of the Criminal Code of
1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, as heretofore or hereafter amended,
or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory
provisions;61
(T) A person or entity to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the
current tax period, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued a
license under the Raffles and Poker Runs Act (230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.)
or the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act (230 ILCS 20/1 et seq.);62
(U) A copartnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the
current tax period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal
gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal
government for the current tax period;
(V) A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.34 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.34
1:227
§ 11.35. Classification; fees.
corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp for the current tax period;
(W) Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the
current tax period;
(X) A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption on
his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal
to the maximum liability amounts set out in 235 ILCS 5/6-21(a);63
(Y) A person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a manufacturer
of beer, or any partnership, corporation, limited-liability company, or
trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of
business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer, having any
legal, equitable, or beneficial interest, directly or indirectly, in a person
licensed in this state as a distributor or importing distributor. For
purposes of this Subsection (Y), a person who is licensed by any
licensing authority as a "manufacturer of beer" shall also mean a
brewer and a nonresident dealer who is also a manufacturer of beer,
including a partnership, corporation, limited-liability company, or trust
or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of
business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer;64
(Z) A person who is licensed in this state as a distributor or importing
distributor, or any partnership, corporation, limited-liability company,
or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form
of business enterprise licensed in this state as a distributor or importing
distributor having any legal, equitable, or beneficial interest, directly or
indirectly, in a person licensed as a manufacturer of beer by any
licensing authority, or any partnership, corporation, limited-liability
company, or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any
other form of business enterprise, except for a person who owns, on or
after the effective date of the amendatory Act of the 98th General
Assembly amending 235 ILCS 5/6-2, no more than 5% of the
outstanding shares of a manufacturer of beer whose shares are publicly
traded on an exchange within the meaning of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934. For the purposes of this Subsection (Z), a person who is
licensed by any licensing authority as a "manufacturer of beer" shall
also mean a brewer and a nonresident dealer who is also a
manufacturer of beer, including a partnership, corporation, limitedliability
company, or trust or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof,
or any other form of business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of
beer.65
63.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
64.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
65.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 11.34 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.35
1:228
§ 11.36. Disposition of fees.
All such fees shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time application is made;
the Clerk shall issue a receipt for and on behalf of the Mayor. In the event
the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant;
if the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general
(A) Such licenses to sell alcoholic liquor at retail shall be and are hereby
divided into six classes: [Amended 8-23-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005;
10-28-2014 by Ord. No. 9-201466]
(1) Class A licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for
use or consumption on the premises where sold. The annual fee for
such license shall be $1,200 plus square feet of area.
(2) Class A-1 licenses shall be issued only in conjunction with a Class A
license and shall authorize the retail sale of packaged goods for
consumption off of the licensee's premises. The annual fee for such
license shall be $240.
(3) Class B licenses shall authorize the retail sale of packaged and
sealed alcoholic liquor on the premises, but not for consumption on
the licensee's premises. The annual fee for such license shall be
$960 plus square feet of area.
(4) Class B-1 licenses shall be issued in conjunction with a Class B
license and shall authorize the retail sale of packaged and sealed
alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the premises,
commencing at 9:00 a.m. on Sundays. The annual fee for such
license shall be $500.
(5) Class C licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only
for consumption on the licensee's premises. The annual fee for such
license shall be $1,080.
(6) Class D licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for
use or consumption on the premises where sold in conjunction with
the lawful operation of video gaming terminals pursuant to the
Illinois Video Gaming Act (Act) (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.). Unlike a
Class A license, a Class D license shall only be issued to those
whose primary purpose for seeking a liquor license is to allow for
the operation of video gaming terminals in the premises described
in the application and license. A Class D license shall only be valid
during such times as video gaming terminals are present in the
premises and in operation in accordance with the Act. The fee for
such license shall be $1,200.
(B) Licensees shall pay an additional fee based on the square footage of
area as provided for in § 11.16.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.35 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.36
1:229
corporate fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the
Council, by proper action.
§ 11.37. Number of licenses. [Amended 8-23-2005 by Ord. No.
6-2005; 10-28-2014 by Ord. No. 9-2014]
§ 11.38. Issuance of license; record of licenses issued.67
Upon the approval by the Mayor of the application as provided in the
foregoing sections, and the payment of the required license fee, the City
Clerk shall issue to the person or persons applying therefor a license to
retail alcoholic liquors under the provisions of this article, indicating the
classification under which the license is issued and the term for which
such license was granted, which license shall be signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the Clerk. The Mayor shall keep or cause to be kept a
complete record of all such licenses issued by him, and shall furnish the
Clerk, Treasurer, and Chief of Police each with a copy thereof; upon the
issuance of any new license, or the revocation of any old license, the Mayor
shall give written notice of such action to each of these officers within 48
hours of such action.
§ 11.39. Transfer of license.
(A) The number of licenses which may be in effect at any one time shall be
as follows:
Class of License Number in Effect
A 4
B 2
B-1 1
C 1
D 10
(B) A Class A-1 license can only be issued to a holder of a Class A license
and is counted with the limitation of Class A licenses; provided,
however, that in addition to any and all limitations on the number of
Class A, B, B-1 and C licenses, the City of Hometown may issue a license
to any veterans' group organized and existing under a charter issued by
a national organization incorporated by Act of Congress of the United
States, upon payment of the sum of $1 annually, and that such licenses
shall not be considered in determining the number of licenses issued
and in effect.
(A) A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed
one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this article
provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.36 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.39
1:230
§ 11.40. License to be posted.68
Any and all persons licensed under this article to sell alcoholic liquors shall
immediately cause to be and remain posted upon some conspicuous part of
the room or bar kept for such purpose his or her license.
§ 11.41. Penalty for failure to post license.69
Any person so licensed, who shall not cause such license to be and keep
the same posted as required in the preceding section, or who, not being
licensed, shall cause or permit any license which has expired or any paper
or document purporting to be a license to be or remain posted as aforesaid,
shall, on conviction, be fined in a sum not less than $10 nor more than $750.
§ 11.42. Change of location.
A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only
in the premises described in the application and license. Such location may
be changed only upon the written permit to make such change issued by the
Mayor. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being
encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the
laws of testate or intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death
of the licensee, provided that executors or administrators of the estate
of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt
licensee,, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may
continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor
under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges
of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of
such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of
such license but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy
or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion
of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be
prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the
provisions of this subsection.
(B) Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided
he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such
renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; and provided,
further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be
construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Mayor
from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within his
jurisdiction.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.39 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.42
1:231
location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws
of this state and the ordinances of the City.
§ 11.43. Sanitary conditions.
All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of
such liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances regulating the condition
of premises used for the storage of food for human consumption.
§ 11.44. (Reserved)70
§ 11.45. Unrestricted area.71
It is hereby determined that the following described portions of the City are
not predominately residential in character and accordingly it shall not be
necessary for any applicant to secure frontage consents in order to establish
an alcoholic liquor business in said territory described as follows: Sections
B-1 according to Chapter 22, Zoning, of the Code of the City of Hometown.
§ 11.46. Restricted area.
As to all other property within the limits of the City not described in § 11.45
above, it shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor.
§ 11.47. Hours of operation.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any licensee herein to sell, permit to sell, offer
for sale, allow the consumption of, or give away any alcoholic liquors in
the City between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any weekday
and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.
Notwithstanding, the holder of a Class B-1 license shall be authorized to
sell packaged goods for off-premises consumption commencing at 9:00
a.m. on Sundays. [Amended 8-23-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005]
(B) During such prohibited hours of sale, every location, place, or premises
where alcoholic liquor may be sold at retail shall be kept closed, and no
person other than the licensee or an employee or a member of the
immediate family of the licensee shall be permitted to remain therein.
All doors directly opening into or out of such location, place, or
premises for ingress thereto or egress therefrom shall be securely
locked during the prohibited hours of sale. The provisions of this
section relating to the closing of the premises and the locking of the
doors shall not apply to restaurants and hotels licensed as food
dispensers nor to clubs, drugstores, and delicatessen stores, except
70.Editor's Note: Former § 11.44, Employees, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2). See § 11.48(G).
71.Editor's Note: See § 11.10 of this chapter. Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 11.42 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.47
1:232
§ 11.48. Conduct of licensee.
that no alcoholic liquor may be consumed or sold during the prohibited
hours.
(A) Every licensee hereunder engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverage
shall conduct his or her place of business in a quiet, decent and
respectable manner and shall eject therefrom or refuse admittance
thereto all persons rendering themselves objectionable or undesirable
by reason of undue noise or other acts disturbing the peace.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any licensee, officer, associate, member, agent,
representative or employee of such licensee to give or deliver any
alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverages to a person under the influence
of alcoholic liquor. Soliciting of drinks or prostitution is prohibited.72
(C) No licensee shall permit his patrons to perform any lewd, lascivious
acts or an act of obscenity.
(D) Every licensee shall immediately report to the police any act by a
person or patron rendering himself objectionable, causing undue noise
or disturbance, breach of peace, unusual conduct, or a person with a
firearm, knife, bludgeon or deadly instrument.
(E) No person licensed under the provisions hereof shall suffer any loud or
boisterous talking, or obscene or profane language, quarreling, singing,
fighting or other disturbance of persons passing along any street or
public square in the vicinity thereof or the disturbance of the peace and
quiet of persons doing business or residing in the neighborhood thereof.
(F) All persons, or employees, dispensing or serving food or alcoholic liquor
shall be decently clothed. Topless or similar types of attire are hereby
prohibited. In addition the following rules shall be observed:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, while acting as a waiter,
waitress, or entertainer, to:
(a) Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
(b) Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks,
natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
(c) Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any waiter,
waitress, or entertainer to commit any of the unlawful acts in this
section.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.47 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.48
1:233
§ 11.49. Consumption of alcohol in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume, transport, carry or
possess any alcoholic liquor, except in the original package and with the
seal unbroken, on a public street, sidewalk, parkway, public parking lot
or semi-public parking lot. However, it shall be lawful to drink, consume,
transport, carry or possess any alcoholic liquor if that person or
organization using the public park has received permission from the
Playground and Recreation Board. The term "semi-public parking lot" shall
include any area wherein motor vehicles are parked by the public in
conjunction with any business, enterprise, or commercial establishment.
(3) A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress or entertainer if
such person acts in that capacity without regard to whether or not
such person is paid any compensation by the management of the
establishment in which the activity is performed.
(G) It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of,
any contagious, infectious or venereal disease, and it shall be unlawful
for any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to
work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling,
preparation or distribution of such liquor.
(H) It shall be unlawful for any licensee to suffer or permit any species of
gambling in his premises or any part thereof or any place adjacent
thereto under his control.
(I) It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit alcoholic liquor, except in
the original package and with the seal unbroken, to be taken out of the
premises wherein it was sold, delivered, or given.
(J) It shall be unlawful for any licensee in the conduct of his business to
commit, suffer or permit, through himself, an agent, servant, or
employee, a violation of a City ordinance or law of the State of Illinois or
the United States. A certified copy of the conviction or proof before the
local Commissioner of facts to establish a violation shall be sufficient
cause for revocation or suspension of any license, irrespective of
whether or not a conviction has been obtained in any court.
(K) It shall be unlawful for any licensee to suffer or permit a violation of any
rule or regulation of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(1) A licensee shall immediately report to the police a violation of any
City ordinance, Illinois statute or federal law occurring in the
licensed premises, or outside the licensed premises, but adjacent
thereto, involving the conduct of his business or patrons.
§ 11.48 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.50
1:234
§ 11.50. Persons drinking to excess.73
No retail liquor dealer shall, by himself, servant or clerk, allow drunkenness
or permit any person to drink to excess on his premises, or in any part
thereof or in any place adjacent thereto under his control.
§ 11.51. Minors. [Amended 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 1-2005]
(A) No person under the age of 21 years shall consume, purchase or accept
delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her
possession, excepting the possession and dispensing, or consumption
by a person under the age of 21 years of alcoholic liquor in the
performance of a religious service or ceremony, the consumption by a
person under the age of 21 years under the direct supervision and
approval of the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such underage person in the
privacy of that parent's or guardian's home, or the possession or
delivery of alcoholic liquors in pursuit of a person's employment by a
licensee as allowed by state law.
(B) No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor,
shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under
the age of 21 years, except as allowed in Subsection (A) above.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to use false
identification or the identification of another to obtain admittance to or
to obtain alcoholic liquor from any liquor establishment.
(D) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish to any person
under the age of 21 years any identification which is used by any other
person for the purpose of gaining entrance into a liquor establishment
or which is used for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to
purchase any alcoholic beverage.
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person to employ or permit the employment
of any person under the age of 21 years in any licensed premises where
alcoholic liquor is sold when that person is involved in the sale or
delivery of alcoholic liquor. Persons under the age of 21 may be
employed in any licensed premises where their employment does not
require them to sell, accept money for, check identification for, or serve
alcoholic liquor.
(F) It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises to
knowingly allow any person under the age of 21 years to violate any
provision of this section.
(G) It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit any
person under the age of 21 years of which he or she may be the parent
or guardian to violate any provision of this section.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.50 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.52
1:235
§ 11.52. (Reserved)74
§ 11.53. (Reserved)75
§ 11.54. Prosecutions.76
In all prosecutions under this article it shall not be necessary to state the
kind of liquor sold or to describe the place where sold, or to show the
knowledge of the principal to convict for acts of an agent or servant, and in
all cases the person to whom an alcoholic liquor shall be sold in violation of
any provisions of this article shall be a competent witness.
§ 11.55. Temporary permits; fees.
§ 11.56. Penalties.
(A) The Mayor shall have the power to issue temporary permits (not
licenses) to any society, fraternity, picnic, bazaar, fair or similar public
or private assembly, for the sale of wine and beer where food is sold,
served or dispensed. Such temporary permits shall be issued only to
organizations not for pecuniary profit and shall be valid for only one
day.
(B) Not more than one such permit shall be issued to any organization
within a period of 30 days. The fee for a temporary permit shall be $6
per day for the sale of alcoholic beverages containing 6% or less alcohol
by volume and $6 per day for beverages containing more than 6%.77
(A) Any person engaged in the sale at retail or wholesale of alcoholic
beverages without a license so to do shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and each day that any person is engaged in the sale of
liquor contrary to the provisions of this article shall constitute a
separate offense; and, in addition thereto, any licensee hereunder who
violates or permits a violation of any provision contained herein
pertaining to the conduct of his business under such license may have
his license revoked or suspended by and pay a fine of up to $1,000 to
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to investigate any complaints
concerning the conduct of any such establishment or place of business
and to revoke or suspend the license and to compel the licensee to pay a
fine, together with costs and reasonable attorney's fees, for failing or
refusing to comply with the provisions herein or the regulations of the
Local Liquor Control Commission if, in his judgment, such revocation or
suspension is advisable.
74.Editor's Note: Former § 11.52, Notice to liquor dealers, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
75.Editor's Note: Former § 11.53, Loud noises; quarreling, fighting, etc. prohibited, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.52 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.56
1:236
§ 11.57. Enforcement.79
The Chief of Police and all police officers shall have the duty to see that all
provisions of this article are strictly observed and enforced. Persons who
may be in violation of any provision of this article shall be arrested and
then prosecuted with the assistance of the City Attorney without delay. All
violations of the regulations of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall
be immediately reported to him.
§ 11.58. Pricing; happy hours or reduced-price drinks.80
(B) Any person, firm or corporation found guilty by a court of any violation
of the provisions of this article shall be fined as follows, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation continues:78
(1) Not to exceed $1,000 for a first violation within a twelve-month
period.
(2) Not to exceed $1,500 for a second violation within a twelve-month
period.
(3) Not to exceed $2,500 for a third or subsequent violation within a
twelve-month period.
(4) Not more than $15,000 in fines may be imposed against any
licensee during the period of the license.
(A) All licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all
drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed
premises or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multi-use
establishment which holds a valid retailer's license operates on its
premises more than one establishment at which drinks of alcoholic
liquor are sold at retail, the hotel or multi-use establishment shall
maintain at each such establishment a separate schedule of the prices
charged for such drinks at that establishment.
(B) No licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
(1) Serve two or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one
person for consumption by that one person, except selling or
delivering wine by the bottle or carafe;
(2) Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of
drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.56 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.58
1:237
§ 11.59. Outdoor service areas; fee. [Added 4-13-2010 by Ord. No.
5-2010]
price, except at private functions not open to the general public or
as provided in 235 ILCS 5/6-28.5;
(3) Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or the
size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing
proportionately the price regularly charged for the drink on that
day;
(4) Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest
which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks
of alcoholic liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the
licensed premises; or
(5) Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under Subsection (B)(1)
through (4).
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume, transport, carry
or possess any alcoholic liquor, except in the original package and with
the seal unbroken, from any licensed liquor establishment except into a
licensed outdoor service area. Outdoor service area licenses are limited
to establishments having full kitchen facilities and offering food service
to customers.
(B) The consumption and possession of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted
in licensed outdoor service areas during the same hours of operation for
which the premises are licensed unless the outdoor service area license
is issued for different hours of operation. In no event shall the outdoor
service area be open later than 12:00 midnight Monday through
Sunday.
(C) Application shall be made for an outdoor service area license upon such
forms and with such attachments as required by the Mayor, serving in
his capacity as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. A diagram
depicting the specific location and dimensions of the outdoor service
area shall accompany the application. The annual fee for an outdoor
service area license shall be $250, in addition to the fees set forth in
§ 11.35.
(D) The application shall be reviewed by the Mayor. No outdoor service
area license shall be granted to the detriment of the public health,
safety, welfare and quiet enjoyment of persons residing or working
within vicinity of the premises. The Mayor shall have the right and
authority to place limitations or conditions upon any outdoor service
area license, which limitations and conditions include the hours of
operation and which may be changed on an annual basis by the Mayor.
The Mayor shall report the issuance of any outdoor service area license
to the Aldermen at a City Council meeting.
§ 11.58 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.59
1:238
§ 11.59.1. License for limited consumption on premises; fee. [Added
2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
(E) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 11.49, a semi-public parking lot
may be used as an outdoor service area if the minimum number of
parking spaces required by Chapter 22, Zoning, remains available.
(F) The following terms and conditions govern the issuance of an outdoor
service area license:
(1) No outdoor storage of food or beverages is permitted.
(2) Trash containers shall be self-closing and shall be emptied at the
closing hour so that no garbage or trash remains when the
premises are not open. Sufficient trash receptacles shall be
provided and emptied so as to prevent the overflow of garbage onto
the ground.
(3) Access shall be to the outdoor service area shall be limited to one
point of ingress and egress. A barrier shall be installed to otherwise
prevent entry into the designated area.
(4) No animals shall be allowed (except for handicapped service
animals).
(5) No alcoholic beverages may be removed from the outdoor service
area except into the main structure on the premises.
(6) Handicapped-accessible seating shall be provided.
(7) Fire exits shall not be blocked by the outdoor service area.
(8) Required parking areas shall not be used for the outdoor service
area.
(9) Occupancy limitations shall not be exceeded.
(10) Sound-amplifying devices shall not disturb neighboring properties
and may only be used as permitted.
(11) The public right-of-way shall not be used for the outdoor service
area.
(12) All outdoor eating areas shall be cleaned and hosed down prior to
opening or at the close of business each day that the outdoor eating
areas are open for business.
(13) The floor of the outdoor service area shall be a hard surface of
concrete, asphalt, brick material or decking.
(14) The consumption of alcohol is only permitted in conjunction with
food service.
§ 11.59 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.59.1
1:239
(A) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 11.31 of this article, a license may
be issued to allow the consumption of alcoholic liquor in a commercial
establishment where food is stored or consumed. No liquor license from
the State of Illinois is required for the issuance of the license.
(B) Applications for the license shall be made on forms provided by the City
Clerk. The conditions relating to the issuance of a license for alcoholic
beverages provided for in §§ 11.33 and 11.34 of this article shall not
apply. The license fee shall be $50 per year. License fees are not
prorated, and licenses may not be transferred.
(C) The following terms and conditions govern the issuance of the license:
(1) Consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be in conjunction with
private parties only. The principal business operations of the
commercial establishment must remain closed. Fire exits shall not
be closed.
(2) No employee of the commercial establishment may be involved in
serving or dispensing alcoholic beverages.
(3) No consumption of alcohol by persons under the age of 21.
(4) The consumption of alcoholic beverages is restricted to the hours
provided for in § 11.47 of this article.
(5) Occupancy limits shall not be exceeded.
(6) No open containers of alcoholic beverages shall be removed from
the premises.
(7) Compliance with all relevant provisions of the Municipal Code of
the City of Hometown.
§ 11.59.1 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.59.1
1:240
ARTICLE 3
Dealers in Small Animals
§ 11.60. License required.81
No person shall engage in the business of buying, selling, dealing in or
grooming or training birds, dogs, or other small animals used as household
pets or used for domestic purposes without first obtaining a license.
§ 11.61. Application for license.
§ 11.62. Fees.
The annual fee for a license for dealers in birds, dogs and other small
animals shall be $250. The licensee shall pay an additional fee based upon
the square footage of the business premises as prescribed by § 11.16.
§ 11.63. Inspections.
§ 11.64. Compliance with state law.82
No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant is in compliance
with the Animal Welfare Act of the State of Illinois (225 ILCS 605/1 et seq.).
§ 11.65. through § 11.69. (Reserved)
(A) An application for small animal dealer's license shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to
applications for licenses.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner and Health Officer to
cause an investigation to be made of the premises named and described
in the application for the purpose of determining the fitness and
suitability of such premises for said business from a sanitary
standpoint.
(A) It shall be the duty of every person licensed to engage in the business of
dealing in birds, dogs, or other small animals used as household pets or
for domestic purposes to comply with the provisions of this Code
regulating health and sanitation applicable thereto.
(B) The Health Officer shall periodically inspect each such place or
business to determine whether the applicable provisions of this Code
regulating health and sanitation are being complied with.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
82.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 11.60 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.65
1:241

ARTICLE 4
Auctions and Auctioneers
§ 11.70. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to conduct an
auction in the City or to do business as an auctioneer without having first
obtained a license as is herein provided, and paying the fee herein set forth.
§ 11.71. Fees.
The license fee is payable in advance. The license fee shall be $75 for
an annual license; $50 for a monthly license; and $20 for a daily license.
An additional fee of $60 per employee is required, not to exceed two
employees.
§ 11.72. Application for license.
Applications for an auctioneer's license shall be made in writing to the City
Clerk and shall state thereon the place of business, if any, intended to be
occupied; and the names of any employees, not to exceed two, who are to
be authorized to conduct auctions under the authority of the license.
§ 11.73. Investigations.
The Chief of Police, or any other officer designated by the Mayor, shall
investigate the character of every applicant for an auctioneer's license, and
no such license shall issue to any person who is not of good character.
§ 11.74. Employees; license fee.
Every person licensed as an auctioneer may designate not to exceed two
employees who may be authorized by him to conduct auctions. Notice
containing the names of the employees so designated must be given to the
City Clerk, and an employee's license shall be issued on the payment of a
fee of $10. This license shall be good for one year, and it shall be unlawful
for any employee not licensed under this section to conduct an auction, or
for any auctioneer to permit an auction to be conducted by an unlicensed
employee.
§ 11.75. Auctions in streets.
No person shall sell or attempt to sell or offer for sale at public auction any
goods, chattels, or personal or real property of any kind upon the public
streets or sidewalks of the City.
§ 11.76. Exemptions.
Nothing in this article shall apply to any public auction or sale made or
conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order or process or by
virtue of any power or authority contained in a mortgage or trust deed.
§ 11.70 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.77
1:243
§ 11.77. through § 11.79. (Reserved)
§ 11.77 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.77
1:244
ARTICLE 5
Automatic Vending Machines
§ 11.80. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC VENDING MACHINE — Any mechanical container or device
used for the sale of any article or service, the operation of which is governed
or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token.
§ 11.81. License required; display and transfer.
Every automatic vending machine shall be licensed.
§ 11.82. Application for license; sticker; fees.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver or install any automatic
vending machine within the City without first having obtained a license
so to do.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to install, keep, maintain or use, or
permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or use upon his premises
of any automatic vending machine for which a license has not been
issued and affixed to said machine for the current year.
(C) No person, firm or corporation shall permit to operate or be maintained
on premises under his or its control any automatic vending machine, as
described herein, which does not have a license affixed to said machine
as required herein.
(D) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to which a
license for an automatic vending machine has been issued not to have
the same affixed to the automatic vending machine for which it was
issued.
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or transfer to another
machine a license from a machine to which it was issued or to install,
keep, maintain or use a machine to which said license was transferred.
(A) An application for such license shall be made in conformity with the
general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses.83 In addition, the applicant shall set forth the number of
automatic vending machines intended to be installed, the location at
which each is to be installed, and a description of each, which
description shall contain the manufacturer's name, the make, and
factory number thereof, whether a single or multiple machine, together
with the monetary value of the coin or coins used to operate the
machine. The application shall also set forth any information required
83.Editor's Note: See Art. 1 of this chapter.
§ 11.80 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.82
1:245
§ 11.83. Additional or new machines.
Additional or new machines shall require the annual license fee required in
§ 11.82. No license shall be transferred from the machine for which it was
issued to another machine.
§ 11.84. Change of location.
Change of location of any licensed vending machine during any license
period may be authorized by the City Clerk upon application therefor.
§ 11.85. Prohibited locations.
No automatic food vending machine shall be installed or kept for use in any
toilet or washroom.
§ 11.86. Food vending machines.
by the Health Officer in order to inform him fully as to the type or types
of machines and the kind or kinds of food to be dispensed therefrom.
(B) Every automatic vending machine installed or maintained within the
City shall have affixed to it a sticker license for which an annual license
fee has been paid as prescribed in the following classes; provided,
however, that where said machine or machines are owned and operated
by a not-for-profit organization, the fee or fees for said license for each
machine shall be $1.
Class Description Fee
Class I Candy machines $50
Class II Soft drink machines $50
Class III Food machines other than candy or soft
drinks
$50
Class IV Not-for-profit organizations $1
Class V Cigarette and tobacco machines $75
Class VI Ice machines $50
Class VII Laundromat or dry-cleaning machines,
soap dispenser, each
$50
Class VIII Jukeboxes or other musical devices $75
Class IX Coin-operated rides $75
Class X Coin-operated games $75
Machines not classified $250
(A) All articles of food purveyed by means of an automatic food vending
machine shall be clean, wholesome, free from taint, decay, or infections,
and shall contain no poisonous, deleterious or injurious ingredients in
§ 11.82 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.86
1:246
§ 11.87. Permit required for food vending machines.
Before a license is issued for any food vending machine, a permit shall be
secured for such machine as provided in Article 14.
§ 11.88. through § 11.89. (Reserved)
kind and quantities so as to render such article injurious or detrimental
to health.
(B) The Health Officer shall make periodic inspections of all automatic food
vending machines and articles of food purveyed therefrom for the
purpose of determining the purity and wholesomeness of the products
vended, the preparation, wrapping and handling of the same and to see
that all requirements of this Code and the health provisions are met and
complied with, including the operation and use of such machines, to
guard against improper handling, distribution and contamination of
food purveyed thereby.
§ 11.86 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.88
1:247

ARTICLE 6
Bakeries
§ 11.90. Regulations.
See Article 14, Food Dealers.
§ 11.91. through § 11.109. (Reserved)
§ 11.90 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.91
1:249

ARTICLE 7
Barber Shops
§ 11.110. License required.
It shall be unlawful to conduct, or in the business of cutting or trimming
hair, a barber shop in the City without having first secured a license therefor
as is herein required. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing
to the City Clerk.
§ 11.111. Fee.
The annual fee for such licenses shall be based on the square foot area
requirements of § 11.16.
§ 11.112. Sanitary regulations.
Premises used for a barber shop shall be in a clean and sanitary condition
and the employees of such barber shops must keep themselves clean both
as to person and clothing. Utensils and tools must be sterilized before being
used on any patron. It shall be unlawful to keep as an employee in any such
shop any person afflicted with a contagious disease of any kind.
§ 11.113. Inspections.
The Health Officer shall make or cause to be made such inspections as may
be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 11.114. through § 11.119. (Reserved)
§ 11.110 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.114
1:251

ARTICLE 8
Brokers
§ 11.120. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate as a broker (except insurance
or real estate) of any articles, goods, property or tickets without being
licensed therefor as is herein provided; provided that this article shall not
be construed to require an additional broker's license from employees of a
licensed broker.
§ 11.121. Fees.
The annual license fee shall be $50. The licensee shall pay an additional fee
based upon the square footage of the business premises as prescribed by
§ 11.16.
§ 11.122. through § 11.129. (Reserved)
§ 11.120 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.122
1:253

ARTICLE 9
Chauffeurs
§ 11.130. License required; fee.
No person shall drive, operate or control any motor vehicle as a public
taxicab or public passenger vehicle not operating along a fixed route
without first having obtained a license therefor, as is herein provided. The
annual fee shall be $20 for each person.
§ 11.131. Application for license.
Applications for such licenses shall state whether the applicant is licensed
as a chauffeur under the state law, and the name of the employer or
prospective employer of the applicant.
§ 11.132. Character of applicant.
No such license shall be issued to any but a person of good character,
and who is competent to operate a motor vehicle on the streets of the
municipality. The Chief of Police shall make, or cause to be made, an
investigation into the character and ability of the applicant before a license
shall be issued.
§ 11.133. Certification.
Every person so licensed shall be provided with a certificate which shall
contain a number identifying such person, and such person shall display this
certificate in a conspicuous place in the vehicle at all times while operating
a public passenger vehicle.
§ 11.134. Revocation of license.
Any such license may be revoked for the commission of a felony by the
licensee; or for any violation of traffic rules, or driving while intoxicated, or
for any violations of the ordinances relating to taxicabs or chauffeurs.
§ 11.135. through § 11.139. (Reserved)
§ 11.130 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.135
1:255

ARTICLE 10
Cleaners and Dyers
§ 11.140. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLEANING AND DYEING ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any place or
vehicle where the service of dry cleaning, wet cleaning as a process
incidental to dry cleaning, dyeing, spotting, and finishing any fabric is
rendered for hire, or is sold, resold or offered for sale or resale.
CLEANING PLANT — Includes any cleaning and dyeing establishment
equipped to perform dry cleaning.
DRY CLEANING — The process of cleaning fabrics by immersion and
agitation, or by immersion only, in volatile solvents (including, but not by
way of limitation, solvents of petroleum distillate type and the chlorinated
hydrocarbon type) and processes incidental thereto (including, but without
limitation, spotting, cleaning, wet cleaning, and finishing).
FABRIC — Any article of wearing apparel, household furnishings, rugs,
textiles, fur and leather.
FINISHING — The process of pressing and/or reshaping any fabric, which is
designed to restore as nearly as possible the shape, dimensions and contour
of said fabric.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm or corporation, copartnership or
association.
PROPRIETOR — Any person by or for whom a cleaning plant is operated.
RETAIL OUTLETS — Includes any cleaning and dyeing establishment
located within the City where dry cleaning is sold, solicited or offered
for sale, directly to the retail customer. The term "outlet" also includes
any automobile, truck or vehicle operated within the City from which dry
cleaning is sold, solicited, or offered for sale directly to retail consumers.
RETAILER — Any person or member of the cleaning and dyeing trade by or
for whom a retail outlet is operated.
SPOTTING — The process designed to remove spots or stains which remain
in a fabric after it has been subjected to the other processes of dry cleaning.
§ 11.141. Sanitation.84
Every building or premises used or occupied by a cleaning and dyeing
establishment, or retail outlet located within the City or used or occupied
by a cleaning plant not located in the City but which has a retail outlet
in the City shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition as to its floors,
sidewalls, ceilings, woodwork, and fixtures and as to the tools, machinery,
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.140 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.141
1:257
equipment and storage facilities used and kept in any such building or
premises. At regular intervals and at such other times as may be deemed
necessary and as shall be specified by the Departments of Public Health and
Safety, or by any health inspector of this City, the floors, sidewalls, ceilings,
woodwork, and fixtures of any such building and premises and the tools,
machinery, equipment and storage facilities used or kept thereon shall be
washed or sprayed with a disinfectant in solution or other liquid form or
vapor approved by the Departments of Public Health and Safety or by a
health inspector of the City.
§ 11.142. Operating standards.
§ 11.143. Fire hazard.
The Chief of the Fire Department of the Fire District shall have the right to
enter any building or premises situated within the City and used or occupied
by any retail outlet in order to examine same and to determine whether or
not said building and premises, or any material, chemical or compound kept
therein, or used thereon, or any article of fabric dry cleaned, dyed, spotted
or finished as received, used, kept, maintained or stored on said building or
(A) No finished or unfinished dry cleaning sold, solicited or offered for sale
within the City shall show, upon the dry-cleaned fabric being re-rinsed
in water, white solvent (one gallon to one pound of garment weight),
sufficient dirt or soil residue or other foreign deposits sufficient to
darken dry solvent below 15 Saybolt Chromometer.
(B) Finished dry cleaning solicited or offered for sale within the City shall
be free from solvent and chemical odors.
(C) No chemical or other substance which is poisonous, injurious or
unwholesome to human beings and which is not essential to the service
or process of dry cleaning, dyeing, spotting or finishing shall be used in
rendering any such service or performing any such process in any
cleaning plant which is not located within the City but has a retail outlet
within the City.85
(D) In case any such chemical or other substance which is poisonous,
injurious or unwholesome to human beings is used by any such cleaning
and dyeing establishment in rendering any such service or performing
any such process essential thereto, then such chemical or other
substance shall be completely removed from the fabric dry cleaned,
dyed or spotted or finished or such chemical or other substance shall be
completely and entirely neutralized and rendered harmless and
innocuous to human beings before such fabric is permitted to leave
such establishment or plant for delivery to the person entitled to the
possession thereof upon completion of the process.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.141 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.143
1:258
premises conforms to the fire ordinances and regulations of the City, or Fire
District or constitutes a fire hazard within the City.
§ 11.144. Fees.86
§ 11.145. through § 11.159. (Reserved)
(A) At the time of filing an application for a certificate of inspection for any
cleaning and dyeing establishment, or cleaning plant, as above
provided, the applicant shall pay to the City Clerk an annual fee based
on square-foot area as provided in §§ 11.16 and 11.17 of this chapter.
(B) No additional fee shall be charged or paid for the inspection of or
issuance of a certificate of inspection for any retail outlet situated in the
same building or on the same premises as a cleaning and dyeing
establishment or cleaning plant in conjunction with which it is
operated. The fee for any such retail outlet operated in conjunction with
such establishment or plant and not situated in the same building or on
the same premises shall be based on the square-foot area as provided
for in §§ 11.16 and 11.17 of this chapter.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.143 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.145
1:259

ARTICLE 11
Drain Layers and Sewer Builders
§ 11.160. License required.
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of drain layer or sewer
builder in the City without having first secured a license therefor, as is
herein provided. Applications for such license shall conform to the general
provisions of the chapter on licenses.87
§ 11.161. Bond.
Drain layers and sewer builders who are licensed under the provisions of
this article to do business may be required to furnish an annual bond in
the sum of $10,000 by the Council and with sureties to be approved by the
Council, conditioned to indemnify the City and hold it harmless from any
loss, damage, claim or liability arising out of or resulting from the conduct
or operation of such business or with the doings or failure to do any act in
connection therewith.
§ 11.162. Fee.
The annual fee for a drain layer and sewer builder's license shall be $50.
§ 11.163. Compliance with other laws.
It shall be the duty of the person licensed under the provisions of this
article to comply with the ordinance provisions relating to connections with
sewer systems and making excavations in streets, and to secure the permits
required for these operations.88
§ 11.164. through § 11.169. (Reserved)
87.Editor's Note: See Art. 1 of this chapter.
88.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Streets and Sidewalks; and Ch. 16, Combined Waterworks and
Sewerage System.
§ 11.160 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.164
1:261

ARTICLE 12
Filling Stations
§ 11.170. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILLING STATION — Any building, structure, premises, enclosure, or other
place within the City where a container or containers, tank or tanks, either
portable or stationary, containing ether, carbon bisulphite, gasoline, naptha,
benzols, hydrocarbon (gas drips), liquefied petroleum gas, acetone,
kerosene, turpentine or other flammable liquids having a flash point below
165° F. are kept or located for the purpose of selling, offering for sale,
or distributing any such liquids from such container or tank; provided,
however, that the provisions of this article shall not apply to any place
where such flammable liquids are kept or sold for medicinal purposes only.
§ 11.171. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of a filling station without first
having obtained a license therefor.
§ 11.172. Application for license.
An application for such license shall be made upon a form to be prepared
and provided by the City Clerk. Such application shall set forth the name
and address of the owner or operator of the filling station, the location of
the filling station, a description of each container or tank installed or to be
installed upon the premises, and the capacity of each measured in gallons,
the type of construction of each building situated upon the premises and
whether, in addition thereto, he conducts a motor vehicle repair shop as
defined in this Code. Every application shall be referred to the Building
Commissioner and the Fire Chief to determine whether the provisions of
this article and all other applicable articles of the City are being complied
with, and the approval of such officers must appear upon such application
before a license shall be issued.
§ 11.173. Fees.
The annual license fee for each filling station shall be as follows: $8.25 for
each portable wheel tank.
Total Capacity — Gasoline
(in gallons)
Over But Not Over Fee
100
100 400 $2.75
400 1,065 $13.75
§ 11.170 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.173
1:263
Total Capacity — Gasoline
(in gallons)
Over But Not Over Fee
1,065 2,130 $27.50
2,130 3,195 $55.00
3,195 4,260 $87.50
4,260 5,325 $110.00
5,325 6,325 $137.50
6,325 7,000 $154.00
7,000 8,000 $170.50
8,000 9,000 $181.50
9,000 10,000 $192.50
10,000 11,000 $203.50
11,000 12,000 $206.25
12,000 13,000 $209.00
13,000 14,000 $211.75
14,000 15,000 $214.50
15,000 $217.25
plus $1.10 for each
1,000 gallons or
fraction thereof in
excess of 15,000
gallons' capacity
§ 11.174. Location and frontage consents.
(A) No tank, container, pipe or other equipment for the storage and
handling of flammable liquids shall be installed within 200 feet of the
nearest boundary of any lot or plot of ground used for a school, hospital,
church or theater.
(B) No person shall locate, construct or maintain any filling station (except
filling stations in existence and operation at the time of the passage of
this article) in connection with which there is installed any tank for the
storage of flammable liquids, on any lot or plot of ground, without first
obtaining the written consents of the resident property owners,
representing the majority of the total frontage in feet, who reside on
any lot or plot of ground lying a distance of 250 feet in each direction
from such proposed filling station; provided that:
(1) In measuring said minimum distance of 250 feet, such portion of
said distance as lies within the boundaries of any public street shall
be counted twice;
§ 11.173 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.174
1:264
§ 11.175. Transfer of license.
No filling station license granted under the provisions of this Code shall be
assigned or transferred to any person other than the licensee named therein
to do business or act under such license.
§ 11.176. Smoking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit smoking in any filling station
or to smoke in any filling station.
§ 11.177. Flammable liquids.
Gasoline, benzine, naptha and similar flammable liquids shall not be used
for washing or cleaning purposes within any filling station nor in the open
air within a distance of 50 feet of any repair pit or any opening from any
basement space.
§ 11.178. Waste disposal.
Waste oil or other flammable liquids shall be stored in metal containers
pending removal from the premises. No such waste shall be permitted to
drain into any sewers or stormwater drainage system. Rags and soiled
waste shall be kept in metal containers.
§ 11.179. (Reserved)
(2) Lots which abut on a public alley or court shall be considered as
fronting on the street to which such alley or court leads; and
(3) Any and all petitions containing such consents of residents shall be
based on and contain the legal description of the lot or plot of
ground affected, and that for the purpose of this section, whenever
the lot or plot of ground in which such tank is to be installed is in
any shape other than rectangular, the 250 feet limiting line shall
not exceed in distance 250 feet from any point in the boundaries of
such lot or plot of ground.
(C) These provisions shall not be applicable to the installation of a tank or
tanks containing any flammable liquids when such liquids are used
solely for fuel for the purpose of heating the building or other structure
in or in conjunction with which such tank or tanks are installed.
(D) Except as otherwise permitted by this Code, storage of flammable
liquids shall be outside of buildings.
§ 11.174 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.179
1:265

ARTICLE 13
Florists
§ 11.180. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FLORIST — Any building, room, stand, enclosure, premises, place,
establishment or part of establishment in the City of Hometown, operated,
maintained, or conducted for the sale or offering or keeping for sale at
wholesale or retail, alone or with other goods and merchandise, of any
flowers, plants, trees or shrubs, including Christmas trees, of all varieties
and description.
§ 11.181. Fees.
The annual license fee shall be $50. The licensee shall pay an additional fee
based upon the square footage of the business premises as prescribed by
§ 11.16. Itinerant florists shall pay an annual fee of $50.
§ 11.182. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on
the business of florist, despite the fact that they may be licensed for another
business, without first having obtained a license therefor.
§ 11.183. Regulations.
§ 11.184. through § 11.189. (Reserved)
(A) Every establishment where the business of a florist is conducted,
managed or carried on shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
No decayed, decaying, unwholesome, contaminated or diseased
flowers, plants or other things shall be allowed to remain on or about
said establishment and said establishment shall be kept clear of rubbish
and inflammable matter.
(B) Such establishment shall comply with all state laws governing the sale,
possession, growing or disposition of noxious, diseased or infected
plants, trees, or shrubs.
§ 11.180 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.184
1:267

ARTICLE 14
Food Dealers
§ 11.190. Definitions.89
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the
enforcement of this article:
ADULTERATED — The condition of a food if:
ADEQUATE — Acceptable or sufficient as determined by the health
authority.
EMPLOYEE — Any person working in a food-service establishment or retail
food store who transports food or food containers, who engages in food
preparation, packaging, or service, or who comes in contact with any food
utensils or equipment.
EQUIPMENT — All stoves, ranges, hoods, meat blocks, tables, counters,
refrigerators, sinks, dish-washing machines, steam tables, and similar
items, other than utensils, used in the operation of a food-service
establishment or retail food store.
FOOD — Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, beverage, or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption.
FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile restaurant; coffee
shop, cafeteria; short-order cafe; luncheonette; grill; tearoom; sandwich
It bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a
quantity which may render it injurious to health;
(A)
It bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious substance for
which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation, or in excess
of such tolerance if one has been established;
(B)
It contains, in whole or in part, any filthy, putrid, or decomposed
substance, or if it is otherwise unfit for human consumption;
(C)
It has been processed, prepared, packed or held under unsanitary
conditions, whereby it may have become contaminated with filth or
whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health;
(D)
It is in whole or in part the product of a diseased animal, or an animal
which has died otherwise than by slaughter; or
(E)
The containers are composed in whole or in part of any poisonous
or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to
health.
(F)
89.Editor's Note: This section was amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General
Provisions, Art. 2) to repeal the following definitions: approved, authorized representative,
Board of Health, closed, corrosion-resistant material, easily cleanable, food-contact
surfaces, food-processing establishment, mobile food-service establishment, safe
temperatures, sanitizing, sealed, and single-service articles.
§ 11.190 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.190
1:269
shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; nightclub; roadside stand;
industrial-feeding establishment; private, public, or nonprofit organization
or institution routinely serving food; catering kitchen; commissary or
similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on
the premises or elsewhere; and any other eating or drinking establishment
or operation where food is served or provided for the public with or without
charge.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The person or persons who have been designated
by the Aldermen to be the Director of Public Health and Safety or Health
Officer. See Chapter 2, Article 6, Director of Public Health and Safety, of the
City Code.90
KITCHENWARE — All multi-use utensils other than tableware used in the
storage, preparation, conveying, or serving of food.
LAW — Includes state and local statutes, ordinances, and regulations.
MISBRANDED — The presence of any written, printed, or graphic matter,
upon or accompanying food or containers of food, which is false or
misleading, or which violates any applicable state or local labeling
requirements.
PACKAGED — Bottled, canned, cartoned, or securely wrapped.
PERISHABLE FOOD — Any food of such type or in such condition as may
spoil.
PERMANENT FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT OR RETAIL FOOD
STORE — Any food-service establishment or retail food service which
operates at a fixed location for a period of time exceeding 14 days.
PERMIT HOLDER — An individual, a firm, partnership, company,
corporation, trustee, association or public or private entity who or which
is directly or indirectly responsible for the operation of a food-service
establishment or retail store.
PERSON — An individual, or a firm, partnership, company, corporation,
trustee, association, or any public or private entity.
PERSON IN CHARGE — The individual present in a food-service
establishment who is the supervisor of the food-service establishment at the
time.
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD — Any perishable food which consists in
whole or in part of milk or milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish,
or other ingredients capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of
infectious or toxigenic microorganisms.
RETAIL FOOD STORE — Retail grocery meat market, poultry market, fish
market, fresh fruit and vegetable market, confectionery, nut store, retail
bakery, or any other establishment, whether fixed or movable, where food,
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.190 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.190
1:270
intended for human consumption off the premises, is prepared, handled,
transported, sold or offered for sale at retail.
TABLEWARE — All multi-use eating and drinking utensils, including
flatware (knives, forks and spoons).
TEMPORARY FOOD-SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any food-service
establishment which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of
time not to exceed two weeks, in connection with a fair, carnival, circus,
public exhibition, or similar transitory gathering.
TEMPORARY RETAIL FOOD STORE — Any retail food store which operates
at a fixed location for a temporary period of time not to exceed two weeks.
UTENSILS — Any tableware and kitchenware used in the storage,
preparation, conveying or serving of food.
WHOLESOME — In sound condition, clean, free from adulteration, and
otherwise suitable for use as human food.91
§ 11.191. Adoption of state regulations.
In addition to those provisions set forth in this Article 14 and other
ordinances of the City Code of Hometown for food sanitation, the City
hereby adopts by reference the provisions set forth in the State of Illinois
Department of Public Health Rules and Regulations for Food Service
Sanitation,92 and the provisions set forth in the State of Illinois Department
of Public Health Rules and Regulations for Retail Food Store Sanitation,93
and any subsequent amendments or revisions thereto, three certified copies
of each of which shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk. If any
provision of this Chapter 11 is in conflict with said rules and regulations,
the rules and regulations shall prevail.
§ 11.192. Permits and licenses required; hearings; suspensions and
revocations; fees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food-service establishment
or retail food store within the City of Hometown, State of Illinois, who
does not possess a valid permit issued to him by the health authority
and a license issued by the City. Only a person who complies with the
requirements of this ordinance shall be entitled to receive a permit or
license. Permits and licenses shall not be transferable from one person
to another person or place. A valid permit and license shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in every food-service and retail food establishment.
Permits for permanent food-service establishments and retail food stores
shall expire at the end of the license year following the date of issuance.
Permits for temporary food-service establishments and temporary retail
food stores shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed 14 days.
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
92.Editor's Note: See the Food Service Sanitation Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 750.
93.Editor's Note: See the Retail Food Store Sanitation Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 760.
§ 11.190 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.192
1:271
(A) Issuance of permits.
(1) Any person desiring to operate a food-service establishment or
retail food store or to renew an expired permit shall make written
application for a permit on forms provided by the health authority.
Such application shall include the applicant's full name and post
office address and whether such applicant is an individual, firm, or
corporation; and if a partnership, the names of partners, together
with their addresses, shall be included; the location and type of the
proposed food-service establishment or retail food store; and the
signature of the applicant or applicants; if the application is for a
temporary food-service establishment or temporary-retail food
store, it shall also include the inclusive dates of the proposed
operation.
(2) Upon receipt of such an application, the health authority shall
make an inspection of the establishment to determine compliance
with the provisions of this article. When inspection reveals that the
applicable requirements of this article have been met, a permit
shall be issued to the applicant by the health authority.
(B) Issuance of licenses. No person shall operate a food-service
establishment without a license as provided in this article. No license
shall be issued before a permit is secured.
(C) Renewal of permit. Whenever the inspection for renewal of a permit
reveals serious or repeated violations of this article, the permit will not
be issued and the health authority shall notify the applicant
immediately thereof. Such notice shall state the reasons for not
renewing the permit. Such notice shall also state that an opportunity for
a hearing shall be provided for the applicant at a time and place
designated by the health authority. Such hearing shall be scheduled not
later than 10 days from the date of the notice. The notice referred to in
this subsection shall be delivered to the applicant in person by the
health authority or may be sent by registered mail, return receipt
requested. A permit which has expired shall be removed from the
establishment by the health authority.
(D) Suspension of permits.
(1) Permits may be suspended temporarily by the health authority for
failure of the permit holder to comply with the requirements of this
article. Whenever a permit holder or operator has failed to comply
with any notice issued under the provisions of this article, the
permit holder or operator shall be notified in writing that the
permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and
that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written
request for a hearing is filed with the health authority by the permit
holder.
(2) Upon suspension of the permit, the permit shall be removed from
the establishment by the health authority and returned to the
§ 11.192 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.192
1:272
Health Department. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this
article, whenever the health authority finds unsanitary or other
conditions in the operation of a food-service establishment or retail
food store which, in his judgment, constitute a substantial hazard
to the public health, he may, without warning, notice or hearing,
issue a written notice to the permit holder or operator citing such
condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and
specifying the time period within which such action shall be taken
and, if deemed necessary, such order shall state that the permit
is immediately suspended, and all operations as a food-service
establishment or retail food store are to be immediately
discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall
comply immediately therewith but upon written petition to the
health authority shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
(E) Reinstatement of suspended permits. Any person whose permit has
been suspended may at any time make application for a reinspection for
the purpose of reinstatement of the permit. Within 10 days following
receipt of a written request, including a statement signed by the
applicant that in his opinion the conditions causing suspension of the
permit have been corrected, the health authority shall make a
reinspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this
article, its permit shall be reinstated.
(F) Revocation of permits and licenses. For serious or repeated violations of
any of the requirements of this article, or for interference with the
health authority in the performance of his duties, the permit and license
may be permanently revoked by the Mayor after an opportunity for a
hearing has been provided by the health authority. Prior to such action,
the health authority shall notify the permit holder, in writing, stating
the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation and advising
that the permit shall be permanently revoked at the end of five days
following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is filed
with the health authority, by the permit holder, within such five-day
period. If no request for a hearing is filed within the five-day period, the
revocation of the permit and license becomes final.
(G) Hearing on suspension or revocation. The hearings provided for in this
section shall be conducted by the health authority at a time and place
designated by him. Based upon the record of such hearing, the health
authority shall make a finding and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any
official notice or order considered in the hearing.
(H) Application after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a permit or
license has become final, the holder of the revoked permit or license
may make written application for a new permit or license.
(I) Fees. The annual license fee shall be $75. The licensee shall pay an
additional fee based upon the square footage of the business premises
as prescribed by § 11.16. Also, the licensee shall pay a fee to the City
covering the cost of any inspection. Additional fees for vending
§ 11.192 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.192
1:273
§ 11.193. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or do business in the
processing for sale or the sale of food in the City without first having
secured a license therefor.
§ 11.194. Inspection of food-service establishments and retail food
stores.94
At regular intervals, the health authority shall inspect each food-service
establishment and retail food store located in the City of Hometown, State
of Illinois, and shall make as many additional inspections and reinspections
as are necessary for the enforcement of this article.
machines shall be required. There will be no charge made for such
permits to any schools, religious, voluntary, or no-profit-making
community organizations and institutions.
(A) Access to establishment. The health authority, after proper
identification, shall be permitted to enter at any reasonable time any
food-service establishment or retail food store within the City of
Hometown, State of Illinois, for the purpose of making inspections to
determine compliance with this article. He shall be permitted to
examine the records of the establishment to obtain pertinent
information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received, or
used, and persons employed.
(B) Report of inspection. Whenever an inspection of a food-service
establishment or retail food store is made, the findings shall be
recorded on the inspection report forms set out in the rules and
regulations adopted by § 11.191.
(C) Correction of violations. The completed inspection report form shall
specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations
found; and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the
period specified, in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of
refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the
establishment shall immediately cease food-service operations.
Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the regulatory
authority.
(2) All violations of four- or five-point weighted items shall be
corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within 10 days
following inspection. Within 15 days after the inspection, the holder
of the permit or license shall submit a written report to the
regulatory authority stating that the four- or five-point weighted
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.192 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.194
1:274
§ 11.195. Inspection records.
Whenever the health authority makes an inspection, he shall record his
findings on an inspection report provided for this purpose, and shall furnish
a copy of such inspection report form to the permit holder or operator.
The current inspection report shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the
establishment.
§ 11.196. Issuance of notices.
Whenever the health authority makes an inspection of an establishment and
discovers that any of the requirements of this article have been violated,
he shall notify the permit holder or operator of such violations by means of
an inspection report form or other written notice. In such notification the
health authority shall:
violations have been corrected. A follow-up inspection shall be
conducted to confirm correction.
(3) All one- or two-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as
possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine
inspection.
(4) When the rating score of the establishment is less than 60, the
establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified
violations within 48 hours. One or more reinspections will be
conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure correction.
(5) In the case of temporary food-service establishments, all violations
shall be corrected within 24 hours. If violations are not corrected
within 24 hours, the establishment shall immediately cease foodservice
operations until authorized to resume by the regulatory
authority.
(6) The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any
time limits for corrections may result in cessation of food-service
operations. An opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or
the time limitations or both will be provided if a written request is
filed with the regulatory authority within 10 days following
cessation of operations. If a request for hearing is received, a
hearing shall be held within 20 days of receipt of the request.
(7) Whenever a food-service establishment is required under these
provisions to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until
it is shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order
to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection
shall be offered within a reasonable time.
(A) Set forth the specific violations found.
(B) Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of
the violations found.
§ 11.194 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.196
1:275
§ 11.197. Service of notices.
Notices provided for under this article shall be deemed to have been
properly served when a copy of the original of the inspection report form or
other notice has been delivered personally to the permit holder or person
in charge, or such notice has been sent by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of the permit holder.
The original of such notice shall be filed with the records of the health
authority.
§ 11.198. Examination and condemnation of food.95
Food may be examined or sampled by the health authority as often as may
be necessary to determine freedom from adulteration or misbranding. The
health authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge,
place a hold order on any food which he determines or has probable cause
to believe to be unwholesome or otherwise adulterated or misbranded.
Under a hold order, food shall be permitted to be suitably stored. It shall be
unlawful for any person to remove or alter a hold order notice or tag placed
on food by the health authority, and neither such food nor the containers
thereof shall be relabeled, repacked, reprocessed, altered, disposed of, or
destroyed without permission of the health authority, except on order of a
court of competent jurisdiction. After the owner or person in charge has
had a hearing, as provided for in § 11.192, and on the basis of evidence
produced at such hearing, or on the basis of his examination in the event
a written request for a hearing is not received, within 10 days, the health
authority may vacate the hold order, or may by written order direct the
owner or person in charge of the food which was placed under the hold
order to denature or destroy such food, or bring it into compliance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 11.199. Food-service establishments located outside Hometown
doing business in Hometown.96
Food from food-service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the health
authority of the City of Hometown is permitted if such food-service
establishments conform to the provisions of this article or to substantially
(C) State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with
the provisions of this article may result in immediate suspension of the
permit or other prosecution.
(D) State that an opportunity for appeal from any notice or inspection
findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with
the health authority within the period of time established in the notice
of correction.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.196 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.199
1:276
equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of compliance with such
provisions, the health authority may accept reports from responsible
authorities in other jurisdictions where such food-service establishments
are located.
§ 11.200. Plan review of future construction.
When a food-service establishment or retail food store is, hereafter,
constructed or extensively remodeled, or when an existing structure is
converted for use as food-service establishment or retail food store,
properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction,
remodeling, or alteration, showing layout, arrangement, and construction
materials of work areas, and the location, size and type of fixed equipment
and facilities, shall be submitted to the health authority for approval before
such work is begun. Fees may be charged to offset the cost of plan reviews.
§ 11.201. Procedures when infection is suspected.
When the health authority has reasonable cause to suspect possibility of
disease transmission from any food-service establishment or retail food
store employee, the health authority shall secure a morbidity history of the
suspected employee, or make such other investigation as may be indicated,
and take the following measures:
§ 11.202. Conflicts with other regulations; severability.
(A) The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food-service
establishments and retail food stores;
(B) The immediate closure of the establishment concerned until, in the
opinion of the health authority, no further danger of disease outbreak
exists;
(C) Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease;
and
(D) Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee, and of
his or their body discharges.
(A) In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health
ordinance, or code of the City of Hometown existing on the effective
date of this article, the provision which, in the judgment of the health
authority, establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail, in any
case where this article is found to be in conflict with a provision of any
other ordinance or code of the City of Hometown existing on the
effective date of this article which establishes a lower standard for the
protection and promotion of the health and safety of the people, the
provisions of this article shall be deemed to prevail, and such other
§ 11.199 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.202
1:277
§ 11.203. through § 11.209. (Reserved)
ordinance or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent
that they may be found in conflict with this article.
(B) If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
article should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article, which
shall remain in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of
this article are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 11.202 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.203
1:278
ARTICLE 15
Food Deliveries
§ 11.210. License required.
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any vehicle, including wagons
and motor vehicles and vehicles propelled by human power, for the storage
or carrying of any meat, poultry, fish, beverages, fruit juice, beer, wine,
butter, cheese, lard, vegetables, bread or bakery products, or any other
provisions intended for human consumption, excluding milk, in the City for
the purpose of delivering any such foodstuffs to any place in the City for use
and consumption or for resale in the City for such purposes, unless a license
for such vehicles is first secured and the provisions of this article are fully
complied with.
§ 11.211. Application for license; fee.
Application for such licenses shall be made to the City Clerk, and shall
recite the name and address of the owner of the vehicle, the name or names
of the persons from whom such deliveries are made, and the nature of the
goods carried. The City Clerk shall issue such licenses and shall give to the
Health Officer a list of all such licenses issued. The annual fee for each such
vehicle shall be $50.
§ 11.211.1. Exemptions.
No license shall be required for any vehicle used to deliver foodstuffs
from any establishment which is licensed and inspected as a food-dealing
establishment in the City; however, all provisions of this article, other than
that providing for the payment of a fee, shall be complied with in connection
with such vehicles.
§ 11.212. Regulations.
§ 11.213. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to make or cause to be made such
inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions
of this article.
(A) All such vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and
shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they are so used. It shall be
unlawful to permit stale food, decaying matter or any other waste or
material to accumulate in or on any such vehicle while it is so used.
(B) If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any vehicle, such goods shall
be carried in a portion or compartment of the vehicle which is screened
and protected against dust and insects.
§ 11.210 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.214
1:279
§ 11.214. Conflicts with other ordinances.
In case any of the provisions herein conflict with the provisions set forth in
Article 14, Food Dealers, the Illinois Department of Public Health rules and
regulations shall prevail.
§ 11.215. through § 11.219. (Reserved)
§ 11.214 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.215
1:280
ARTICLE 16
Food Dispensers (Retail)
§ 11.220. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD DISPENSER — Any person who keeps for sale, sells, and serves to
the public for consumption on the premises or on the public way contiguous
to said premises, or any mobile vehicle or stand on the premises or public
way, any article of food or drink for human consumption. Restaurants,
coffee houses, lunch rooms, tea rooms, lunch stands, box lunch deliveries,
luncheonettes, cafeterias, and retail drugstores serving counter lunches
and drinks shall be included among food dispensers.
SERVICE — The placing of such food for the convenience of the patron into
any cup, glass, dish, plate, or other receptacle from which the patron may
conveniently consume it.
§ 11.221. License required.
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of a food dispenser without
first obtaining an annual license therefor.
§ 11.222. Application for license; fees.97
Application for such licenses shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be
referred to the Health Officer for such inspections as may be necessary to
see that the provisions of this article are complied with. The annual fee for
such license shall be based on the square foot area requirements of §§ 11.16
and 11.17.
§ 11.223. Employee attire.
(A) All persons or employees dispensing or serving food shall be decently
clothed. Topless or similar type of attire is prohibited.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person, while acting as a waiter, waitress or
entertainer, to:
(1) Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
(2) Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal
cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
(3) Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.220 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.224
1:281
§ 11.224. Revocation of license.98
Any food dispenser's license may be revoked by the Mayor after hearing and
notice to the licensee for repeated violation of the provisions of this article,
or for any violation of any ordinance provisions relating to the conduct of
the business, the condition of the premises, the articles sold or to the license
required.
§ 11.225. through § 11.229. (Reserved)
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.224 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.225
1:282
ARTICLE 17
Fuel Deliveries
§ 11.230. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deliver coal, wood,
petroleum products, fuels, or any other type of gasoline or fuels within the
City without first having obtained a license as herein provided.
§ 11.231. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FUEL DELIVERIES — The delivery to any home, apartment building or
store within the City of petroleum fuels or products of any nature for
immediate use or consumption on the premises. Deliveries of the same for
resale by established businesses or service stations are hereby excluded.
§ 11.232. through § 11.240. (Reserved)
§ 11.230 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.232
1:283

ARTICLE 18
Hardware Stores
§ 11.241. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAIL HARDWARE STORE — Any building, room, enclosure, premises,
place, establishment, or part of an establishment in the City, operated,
maintained, or conducted for the sale or offering for sale at retail of any of
the following articles: hardware, tinware, household appliances, aluminum
ware, enamel ware, jewelry, cutlery, tools, implements, apparatus,
machinery, plumbing, engineers', janitors', blacksmiths', contractors', or
electrical supplies, gas, plumbing or electrical fixtures, other articles or
wares made largely of metals, kerosene, and loaded shot shells or
cartridges where not more than 25,000 are kept on hand at one time;
provided, however, that dealers or establishments or parts of
establishments of a similar nature specifically defined and licensed by other
parts of this Code shall be exempt from the provisions licensing retail
hardware stores.
§ 11.242. License required; application; investigation.
§ 11.243. Fees.
The annual license fee shall be $50. The licensee shall pay an additional fee
based upon the square footage of the business premises as prescribed by
§ 11.16.
(A) No person shall engage in the business of a retail hardware store
without first having obtained a license therefor.
(B) An application for a retail hardware store license shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this Code relating to
application for licenses.99 The applicant shall also describe the
premises to be licensed and state the location of the same.
(C) The Building Commissioner and Health Officer shall cause an
investigation to be made of the premises named and described in the
application for a license to conduct a retail hardware store, for the
purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of said premises for
such business from a sanitary standpoint, and determining whether or
not the premises comply with all the provisions of this Code and laws of
the state regulating health, safety, and sanitation so as to safeguard
properly the lives and health of the employees engaged therein. The
Fire Chief shall investigate said premises to determine whether the fire
regulations of this Code applicable thereto have been complied with.
99.Editor's Note: See Art. 1 of this chapter.
§ 11.241 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.244
1:285
§ 11.244. Retail paint store.
Every licensed retail hardware store shall have the privilege of engaging
in the business of a retail paint store within the same building, room,
enclosure, premises, place, establishment, or part of an establishment
without the necessity of obtaining an additional license.
§ 11.245. through § 11.249. (Reserved)
§ 11.244 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.245
1:286
ARTICLE 19
House Movers
§ 11.250. License required.
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of house moving, raising or
shoring without first having obtained a license therefor. Application for such
license shall be made in writing to the City Clerk.
§ 11.251. Fee.
The annual fee for such license shall be $100.
§ 11.252. Regulations.
Persons licensed under this article must comply with all of the ordinance
provisions relating to the work being done, and must pay the permit fee
required for moving buildings, and must maintain lights and warnings as
required by ordinance.
§ 11.253. Bond.100
Every licensee under the provisions of this article shall file with the City
Clerk a bond in an amount set by the City Council, conditioned to indemnify
the City for any loss, damage or expense occasioned by any act or failure
to act of the licensee, or by any failure of the licensee to comply with the
ordinance of the City relating to the business of house-moving or moving
houses.
§ 11.254. Planking street.
The pavement of any street, curb, alley or sidewalk on or along which any
house is moved shall be protected by two-inch planks along the route.
§ 11.255. through § 11.259. (Reserved)
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.250 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.255
1:287

ARTICLE 20
Ice Cream and Food Vendors
§ 11.260. License required.
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of the manufacture for
wholesale or retail distribution of candy, ice cream, or other confections
and foods in the City without having first obtained a license therefor as is
herein provided. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the City
Clerk and shall conform to the general provisions relating to applications
for licenses.101
§ 11.261. Fees.
The annual fee shall be $35. The licensee shall pay an additional fee based
upon the square footage of the business premises as prescribed by § 11.16.
§ 11.262. Dispensing on streets.
(A) The custom among merchants dealing in ice cream, ices, soda waters,
other soft drinks, hot dogs, hamburgers, hot tamales, and similar
unpackaged foods, of delivering their merchandise at the curb, in the
street, or upon the sidewalks or roadways in paper cups, plates, or
other containers other than in a sealed packaged carton has become a
nuisance and a menace to pedestrians traveling upon the roadway by
reason of the depositing of such cups, plates or other containers on the
sidewalks and streets, and the delivery of such commodities in
containers upon the public streets, except in a sealed packaged
container, anywhere on the streets is hereby declared to be a nuisance
and menace.
(B) No person dealing at retail in ice creams, soda waters and other soft
drinks, hot dogs, hamburgers, hot tamales, or merchandise of like
character shall deliver the same upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, or
other public ways of this City.
(C) No person shall litter, throw or drop such cup, plate or container upon a
sidewalk, crosswalk, roadway, or any part of any public street, and such
act is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful.
(D) The sale or disposition by any person of food, beverage, dairy products,
ice cream or any of its kindred products in paper, cardboard or other
containers, other than in a sealed packaged container, known by such
person to be intended to be consumed by the buyer on the sidewalks,
alleys, or at or near the place of business where such food or beverage
is sold or dispensed, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a danger
to the health and sanitation of the community.
101. Editor's Note: See Art. 1 of this chapter.
§ 11.260 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.262
1:289
(E) No food dealer shall deliver any such goods to a person known to be a
runner or person employed to carry such goods from the place of
business to persons on the sidewalk, curb or street, and no such runner
shall deliver any such merchandise on the streets, sidewalks or alleys of
the City.
(F) Any dealer in ice cream, ices, soda water or other soft drinks, hot dogs,
hamburgers, hot tamales and similar packaged food, or merchandise of
like character who shall violate any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to having his
license as such dealer revoked by the Mayor, and any person littering,
throwing, or dropping such cup, plate or container on the street, and
any person acting as a runner as herein prohibited, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(G) A person receiving an ice cream or food vendor's license under this
article to peddle upon the roadways or streets shall comply with the
following conditions: [Amended 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 10-2002]
(1) The person shall comply with all health and other regulations.
(2) Any manually operated chimes or amplification device used in
conjunction with the vendor's operation shall not be in operation
while the vendor's vehicle is stopped. No sound, amplified or
otherwise, emanating from the vendor's vehicle shall become
unduly loud or intolerable to a reasonable person. No sound shall
be greater than 67 decibels at the source of the sound based upon a
calibrated sound level meter in accordance with the standards
prescribed by the American Standards Association.
(3) The food being vended shall be in a sealed packaged container. All
sales and delivery of wares shall be made and consummated by the
vendor on the street and outside the vehicle. Sales from any part of
or out of the vehicle, except as herein provided, are prohibited. The
practice of selling minor quantities of food from bulk is prohibited.
(4) The applicant, or any person employed by it in the sale of such food
upon the streets, shall comply with the requirements of Article 30,
Peddlers, of this chapter, for peddlers before engaging in the
activity of vending upon the streets.
(5) Vending is prohibited between 8:30 p.m. and the hour of 11:00 a.m.
the following morning, prevailing time.
(6) The license fee of such person or vehicle shall be designated as a
street vendor and the annual fee shall be $35. Each vehicle shall be
separately licensed.
§ 11.262 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.263
1:290
§ 11.263. Conflict with other ordinances.
In case any of the provisions herein conflict with the provisions set forth in
Article 14, Food Dealers, the Illinois Department of Public Health rules and
regulations shall prevail.
§ 11.264. through § 11.269. (Reserved)
§ 11.263 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.264
1:291

ARTICLE 21
Ice Dealers
§ 11.270. License required.
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of the retail sale of ice in the
City without having first obtained a license therefor.
§ 11.271. Application for license.
§ 11.272. Standards.
§ 11.273. Fee.
The annual fee for such ice dealer's license shall be $50 for each vehicle or
vending machine used in conveying ice for purposes of sale.
§ 11.274. through § 11.279. (Reserved)
(A) Applications for such license shall contain the number of vehicles and/
or the size and location of coin-operated or attended stands to be used
for the delivery of ice in the City, together with the other information
required in such application.
(B) Whenever the number of vehicles and/or coin-operated or attended
stands is increased, notice of this fact shall be given to the City Clerk
and the fee provided herein shall be paid.
(A) All ice sold or offered for sale in the City shall be free from harmful
materials, if such ice is sold or offered for sale for domestic use.
(B) Each vehicle used for the delivery of ice shall be equipped with an
accurate scale for the weighing of ice as delivered.
§ 11.270 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.274
1:293

ARTICLE 22
Itinerant Merchants
§ 11.280. License required; definition.
§ 11.281. Identification badge; term.
Upon the issuance of a license after application, the licensee may be
required to wear a badge identifying himself or his business. The City Clerk
shall forward a copy of the license to the Police Department when issued. In
no case shall an application be valid for a period in excess of six months.
§ 11.282. (Reserved)103
§ 11.283. Yard sales. [Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2014]
(A) It shall be unlawful to do business in the City as an itinerant merchant
without having first secured a license as herein provided.102
(B) An itinerant merchant shall be any person, firm or corporation traveling
from house to house or from place to place within the City of Hometown
and offering merchandise for sale or who, from a place or residence in
Hometown, communicates by telephone, letter or circular to other
places in Hometown or elsewhere and offers merchandise for sale or
who, at any place in Hometown other than his place of business (which
place of business is hereby defined as one who rents a store loft,
warehouse, yard, storeroom, or office space in Hometown by the year,
or part of a year), offers for sale merchandise which is ultimately
delivered to the consumer at his place of business or residence.
(A) For purposes of this section, "yard sales" shall mean and include all
general sales, open to the public, for the purpose of disposing of
personal property owned, utilized, or maintained by an individual or
members of his or her residence and acquired in the normal course of
living in or maintaining a residence.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a yard sale,
except on the following conditions:
(1) No yard sale may be conducted without first obtaining a permit
from the City Clerk. The permit fee shall be $5. Additionally, the
property owner shall post a cash bond of $25 to guarantee
compliance with the provisions of this section and the return of the
yard sale permit by the property owner to the City Clerk at the
conclusion of the yard sale. The cash bond will be forfeited in the
event of noncompliance. The yard sale permit must be obtained at
least seven days prior to the event.
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
103. Editor's Note: Former § 11.282, Fees, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30,
General Provisions, Art. 2). See the fees listed in § 11.17 of this chapter.
§ 11.280 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.283
1:295
§ 11.284. through § 11.289. (Reserved)
(2) A property owner is limited to one yard sale per calendar year. Yard
sales are restricted to the hours of 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. on
Fridays and Saturdays. "Early bird specials" or sales otherwise
outside the restricted hours are strictly prohibited. A yard sale may
be held on consecutive days (Friday and Saturday) during the
foregoing hours.
(3) All personal property being offered for sale at the yard sale shall be
removed from display in the yard by 6:00 p.m. on each date of the
yard sale.
(4) Yard sales are only permitted between the first Friday in the month
of April through the first Saturday in the month of October. If rain
or inclement weather results in the cancellation of the yard sale,
the resident must renew the permit application for a future date, at
no additional charge, within seven days of the cancellation.
(5) All yard sales shall be confined to the property owner's front yard.
No yard sale activities shall be conducted in the garage, rear yard
or driveway. No public sidewalk, parkway, or street shall be
obstructed or used for the sale or display of goods. The property
owner is required to cordon off the property line between the
duplexes and the driveway side of the yard. However, if the
property owner is conducting a yard sale simultaneously with his
duplex neighbor or driveway neighbor, there is no requirement that
the neighbor's property be cordoned off.
(6) Only personal property owned, utilized or maintained in the normal
course of living or maintained in the residence shall be offered for
sale at the yard sale. Personal property purchased for resale may
not be offered for sale.
(7) Two adjoining buildings (four addresses) may join in requesting a
driveway permit. While only one permit is required, the permit will
operate as a permit issued to each property owner participating in
the yard sale.
(8) Signs advertising the yard sale must be no more than four square
feet in area and located on private property with the consent of the
property owner. No sign shall be attached to utility poles or
otherwise posted in the public right-of-way.
(9) The yard sale permit must be displayed so that it is capable of being
observed from the street.
(10) The City reserves the right to summarily close the yard sale for
violations of this section.
§ 11.283 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.284
1:296
ARTICLE 23
Junk Dealers
§ 11.290. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, or offer to buy, barter or
exchange, or collect any junk, newspapers, rags, paper or bagging, old
metal, empty bottles, cans, slush, lead, or discarded or abandoned material
while traveling from place to place in, along, or upon the streets or alleys
of this City without first having obtained a license therefor as hereinafter
provided. The practice of buying, offering to buy, bartering, exchanging, or
collecting junk and so forth as stated herein shall be defined as "junking."
§ 11.291. Application for license; fees.
§ 11.292. Stolen goods.
Every junk dealer, or person collecting junk, who shall receive or be in
possession of any goods, article, or thing of value which may have been lost
or stolen shall, upon demand, produce such article or things to any member
of the Police Department for examination.
§ 11.293. Vehicles.
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear
thereon in legible characters the name and address of the owner thereof.
§ 11.294. Hours of operation.
Junking referred to in § 11.290 shall be permitted only by licensed junk
dealers on the evenings before the regular scheduled pickup by a licensed
scavenger doing business in the City, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
11:00 p.m., and on the day of the pickup, between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 11:00 a.m.
§ 11.295. through § 11.299. (Reserved)
(A) Applications for such licenses shall be made in conformance with the
provisions of the article relating to application for licenses.104 Such
persons shall be licensed as "junk dealers."
(B) The fee to be paid for such license shall be $75 per year, charitable
institutions excepted. Additionally, a solicitor's license fee of $20 shall
also be remitted.
104. Editor's Note: See Art. 1 of this chapter.
§ 11.290 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.295
1:297

ARTICLE 24
Laundries
§ 11.300. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LAUNDRY — Includes self-service-type laundromats, or a place, building,
room or establishment which is used for the business of washing,
laundering, towel or linen supply laundry.
§ 11.301. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate or conduct a laundry in the City
without having obtained a license therefor; provided that establishments
licensed as dry-cleaning establishments need not obtain a laundry license in
addition to the dry-cleaning license, nor shall places licensed as a laundry
be required to obtain a dry-cleaning license it there are located at a
laundromat automatic dry-cleaning machines. Applications for such licenses
shall be made in writing to the City Clerk and shall state thereon the
location intended to be occupied.
§ 11.302. Fees.
The annual fee for laundry licenses shall be $50. The licensee shall pay an
additional fee based upon the square footage of the business premises as
prescribed by § 11.16.
§ 11.303. Sanitation.
Premises used for laundries must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
No refuse of any kind shall be permitted to accumulate on such premises;
and the premises must be kept free from rats, mice, and vermin. It shall be
unlawful to employ any person afflicted with a venereal or any contagious
disease in a laundry.
§ 11.304. through § 11.309. (Reserved)
§ 11.300 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.304
1:299

ARTICLE 25
Laundry Vehicles
§ 11.310. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LAUNDRY VEHICLE — Any wagon, automobile, or other vehicle used for
the purpose of collecting or delivering laundry within the City limits.
§ 11.311. License required; application; investigations.
§ 11.312. Fee.
The annual license fee for such laundry vehicle shall be $50.
§ 11.313. Name of laundry on vehicle.
No vehicle of any kind shall be used for the purpose of collecting or
delivering laundry work, unless said vehicle shall carry upon two sides of
the same, in plain legible letters, at least 1 1/2 inches high, the name of the
laundry where the laundry work is actually done.
§ 11.314. Sanitary requirements.
(A) No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, on any of the public
ways of the City, any laundry vehicle without first having obtained a
license for the same.
(B) An application for said license shall be made in conformity with the
general requirements of this Code relating to applications for
licenses.105 In addition, the applicant shall state the character of the
vehicle which the license is applied for, as well as its make, model,
serial number and year of manufacture.106
(C) The Health Officer shall cause such investigation to be made as is
necessary for the purpose of determining whether such laundry vehicle
complies with the sanitary and health regulations of the City applicable
thereto.
(A) All vehicles used for the transportation of laundry shall at all times be
kept in a clean and sanitary condition and be properly equipped with
means to separate the laundered from the unlaundered fabrics. Every
such vehicle shall have separate containers for bedding, linen, and
wearing apparel which may be taken from places where quarantine has
been established or where persons are convalescing after a disease.
105. Editor's Note: See Art. 1 of this chapter.
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.310 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.314
1:301
§ 11.315. through § 11.319. (Reserved)
(B) Such vehicles shall be inspected under the direction of the Health
Officer as often and at such times as the Health Officer may deem
necessary or proper in order to keep them in a proper sanitary
condition, and inspectors shall make reports in writing to said Health
Officer of any violation of the general sanitary and health regulations of
the City in the operation of such vehicles or of any unsanitary or
unclean conditions with respect to the transportation or delivery of
laundered and unlaundered fabrics as may come to their attention.107
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.314 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.315
1:302
ARTICLE 26
(Reserved)108
§ 11.320. through § 11.329. (Reserved)
108. Editor's Note: Former Art. 26, Milk, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30,
General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 11.320 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.320
1:303

ARTICLE 27
Motor Vehicle Repair Shops
§ 11.330. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP — Any building, structure, premises,
enclosure, or other place where the business of doing repair work on or for
motor vehicles or any of the component parts thereof, the replacing of or
the adding of parts thereto, or the polishing, washing, greasing, painting or
refinishing of such vehicles is carried on.
§ 11.331. License required; application.
§ 11.332. Fees.
The annual fee shall be $50. The licensee shall pay an additional lee based
upon the square footage of the business premises as prescribed by § 11.16.
§ 11.333. Location and frontage consents.
(A) No person shall engage in the business of a motor vehicle repair shop
without first having obtained a license therefor.
(B) An application for said license shall be made in conformity with the
general requirements of this Code relating to applications lor
licenses.109 The applicant shall also specify the number of persons to be
engaged therein.
(A) No motor vehicle repair shop shall be conducted or operated within 200
feet of any building used as a hospital, church, or public or parochial
school, or the grounds thereof.
(B) No person shall construct, conduct or operate any motor vehicle repair
shop in the City on any lot in any block in which 2/3 of the buildings on
both sides of the street are used exclusively for residence purposes, or
within 100 feet of any such street in any such block without the written
consent of a majority of the property owners according to frontage on
both sides of the street; provided that all lots which abut only on a
public alley or court shall be considered as fronting on the street to
which such alley or court leads. Such written consents shall be obtained
and filed with the Building Commissioner before a license is issued for
the operation of any motor vehicle repair shop; in any existing building,
in determining whether 2/3 of the buildings on both sides of such street
are used exclusively for residence purposes, any building fronting upon
another street and located upon a corner lot shall not be considered.
The word "block," as used in this section, shall be held not to mean a
109. Editor's Note: See Art. 1 of this chapter.
§ 11.330 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.333
1:305
§ 11.334. Rental batteries.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
§ 11.335. Storage of vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to store or park damaged vehicles or junked vehicles in
any open lot or premises open to the public view.
§ 11.336. through § 11.339. (Reserved)
square, but shall be held to embrace only that part of the street in
question which lies between the two nearest intersecting streets.
(A) To retain in his possession for a period longer than 10 days, without the
written consent of the owner, any electric storage battery upon which
the word "rental" or any other word, mark, or character is printed,
painted, or stamped, or to which any such word, mark, or character is
attached for the purpose of identifying said electric storage battery as
belonging to or being the property of any person.
(B) To recharge, without the consent of the owner, except in cases of
emergency, any such rental battery.
(C) To sell, dispose of, deliver, or give, or attempt to sell, dispose of, deliver,
or give to any person other than the owner thereof any such rental
battery.
§ 11.333 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.336
1:306
ARTICLE 28
Paint Stores
§ 11.340. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAIL PAINT STORE — Any building, room, enclosure, premises, place,
establishment or part of an establishment in the City operated or conducted
for the sale or offering for sale at retail of any paints, dry colors, wallpaper,
varnishes, calcimine, white or red lead, raw or boiled linseed oil, turpentine,
dryer, benzine, naptha, painter's tools, supplies and equipment, and
provided that dealers or establishments or parts of establishments of a
similar nature specifically defined and licensed by other provisions of this
Code shall be exempt from the provisions of that part of this chapter dealing
with paint stores.
§ 11.341. License required; inspection of premises.
No person shall engage in the business of a retail paint store without
first having obtained a license. The applicant's premises shall be inspected
by the Building Commissioner and an inspector from the Hometown Fire
Protection District before a license is issued.
§ 11.342. Fees.
The annual fee shall be $50. The licensee shall pay an additional fee based
upon the square footage of the business premises as prescribed by § 11.16.
§ 11.343. through § 11.349. (Reserved)
§ 11.340 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.343
1:307

ARTICLE 29
Parking Lots
§ 11.350. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING LOT — Includes any premises, enclosures or other places (other
than a licensed public garage) where four or more automobiles may be
stored or parked and where rent is paid or compensation is paid to the
owner, manager or lessee of such premises for the storing or parking of
such vehicles.
§ 11.351. License required.
It shall be unlawful to operate a parking lot in the City without having first
obtained a license.
§ 11.352. Fees.
The annual fee for such licenses shall be $50. The licensee shall pay an
additional fee based upon the square footage of the business premises as
prescribed by § 11.16.
§ 11.353. Prohibited uses.
§ 11.354. through § 11.359. (Reserved)
(A) It shall be unlawful to park or store, in any parking lot, any vehicle
which is not in condition ready for use, or to permit the parking of any
abandoned, junked or partially dismantled vehicle in any such lot.
(B) It shall be unlawful to use any parking lot for storage or parking of any
vehicle for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to use any parking lot
or portion thereof as an automobile repair shop.
(C) No person operating a parking lot shall invite or permit any person to
drive into such lot over any sidewalk, curb, or parkway at any place
other than a permanent driveway, or in any way in violation of any
ordinance. Vehicles driving into or out of such parking lot shall be
driven with due respect to traffic conditions and in accordance with
police regulations.
§ 11.350 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.354
1:309

ARTICLE 30
Peddlers
§ 11.360. Definition and classification.
§ 11.361. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of peddler of any merchandise, article or thing without having first
obtained a license therefor.
§ 11.362. Fees.
The annual fee for a license shall include the solicitor's license fee of $20
and $35 for each vehicle. If no vehicle is used, the fee shall be $20 per
employee in addition to the solicitor's license fee.
§ 11.363. Restrictions.
There shall be no peddling on Sundays.
§ 11.364. through § 11.369. (Reserved)
(A) The term "peddler," as used in this article, shall be construed to mean
any individual who, by going from place to place, shall sell, offer for
sale, sell and deliver, barter or exchange any goods, wares,
merchandise or country produce, fruits or vegetables from a vehicle or
otherwise.
(B) Classification of peddlers.
(1) Wagon or cart peddler: peddlers selling from wagons, pushcarts
and handcarts.
(2) Pack or basket peddlers: peddlers selling and delivering only from
packs or baskets or similar containers.
§ 11.360 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.364
1:311

ARTICLE 31
Solicitors
§ 11.370. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise:
SOLICITATION and SOLICIT — Includes all activities ordinarily performed
by a solicitor as defined in this article.
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes upon the premises of any private
residence or commercial enterprise in the City, not having been invited by
the occupant thereof, for the purpose of taking or attempting to take orders
for the sale of goods, services, merchandise, wares, insurance policies,
subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals or other personal property
of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the
future. This definition includes any person who, without invitation, goes
upon private property to request the contribution of funds or anything of
value, or to sell goods or services for political, charitable, religious, not-forprofit,
or other similar noncommercial purposes.
§ 11.371. Occupant to determine access to premises.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City that the occupant of
the residence or commercial enterprise shall make the determination of
whether solicitors shall be invited to their residence or commercial
enterprise.
§ 11.372. Prohibition on solicitation.
§ 11.373. Conduct.
(A) Any person not wishing to be solicited shall give notice of this
determination to solicitors by displaying in the following manner a
weatherproof card, approximately two inches by four inches in size,
upon or near the main entry door to the premises containing the
language, or similar language, as follows:
NO SOLICITORS INVITED
(B) The letters shall be at least 1/3 inch in height. For purposes of
uniformity, the cards shall be provided by the City Clerk to persons
requesting the same.
(C) Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor
of the determination by the occupant of the premises of his desire not to
be solicited.
(A) It shall be the duty of every solicitor in the City to first examine for the
notice provided in § 11.372 and be governed by the statement
contained in the notice. If the notices states "no solicitors invited," or
§ 11.370 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.373
1:313
§ 11.374. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a trespass and a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell, knock upon any door,
or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention
of the occupant if the premises displays the notice provided for in § 11.372.
§ 11.375. Operating hours.
It shall be unlawful to engage in the act of soliciting prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m., or at any time on a Sunday, state or national holiday.
§ 11.376. Soliciting on certain places prohibited.110
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on a public parkway, on
corners adjacent to a public roadway, or on any part of a roadway, whether
dedicated as a street or easement. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
solicitation for charitable organizations registered with the Attorney
General pursuant to the provisions of 225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq. shall be
allowed on road dividers and safety islands so long as it does not disrupt
the orderly flow of traffic or interfere with the operation of traffic control
devices.
§ 11.377. Permit required.111
Every solicitor, itinerant vendor, itinerant dealer in secondhand clothes,
canvasser and helper of a solicitor, itinerant vendor, itinerant dealer in
secondhand clothes, or canvasser shall apply for a solicitation permit with
the City Clerk prior to engaging in the activity of soliciting in the City.
§ 11.378. Application for permit; denial or revocation.
similar language, then the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully
depart from the premises.
(B) Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited
or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
(A) Each applicant for a solicitation permit shall provide the following
information to the City Clerk on letterhead stationery indicating the
name, officers, telephone number, and address of the organization or
business:
(1) The dates, hours and location for which the right to solicit is
desired;
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.373 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.378
1:314
§ 11.379. Identification badges.
All solicitors, after receiving the proper permit, shall wear in a conspicuous
place on their outer garment an identification card displaying their picture
(at least one inch by one inch), the name of the solicitor and the name
and address of the person or organization receiving the solicitation permit.
Notwithstanding the display of the required identification badge, no person
shall engage in the activity of solicitation unless his name was submitted to
the City Clerk's office pursuant to § 11.378(A)(2).
§ 11.380. Fee exemptions.112
Although a solicitation permit is required, no fee shall be charged to any
charitable, veteran's, civic, cultural, political, fraternal, social service or
similar not-for-profit organization.
§ 11.381. through § 11.389. (Reserved)
(2) The names, addresses, dates of birth and social security numbers of
all persons who will be soliciting;
(3) The names of at least three municipalities in which the organization
has solicited;
(4) A brief description of the activity to be conducted; and
(5) A copy of the proposed identification badge required to worn by
each solicitor as required by § 11.379.
(B) The City Clerk's office shall forward a copy of the permit application to
the City of Hometown Police Department upon its receipt of the same.
(C) The City reserves the right to revoke or deny any solicitation permit for
fraud or misrepresentations in the permit application process, for
conducting its solicitation activities in such a manner as to create a
breach of the peace, or for repeated violations of § 11.372 by individual
solicitors. Notice, the nature of the allegations in writing and a hearing
before the Mayor or City Council are required before any solicitation
permit is revoked or denied.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.378 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.381
1:315

ARTICLE 32
Photographers
§ 11.390. License required; definition.
§ 11.391. Fees.
The annual license fee for a photography studio shall be $50 plus an
additional fee based upon the square footage of the business premises as
prescribed by § 11.16. An itinerant photographer shall pay a fee of $50, plus
an additional $20 for a solicitor's license.
§ 11.392. Safety requirements.
The licensee shall ensure that all chemicals and flash powders are properly
secured and otherwise stored so as to prevent any fire hazard. All
photography studios shall be kept in a sanitary condition.
§ 11.393. through § 11.400. (Reserved)
(A) No person, firm or entity shall engage in the business of photography or
act as a photographer without a proper license.
(B) As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PHOTOGRAPHER — Any person operating, managing, or maintaining
a photographic studio, a postcard studio, tin-type or ferrotype studio, a
bromide enlarging plant, an amateur finishing or developing plant, or
a portrait copying house, or engaging in the business of photography,
including commercial, portrait, and home portrait photograph, or the
business of a lantern slide maker, or of an itinerant or transient
photographer, or the business of photography for any purpose
whatsoever.
§ 11.390 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.393
1:317

ARTICLE 33
Public Garages
§ 11.401. License required.
No person, firm or entity shall operate a public garage without having first
obtained a license.
§ 11.402. Fees.
The annual license fee shall be $50. The licensee shall pay an additional fee
based upon the square footage of the business premises as prescribed by
§ 11.16.
§ 11.403. Junk and abandoned vehicles.
The storage of junk, abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles is strictly
prohibited. All public garages must be maintained free of debris and
otherwise in conformance with the relevant provisions of the Municipal
Code.
§ 11.404. through § 11.409. (Reserved)
§ 11.401 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.404
1:319

ARTICLE 34
Scavengers
§ 11.410. License required; definition; operating restrictions.
§ 11.411. Fee.
The annual license fee for scavengers is $200.
§ 11.412. Vehicles.
All vehicles used by any scavenger shall be watertight, equipped with
airtight covers and shall otherwise be operated so as not to create a
nuisance.
§ 11.413. Franchise agreement required. [Added 5-4-2004 by Ord.
No. 7-2004]
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect garbage, landscape waste or
recyclables from a single-family or two-family residential structure except
pursuant to a current scavenger franchise agreement with the City.
§ 11.414. through § 11.419. (Reserved)
(A) No person, firm or entity shall engage in the scavenger business
without first obtaining a license.
(B) For purposes of this article, the term "scavenger" shall include any
business which collects or disposes for final disposition garbage, refuse,
and ashes as those terms are defined in Section 11-19-2 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-19-2).
(C) No person, firm or entity shall be allowed to engage in the operation of
storing any garbage, refuse or ashes unless incidental to the operation
of a lawful business (other than a scavenger business) or incidental to a
residential use of property. The City Council may limit the number of
scavenger licenses issued. No person, firm or entity shall be allowed to
operate a waste transfer station in the City.
§ 11.410 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.414
1:321

ARTICLE 35
Taxicabs
§ 11.420. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct the business of hackman,
cabman or of operating a public passenger vehicle for hire, other than
a bus line operating on a fixed route, without having first obtained a
license therefor, as herein provided, and every person, firm or corporation
conducting such business shall conform to the provisions herein contained.
§ 11.421. Application for license; fee.
Application for a license to conduct such business shall be made to the City
Clerk, and shall specify the number of vehicles owned and operated by the
applicant. A fee of $20 for each vehicle shall accompany the application, and
no license shall be issued without the payment of this fee.
§ 11.422. Cab stands.
No vehicle of any kind shall stand upon, be parked upon, or make use of any
public taxi or hack stand in the City unless the owner thereof has obtained a
license as provided for in the preceding section, and the driver thereof has
a chauffeur's license as provided for in this chapter.
§ 11.423. Bond required; age of applicant.
§ 11.424. City Clerk register.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep a register of the names of
persons to whom such license is granted, or transferred, the date when
issued or transferred, the number of the license and the description of the
vehicle licensed.
§ 11.425. Name on vehicle.
Every vehicle licensed as aforesaid shall bear on the outside thereof, in a
conspicuous place, the name of the owner thereof in letters not less than
two inches in height, which letters shall be of a color in contrast to the color
of the vehicle, and shall be properly proportioned and legible.
§ 11.426. Rates of fare.
(A) No license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation unless the
applicant has secured the bond required by statute.
(B) No such vehicle license shall be issued to any person under 18 years of
age.
(A) The prices or rates of fare to be asked or demanded by the operator or
owner of any such vehicle shall be stated in the application for license
§ 11.420 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.426
1:323
§ 11.427. Receipts.
Upon the request of any passenger, the driver of such vehicle shall give the
person so requesting a receipt for the amount of the fare demanded and
paid.
§ 11.428. Penalty for overcharge.
The owner or driver of any such vehicle, licensed as aforesaid, who may
have demanded and received any fare in excess of what is provided for in
this article shall return the excess received, and, in addition, be liable to a
penalty and his license may be revoked.
§ 11.429. Advance payment.
Every such owner or driver shall have the right to demand in advance his
fare or the person or person so employing him or entering his vehicle, and
may refuse to convey any person who shall not comply with said demand.
§ 11.430. Refusal to carry passenger.113
Except as permitted by § 11.429, no owner or driver of any vehicle, licensed
as aforesaid, shall refuse to convey in said City any person with or without
baggage as aforesaid, when applied to for that purpose; or, having
undertaken to convey such person, shall omit or neglect to do so, under
penalty.
§ 11.431. through § 11.439. (Reserved)
and shall be subject to review by the City Clerk and the Department of
Public Safety before issuance or reissuance.
(B) There shall be affixed on the inside of each vehicle in a conspicuous
place and in such a manner as to be easily read by any person riding in
such a vehicle, a card upon which shall be printed in plain, legible type
the rates of fare provided for in this article.
(C) Any passenger shall be allowed to have conveyed upon any of the
vehicles aforesaid, without charge, his ordinary traveling baggage;
provided that ordinary hand baggage shall not be construed to mean
trunks or sample cases.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.426 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.431
1:324
ARTICLE 36
Tobacco Dealers
§ 11.440. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT — A product or device not consisting
of or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of
nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling,
snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. "Alternative nicotine product"
excludes cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products as these
terms are defined in 720 ILCS 675/1 and any product approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration as a non-tobacco product for
sale as a tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence product, or
for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that
approved purpose.114
TOBACCO PRODUCTS — Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco
or dipping tobacco.
VENDING MACHINE — Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses tobacco products.
§ 11.441. Licenses required; fees.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail tobacco products without
having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license therefor pursuant to this
chapter. The annual license fee shall be $50. The licensee shall pay an
additional fee based upon the square footage of the business premises as
prescribed by § 11.16. Such license shall be in addition to any other license
required by this Code, including a vending machine license.
§ 11.442. Prohibited sales and delivery; signs.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell, offer
for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products to any persons under the
age of 18 years.
(B) Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein
shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco
products and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco
products for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
"THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 18
YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW."
114. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 11.440 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.443
1:325
§ 11.443. Minimum age to sell tobacco products.115
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to engage, employ or permit any person
under 16 years of age to sell tobacco products in any licensed premises.
This section shall not apply to a sales clerk in a family-owned business
which can prove that the sales clerk is in fact a son or daughter of the
owner.
§ 11.444. Purchase by minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to purchase
tobacco products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to use any
false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco
products.
§ 11.445. Possession by minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to possess any
tobacco products.
§ 11.446. Proximity to certain institutions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer tobacco products within
100 feet of any school, child-care facility or other building used for
education or recreational programs for persons under the age of 18 years.
§ 11.447. Certain free distributions prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling
or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products to give
away or deliver tobacco products free of charge to any person on any rightof-
way, sidewalk, park, playground or other property owned by the City, any
school district, any park district or any public library district.
§ 11.448. Vending machines.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale tobacco
products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending machine is
equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device controlled
by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age
of 18 years.
(B) Any premises where access by persons under the age of 18 years is
prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not
permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of
employees of a business located at such premises, shall be exempt from
the requirements of Subsection (A) above.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.443 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.448
1:326
§ 11.448.1. Alternative nicotine products.118
In accordance with 720 ILCS 675/1.5:
§ 11.449. Penalties.119
Any minor who is found to be in violation of § 11.444, 11.445 or 11.448.1
shall be subject to the following penalties:
(C) Tobacco products permitted to be sold through a vending machine shall
not be placed together with any non-tobacco product, other than
matches.116
(D) Tobacco product vending machines may be located in places where
alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the premises if vending
machine operation is under the direct supervision of the owner or
manager.117
(A) A person, either directly or indirectly by an agent or employee, or by a
vending machine owned by the person or located in the person's
establishment, may not sell, offer for sale, give, or furnish any
alternative nicotine product, or any cartridge or component of an
alternative nicotine product, to a person under 18 years of age.
(B) Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing an alternative
nicotine product, or any cartridge or component of an alternative
nicotine product, to another person, the person selling, offering for
sale, giving, or furnishing the alternative nicotine product shall verify
that the person is at least 18 years of age by:
(1) Examining from any person who appears to be under 27 years of
age a government-issued photographic identification that
establishes the person is at least 18 years of age; or
(2) For sales made though the internet or other remote sales methods,
performing an age verification through an independent, third-party
age verification service that compares information available from
public records to the personal information entered by the person
during the ordering process that establishes the person is 18 years
of age or older.
(A) Any person who violates § 11.444 is guilty of a petty offense. For the
first offense in a twenty-four-month period, the person shall be fined
$200 if his or her employer has a training program that facilitates
compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws. For the second offense in
a twenty-four-month period, the person shall be fined $400 if his or her
116. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
117. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
118. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.448 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.449
1:327
employer has a training program that facilitates compliance with
minimum-age tobacco laws. For the third offense in a twenty-fourmonth
period, the person shall be fined $600 if his or her employer
has a training program that facilitates compliance with minimum-age
tobacco laws. For the fourth or subsequent offense in a twenty-fourmonth
period, the person shall be fined $800 if his or her employer
has a training program that facilitates compliance with minimum-age
tobacco laws. For the purposes of this subsection, the twenty-fourmonth
period shall begin with the person's first violation of § 11.444.
(B) If a minor violates § 11.445 or 11.448.1, he or she is guilty of a petty
offense and the court may impose a sentence of 25 hours of community
service and a fine of $50 for a first violation. A second violation that
occurs within 12 months after the first violation is punishable by a fine
of $75 and 50 hours of community service. A third or subsequent
violation that occurs within 12 months after the first violation is
punishable by a fine of $200 and 50 hours of community service. Any
second or subsequent violation not within the twelve-month time period
after the first violation is punishable as provided for a first violation.
(C) If a minor is convicted of or placed on supervision for a violation of the
prohibition in § 11.444 on using false identification for purchase of
tobacco products or § 11.445 or 11.448.1, the court may, in its
discretion, and upon recommendation by the State's Attorney, order
that minor and his or her parents or legal guardian to attend a smoker's
education or youth diversion program if that program is available in the
jurisdiction where the offender resides. Attendance at a smoker's
education or youth diversion program shall be time-credited against
any community service time imposed for any first violation of § 11.445.
In addition to any other penalty that the court may impose for a
violation of § 11.445 or 11.448.1, the court, upon request by the State's
Attorney, may in its discretion require the offender to remit a fee for his
or her attendance at a smoker's education or youth diversion program.
§ 11.449 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.449
1:328
ARTICLE 37
Undertakers
§ 11.450. License required; fee; application.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain an
undertaking establishment or to operate as an undertaker or mortician in
the City of Hometown without first having obtained a license as herein
provided. The fee for such license shall be $50 plus an additional fee based
on the square foot area requirements of § 11.16. No license shall be issued
except upon the payment of the fee. Applications for such licenses shall
conform to the general provision of this chapter on licenses.120
§ 11.451. through § 11.459. (Reserved)
120. Editor's Note: See Art. 1 of this chapter.
§ 11.450 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.451
1:329

ARTICLE 38
Vehicle Licenses
§ 11.460. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every self-propelled device in, upon or by which any
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway,
except devices moved by human power.
§ 11.461. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the City, or for any person,
firm, association or corporation having a principal office or place of business
in the City, to use, house, situate, locate or base, keep, or register any
motor vehicle in the City, or to cause or permit any agent or employee to
use any motor vehicle in the transportation of persons or property or the
conveyance of loads in the City or upon the streets and avenues of this City
unless such motor vehicle is licensed as hereinafter provided.
§ 11.462. Application for license.
Any person, firm, association, or corporation desiring a license for any such
motor vehicle shall file an application therefor with the City Clerk upon a
form provided by him, setting forth the name and address of the applicant,
the description of the motor vehicle, and the state license number thereof,
and such other information as may be prescribed. Such license shall be
issued upon the payment by the applicant of a license fee, as hereinafter
provided, to the City Clerk, and shall authorize the use of such motor vehicle
within the City until the expiration of such license.
§ 11.463. Fees. [Amended 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004; 5-12-2015
by Ord. No. 2-2015]
(A) The annual license fee for each motor vehicle subject to licensure under
this article shall be as follows:
(1) For each motor bicycle, moped, scooter or motorcycle: $16.
(2) For each motor vehicle which is designed and used for the carrying
of not more than 10 persons: $20.
(3) For each motor vehicle for the carrying of not more than 10 persons
which is designed and used, owned and principally used by a
person of the age of 65 years or more: $10.
(4) For each motor vehicle which is designed and used for the pulling
or carrying of freight, and each motor vehicle which is designed
and used for the carrying of more than 10 persons:
§ 11.460 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.463
1:331
§ 11.464. License term; time of payment; late payment fees.
[Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 2-2015]
(a) Having a gross weight of 8,000 pounds or less, including
weight of vehicle and maximum load: $33.
(b) Having a gross weight of more than 8,000 pounds, and not
more than 14,000 pounds, including weight of vehicle and
maximum load: $43.
(c) Having a gross weight of more than 14,000 pounds, including
weight of vehicle and maximum load: $54.
(5) For a transfer of a motor vehicle license and issuance of a new one,
upon surrender of the license previously used, and provided said
different vehicle is owned by the same person and is of the same
class: $3.
(B) The following persons shall be entitled to one passenger vehicle license
without charge:
(1) Non-paid Commissioners of the Playground and Recreation
Board.121
(2) Non-paid Directors of the Library Board.
(3) The surviving spouse of a policeman, fireman, or Public Works
Department employee who has died in the line of duty, as long as
said spouse remains a resident of the City.
(C) The City Clerk or Collector may require any applicant to provide a
statement, under oath, setting forth his age, address, and number of
automobiles owned or subject to licensure hereunder. A person aged 65
or older is entitled to a reduced license fee of $7 for one automobile
owned and principally used by him.
(A) Vehicle licenses shall be valid from each July 1 of a calendar year to
June 30 of the following calendar year.
(B) Persons seeking to acquire a vehicle license shall pay the annual license
fee prescribed in § 11.463 prior to the commencement of the upcoming
license year. Except as otherwise provided below, there shall be
imposed a late fee in the amount of 100% of the applicable annual
license fee on those persons purchasing a vehicle license after the
commencement of the license year.
(C) Persons seeking to acquire a vehicle license for a vehicle purchased or
otherwise becoming otherwise subject to licensure after the
commencement of a license year shall pay the annual license fee
prescribed in § 11.463 no later than 30 days following the date of
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.463 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.464
1:332
§ 11.465. License stickers.
§ 11.466. Sale or transfer of vehicle; transfer fee.
Immediately upon the sale or transfer of any motor vehicle which has been
licensed as provided above prior to the date of such sale or transfer, the
vendor or transferrer shall remove the license tag or sticker from the motor
vehicle so sold or transferred, and the license so issued for such motor
vehicle shall cease to apply to said motor vehicle from such date, and
the purchaser or transferee thereof shall apply to said motor vehicle from
such date, and the purchaser or transferee thereof shall apply to the City
Clerk for a new license therefor, as above provided. Upon a showing to the
City Clerk that said tag or sticker has been so removed from such sold or
transferred motor vehicle, the City Clerk may issue a new tag bearing a new
number, which shall apply to and be assigned to any other vehicle of the
same class owned by said vendor or transferrer; except as above provided,
no tag or sticker issued for or assigned to any motor vehicle shall be used
for or attached to or upon another and different motor vehicle. There shall
be a transfer charge of $3.
purchase of the vehicle or the date the vehicle becomes subject to
licensure under this article. Except as otherwise provided below, there
shall be imposed a late fee in the amount of 100% of the applicable
annual license fee on those persons purchasing a vehicle license after
the thirty-day date specified above.
(D) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, persons seeking to
acquire a vehicle license for a vehicle purchased or otherwise becoming
subject to licensure after the commencement of the current license
year, and on or after January 1 of the license year, shall pay 50% of the
annual license fee prescribed in § 11.463 no later than 30 days
following the date of purchase of the vehicle or the date the vehicle
becomes subject to licensure under this article. There shall be imposed
a late fee in the amount of 100% of the applicable annual license fee on
those persons purchasing a vehicle license after the thirty-day date
specified above. The City Collector may require a statement under oath
or other evidence sufficient to show a person's eligibility for a reduced
fee.
(A) Upon application and payment of the required fee, the City Clerk shall
issue a vehicle sticker for the current year in which the license is
issued. It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle, although duly
licensed, to be used or parked upon the streets or public thoroughfares
unless one current vehicle sticker is displayed or otherwise attached to
the lower right side of the motor vehicle's windshield.
(B) It shall be the duty of the applicant to remove all expired vehicle
stickers from his windshield. It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle
to display an expired vehicle sticker on its windshield while parked
upon the streets or public thoroughfares.
§ 11.464 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.467
1:333
§ 11.467. through § 11.469. (Reserved)
§ 11.467 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.467
1:334
ARTICLE 39
Wearing Apparel Stores
§ 11.470. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WEARING APPAREL STORE — Any place in which any wearing apparel,
articles of clothing, shoes, hats or articles of a like matter are sold at retail
directly to the consumer.
§ 11.471. License required.
No person shall conduct or operate a wearing apparel store without first
obtaining a license therefor.
§ 11.472. Sale of new articles only.
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this article to conduct or
operate a wearing apparel store to sell any article which has been worn or
used prior to the sale to the consumer, or to label, mark or hold out to the
public that any article for sale is new and had not been previously worn or
used.
§ 11.473. Dressing rooms.
Every person conducting or operating a wearing apparel store which has
for sale articles of clothing, which for fitting purposes may require the
customer to disrobe or partially disrobe, must provide a room or rooms of
sufficient size, clean, sanitary and lighted for such purposes; provided that
if articles of such clothing are sold for the use of both sexes, at least one
such fitting room shall be set aside for each sex, and each such room shall
be marked to indicate for which sex it is to be used in letters at least one
inch in height.
§ 11.474. Inspections.
The Chief of Police and the Health Officer, or any person designated by
them, shall make periodic inspections to see that all provisions of this article
are complied with.
§ 11.475. Fees.
The annual license fee for wearing apparel stores shall be $50. The licensee
shall pay an additional fee based upon the square footage of the business
premises as prescribed by § 11.16.
§ 11.476. through § 11.479. (Reserved)
§ 11.470 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.476
1:335

ARTICLE 40
Wholesale Provision Dealers
§ 11.480. License required.122
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of wholesale provision dealer
for, or to buy and sell at wholesale, any meat, poultry, fish, butter, cheese,
lard, vegetables, fruit, flour, meal, or other provisions, in the City, without
having first obtained a license therefor as is hereinafter provided.
§ 11.481. Application for license.
Applications for such licenses shall conform to the general requirements of
Article 1 of this chapter relating to such applications; and in addition to the
information therein required, each such application shall state thereon the
premises to be used for the business and the number and description of the
vehicles used or to be used in the transportation of such food or provisions,
if any.
§ 11.482. Referral of application to Health Officer.
Each such application shall be referred to the Health Officer before the
license requested is issued. He shall make or cause to be made an
investigation into the premises and vehicles to be used for the storage or
transportation of such food or provisions, and shall report his findings to the
City Clerk, with a recommendation that the license be issued or denied. No
such license shall be issued without the approval of the Health Officer.
§ 11.483. Fees.
The annual license fee shall be $50. The licensee shall pay an additional fee
based upon the square footage of the business premises as prescribed by
§ 11.16.
§ 11.484. Storage.
All premises or places used by such licensees for the storage of food or
provisions shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition; and all such
places shall be kept free from rodents and vermin. It shall be unlawful to
permit any animal to remain in any room used for such purposes.
§ 11.485. Vehicles.
All vehicles used for the transportation of food or provisions in connection
with such business shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 11.480 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.486
1:337
§ 11.486. Unwholesome food or provisions.
It shall be unlawful to keep or store in connection with such business, or to
sell or offer for sale, any food or provisions intended for human consumption
which are spoiled, unwholesome or tainted.
§ 11.487. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Health Officer and he is hereby authorized to
make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to see to
the enforcement of the provisions of this article; and he or his authorized
deputy shall be given access to every portion of the premises used in
such licensed business for the purpose of making such inspection at any
reasonable time.
§ 11.488. Conflicts with other ordinances.
In case any of the provisions herein conflict with the provisions set forth in
Article 14, Food Dealers, the Illinois Department of Public Health rules and
regulations shall prevail.
§ 11.489. (Reserved)
§ 11.486 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.489
1:338
ARTICLE 41
Pawnbrokers
§ 11.490. License required; definition; limitation on number issued.
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct or operate the business of
a pawnbroker without first having obtained a license therefor as is
hereinafter provided. For purposes of this article, "pawnbroker" means
every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of receiving
property in pledge or as security for money or other thing advanced to the
pawner or pledger. The number of pawnbroker's licenses shall be limited to
one per 6,000 residents as determined by the most recent federal census.
§ 11.491. Application for license; qualifications of applicant.
An application of a pawnbroker's license shall conform to the general
requirements of Article 1 of this chapter. The Chief of Police shall
investigate the applicant to determine whether or not such applicant is a
person of good character. No license shall be issued to a person who has
been convicted of receiving stolen property, burglary or robbery.
§ 11.492. Fee.
The annual license fee shall be based on the square footage of the licensed
premises as provided for in § 11.16 of this chapter.
§ 11.493. Records.
Each pawnbroker shall keep a record of every article pledged or sold to
it, with this record being open to the inspection by any police officer at
any time during the hours of business. The records shall be maintained in
a book, in ink, and describe the article or thing pawned or pledged, the
amount of money loaned thereon, the date and time of the pledge, the rate
of interest on the loan, and the name and address of any person pawning or
pledging the article or thing pledged. For articles sold to the pawnbroker,
the book shall include the date and time of purchase, the amount paid for
said article, and the name and address of the person selling such article to
the pawnbroker.
§ 11.494. Daily reports; inspections.
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to make daily reports to the Chief
of Police of the City of Hometown as provided for in Section 7 of the
Pawnbroker Regulation Act (205 ILCS 510/0.01 et seq.). Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Chief of Police, or any member of the Police Department
acting at his direction, shall be allowed to inspect the records required to
be maintained under § 11.493 of this article. Similarly, any member of the
Police Department shall be allowed to inspect every article or thing pledged
or pawned, and any article purchased by the pawnbroker, during the hours
of operation for the business.
§ 11.490 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.495
1:339
§ 11.495. Weapons.
No pawnbroker shall receive in pawn, pledge or purchase any revolver,
pistol, blackjack, sawed-off shotgun, knife or any other firearm or weapon
and no pawnbroker shall display or offer any such article for sale.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a pawnbroker may receive in pawn, pledge
or purchase, and offer for sale, a bona fide antique firearm or weapon.
§ 11.496. Hours of business.
The business of a pawnbroker as provided for in this article shall be limited
to 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
§ 11.497. Prohibited pawns or pledges; employee age restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any pawn or pledge
or make any loan to a person under 18 years of age. It shall similarly be
unlawful to receive any pawn or pledge or make any loan to a person under
the influence of alcohol or drugs. It shall also be unlawful to receive any
pawn, pledge or article for resale any known stolen property or from any
person known to be a thief or convicted of burglary or any similar criminal
charge. Finally, no pawnbroker shall employ any person under the age of 18
to take pledges in pawn or sell any articles for the pawnbroker.
§ 11.498. Sale of articles.
No article purchased by a pawnbroker shall be sold or removed from the
place of business for a period of 30 days after the report to the Chief of
Police as required by § 11.494. The sale and retention of pawned or pledged
articles shall otherwise be governed by the provisions of Section 10 of the
Pawnbroker Regulation Act (205 ILCS 510/0.01 et seq.).
§ 11.499. State law.
The provisions of the Pawnbroker Regulation Act (205 ILCS 510/0.01 et
seq.) shall apply to all pawnbrokers doing business pursuant to this article
and are incorporated herein by reference. Should there be a conflict
between the provisions of this article and the Pawnbroker Regulation Act,
the provisions of this article shall apply.
§ 11.495 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.499
1:340
ARTICLE 42
Invalidity of Conflicting Ordinances
[Added 4-11-2017 by Ord. No. 3-2017]
§ 11.500. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
EMPLOYEE — Any individual person permitted and/or hired to work by an
employer regardless of the number of hours worked and of the number of
persons the employer employs.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation,
limited-liability company, business trust, or any person or group of persons
employing or seeking to employ one or more employees in, or having its
principal place of business in, the City of Hometown. The term "employer"
does not mean or include: i) the government of the United States or a
corporation wholly owned by the government of the United States; ii) an
Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe; iii) the
government of the state or any agency or department thereof; or iv) units of
local government.
FEDERAL AND STATE LAW — Any and all applicable statutes and/or
regulations of the United States and State of Illinois, as amended from time
to time.
§ 11.501. Wage and sick leave laws.
(A) Employers shall comply with all federal and state laws governing the
rate, eligibility, applicability, accrual, use or payment of/for sick leave
and minimum wage.
(B) No employers shall have, or be obligated to adhere to, any additional or
greater obligations with respect to sick leave or minimum wage than as
required or established by federal and state law.
(C) Any additional obligation with respect to sick leave or minimum wages
imposed by law (including Cook County ordinances), other than federal
and state law, upon any employer is hereby declared to be, and shall be
deemed to be, in conflict with this section, and shall have no force,
effect, or applicability to such employer.
(D) Nothing in this section shall be deemed or interpreted as affecting or
preventing an employer from imposing upon itself any additional or
greater obligation with respect to sick leave or minimum wage
voluntarily or by contract.
§ 11.500 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.501
1:341

ARTICLE 43
Raffles
[Added 4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 5-2018]
§ 11.502. License required.
It shall be unlawful to conduct any raffle, including the sale or issuance
of chances, in the City without first having obtained a raffle license in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 11.503. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall be given the meanings ascribed
herein unless the context clearly denotes a contrary intention:
ACT — The Raffles and Poker Runs Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01, et seq.
BUSINESS — A voluntary organization composed of individuals and
businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial, and civic interests of a community.
CHARITABLE — An organization or institution organized and operated to
benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit to the public.
CITY COUNCIL — The president and City Council of the City of Hometown.
EDUCATIONAL — An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably
in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in taxsupported
schools.
FRATERNAL — An organization of persons having a common interest, the
primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared
for by the government.
KEY LOCATION — The location where a raffle organized by a law
enforcement agency or a statewide association that represents law
enforcement officials is conducted and the prize or prizes are awarded.
LABOR — An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit
and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Any agency of Illinois or unit of local
government which is vested by law or ordinance with the duty to maintain
public order and to enforce criminal laws or ordinances.
NET PROCEEDS — The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other
reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
§ 11.502 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.503
1:343
NONPROFIT — An organization or institution organized and conducted on
a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to any one as a result
of the operation.
RAFFLE — A form of lottery, as defined in § 28-2(b) of the Criminal Code of
2012, conducted by an organization licensed under this article, in which a
person pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented
and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by some
other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated a winning
chance; the winning chance is determined through drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on
the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that
the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest. "Raffle" does not include a savings promotion
raffle authorized under § 5g of the Illinois Banking Act, Section 7008 of the
Savings Bank Act, § 42.7 of the Illinois Credit Union Act, § 5136B of the
National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. § 25a), or § 4 of the Home Owner's Loan Act
(12 U.S.C. § 1463).
RELIGIOUS — Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded
for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS — An organization or association comprised of members of
which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows,
or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the
welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in
such a way as to confer a public benefit.
§ 11.504. Qualifications.
Only bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational,
or veterans' organizations that operate without profit to their members
and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five years
immediately before making an application for a raffle license and which
have had during that entire five-year period a bona fide membership
engaged in carrying out their objects, nonprofit fundraising organizations
organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an
identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial
hardship as a result of illness, disability, accident or disaster, or law
enforcement agencies and statewide associations that represent law
enforcement officials, shall be qualified for the issuance of a raffle license.
§ 11.505. Ineligibility.
The following qualified persons/organizations shall be ineligible for a raffle
license:
(A) Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
(B) Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
§ 11.503 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.505
1:344
§ 11.506. Application.
Any organization desirous of conducting a raffle within the City shall
complete and file with the City Clerk an application that shall include the
following information:
§ 11.507. License fee.
The fee for a raffle license shall be $25 for each raffle to be conducted. The
license fee shall be tendered with the prospective licensee's application.
The license fee shall be nonrefundable unless the applicant is denied a
license.
(C) Any person who is not of good moral character;
(D) Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in Subsection (A), (B),
or (C) has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a
person is active or employed;
(E) Any organization in which a person defined in Subsection (A), (B), or (C)
is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not;
(F) Any organization in which a person defined in Subsection (A), (B), or (C)
is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle; and
(G) Any organization that has had a raffle license revoked that has not
eliminated the basis for such revocation.
(A) The name, address and telephone number of the organization, including
the manager;
(B) Proof of eligibility for a raffle license;
(C) Identification of the area or areas within the City where raffle chances
will be sold or issued;
(D) The time period during which raffle chances are to be sold or issued;
(E) The time of determination of winning chances;
(F) The location or locations where winning chances are to be determined;
(G) A sworn statement on the letterhead of the organization executed by
the presiding officer and secretary of the organization attesting to the
not-for-profit character of the applicant and that upon reasonable
inquiry, there exists no basis for the denial of such license under
§ 11.505 of this article; and
(H) The name of any other jurisdiction in the State of Illinois in which the
organization is licensed to conduct raffles.
§ 11.505 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.508
1:345
§ 11.508. License issuance.
A raffle license shall be issued to qualified organizations not otherwise
ineligible that have completed and filed an application therefor, have
tendered the applicable license fee, and have tendered a copy of the fidelity
bond for its manager in conformance with the provisions of this article.
Raffle licenses shall be granted or denied by the City within 30 days after
the date of filing of the application.
§ 11.509. License terms.
Each raffle license shall be valid for one raffle or for a specified number
of raffles to be conducted within a specified period of a calendar year
as identified on the raffle license. Raffle licenses are not assignable or
transferable.
§ 11.510. Exemption.
No raffle license shall be required for a political committee conducting a
raffle within the City that has a valid raffle license issued by the Illinois
State Board of Elections, nor shall a raffle license be required for the sale
or issuance of raffle chances within the City by law enforcement agencies
or statewide associations that represent law enforcement officials that are
otherwise licensed by another jurisdiction because the key location of the
raffle is located outside of the City.
§ 11.511. Conduct of raffles.
Raffles conducted in City shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(A) The entire net proceeds of any raffle shall be exclusively devoted to the
lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that raffle;
(B) No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization
shall participate in the management or operation of a raffle;
(C) No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of a raffle;
(D) No licensee shall rent a premises where a winning chance or chances
are to be determined from an organization not licensed under this
article;
(E) Excepting law enforcement agencies and statewide associations that
represent law enforcement officials, raffle chances for raffles to be
conducted in the City shall only be sold or issued within the corporate
boundaries of the City;
(F) Raffle chances shall only be sold or issued within the area specified on
the license and winning chances shall be determined only at those
locations specified on the license;
§ 11.508 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.511
1:346
§ 11.512. Manager; bond. [Amended 4-24-2018 by Ord. No. 7-2018]
The operation and conduct of each raffle shall be under the supervision of
a single manager designated by the organization and bonded in accordance
with the provision of this section. The manager shall provide a fidelity bond
in favor of the licensee conditioned upon his honesty in the performance
of his duties in the amount of 50% of the anticipated aggregate value
of all raffle prizes and merchandise to be awarded by the licensee in
the license year. The term of the bond shall provide that notice shall be
given in writing to the City not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation
or amendment. The bond requirement of this section may be waived by
the City Council, including a waiver provision on the license issued to
an organization, provided that the license containing such bond waiver is
approved by the unanimous vote of the members of the organization.
§ 11.513. Records.
(G) A person under the age of 18 years shall not participate in the
conducting of a raffle without the written permission of a parent or
guardian;
(H) A person under the age of 18 years shall only be within the area where
winning chances are determined when accompanied by a parent or
guardian;
(I) The aggregate retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $1,000,000;
(J) The maximum retail value of each prize awarded in a single raffle shall
not exceed $1,000,000;
(K) The maximum price that may be charged for a raffle chance shall not
exceed $200; and
(L) The maximum period for which chances may be issued or sold shall not
exceed 12 months. [Amended 4-24-2018 by Ord. No. 7-2018]
(A) Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall maintain the records
of its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion where winning chances are determined. All
deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion
shall be documented with receipts or other records indicating the
amount, a description of the purchased item or service or other reason
for the deductions, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds
shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
(B) Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo
gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of
the State of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each
organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who
§ 11.511 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.513
1:347
§ 11.514. Suspension and revocation of licenses.
A raffle license issued under this article may be revoked or suspended by
the City Clerk for a violation of this article, or any other provision of this
Code, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard before the City Council.
§ 11.515. Penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any provision of
this article shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than $750 for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which the violation occurs or continues.
accounts for gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from the
operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other
revenues of the organization.
(C) Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report to the City
and its membership within seven days after the conclusion of each
raffle its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this article.
(D) Records shall be preserved for three years, and organizations shall
make available their records relating to operation of raffles for public
inspection at reasonable times and places.
§ 11.513 HOMETOWN CODE § 11.515
1:348
Chapter 14
TRAFFIC
§ 11.515 CITY GOVERNMENT § 11.515
1:349

ARTICLE 1
Adoption of Illinois Motor Vehicle Code
§ 14.00. Adoption by reference; citations. [Amended 2-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 4-2018]
§ 14.01. Definitions.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all words and phrases used in this
chapter shall have the same definitions as provided for in the Illinois Vehicle
Code.
CENTRAL BUSINESS (OR TRAFFIC) DISTRICT — All streets and portions
of streets within the area designated as area "B-1" of Chapter 22, Zoning, of
the City Code.
TRAFFIC BUREAU — The division of the Hometown Police Department or,
if not established, the Hometown Police Department itself.
§ 14.02. through § 14.19. (Reserved)
(A) In lieu of using any section of or in addition to the regulations of this
Chapter 14, the officer issuing the citation may issue a citation under
any of the sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
The Illinois Vehicle Code, and all amendments made from time to time,
is hereby incorporated by reference as a part of this chapter. Every
numbered section in the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be referred to by the
number "14" prefixing said section number. All citations so issued shall
be issued in the name of the City of Hometown and referred to in the
uniform traffic ticket or complaint as an ordinance violation. The
penalties for traffic violations in this chapter shall apply to said
violations, unless modified or changed by this chapter.
(B) Any section of the Illinois Vehicle Code for which a violation is deemed a
Class A misdemeanor shall be treated as a petty offense where such
offense has been designated as an ordinance violation under this
chapter, and any reference in the Illinois Vehicle Code to a "Class A
Misdemeanor" shall be deemed replaced by the words "petty offense"
when written as an ordinance violation under this chapter. Such
violations shall be punishable by fine only in an amount not to exceed
$500.
§ 14.00 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.02
1:351

ARTICLE 2
Administration
§ 14.20. Police administration.
There is hereby established in the Hometown Police Department a Traffic
Bureau to be under the control of the Chief of Police or his designee.
§ 14.21. Traffic Bureau duties.
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Bureau to aid and assist the Hometown
Police Department and other City departments in the administration and
enforcement of all traffic laws, the investigation of automobile accidents,
and in the development of methods to improve traffic conditions throughout
the City. Whenever the accidents at any particular location become
numerous, the Traffic Bureau shall cooperate with the City Traffic Engineer
in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial
measures.
§ 14.22. Records of traffic violations and accidents.
The Traffic Bureau shall keep records of all traffic violations and vehicular
accidents throughout the City.
§ 14.23. Annual traffic report.
The Traffic Bureau shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be
filed with the Mayor. Such report shall contain information on traffic
matters in the City as follows:
§ 14.24. Traffic Engineer.
The Office of City Traffic Engineer is hereby established. It shall be the
general duty of the City Traffic Engineer to determine the installation
and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct
engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures,
to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan the
operation of traffic on the streets and highways of the City, and to cooperate
with other City officials in the development of ways and means to improve
traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed
by ordinances of the City. The Chief of Police shall consult with the City
Traffic Engineer relative to any emergency or experimental regulations.
(A) The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data.
(B) The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data
on the safety activities of the police.
(C) The plans and recommendations of the Bureau for future traffic safety
activities.
§ 14.20 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.25
1:353
§ 14.25. Traffic Commission.
§ 14.26. Authority to post traffic-control devices.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the Director of Public Works
is hereby authorized to post or otherwise erect any and all traffic-control
devices pursuant to the recommendation of the City traffic engineer,
Hometown Police Department or City Council. It shall be unlawful for any
person to violate any properly posted traffic control device.
§ 14.27. Alternative penalties.123
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, any person accused of
a violation of any section of this chapter may be subject to the alternative
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article 1, § 1.09.1, of the City Code.
§ 14.28. through § 14.29. (Reserved)
(A) There is hereby established a Traffic Commission to serve without
compensation, consisting of the City Traffic Engineer, if appointed;
Chairman of the City Council, Streets, Sidewalks and Municipal
Building Committee; Chief of Police; Director of Public Works; Director
of Public Health and Safety; the Director of Civil Defense; a
representative of the Hometown Fire Protection District; and such
number of other City officers and representatives of unofficial bodies as
may be determined and appointed by the Mayor. The Chairman of the
Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and may be removed by
him.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Traffic Commission, and to this end it shall
have the authority within the limits of the funds at its disposal, to
coordinate traffic activities, to carry on educational activities in traffic
matters, to supervise the preparation and publication of traffic reports,
to receive complaints having to do with traffic matters, and to
recommend to the legislative body of the City and other City officials
ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration
and enforcement of traffic regulations.
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.25 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.28
1:354
ARTICLE 3
Enforcement of Traffic Regulations
§ 14.30. Authority of Police Department; violations.
It shall be the duty of the Hometown Police Department to enforce all traffic
regulations as provided by this chapter and the Illinois Vehicle Code. It shall
be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter or the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
§ 14.31. Skateboards and roller skates.
No person shall roller skate, skateboard or use any similar device in a
negligent or reckless manner so as to pose a danger to himself or others.
§ 14.32. Authorized emergency vehicles.
§ 14.33. Local traffic only.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any street
designated "Local Traffic Only" or "Road Closed To Thru Traffic" unless that
person's immediate destination is a residence or business adjacent to the
street, or traversing the street is the only route available for a destination
not on the street.
§ 14.34. through § 14.39. (Reserved)
(A) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator
of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may exercise the privileges using the red light and siren as set
forth in this section.
(B) The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle
shall apply to a volunteer fireman's vehicle only when the driver of any
said vehicle while in motion sounds an audible signal by sounding the
horn as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped
with at least one lighted lamp displaying a blue light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front
of such vehicle.
(C) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety
of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
§ 14.30 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.34
1:355

ARTICLE 4
Speed Regulations
§ 14.40. State speed laws applicable.
All regulations pertaining to the speed of vehicles contained in the Illinois
Vehicle Code shall apply upon all streets of the City.
§ 14.41. Speed limits.
(A) No person shall drive a vehicle upon any public highway in this
municipality at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having
regard to the traffic and the use of the way, or so to endanger of life or
limb or injure the property of any person. If the rate of speed of any
motor vehicle operated upon any public highway in this municipality
where the same passes through the business district exceeds 20 miles
an hour, or if the rate of speed of any such motor vehicle operated on
any public highway in this municipality where the same passes through
the residence district exceeds 20 miles an hour, or if the rate of speed of
any such motor vehicle operated on any public highway in this
municipality in a suburban district exceeds 30 miles an hour, such rates
of speed shall be prima facie evidence that the person operating such
motor vehicle is running at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable
and proper, having regard to the traffic, and use of the way or so as to
endanger the life or limb or injure the property of any person.
(B) The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the foregoing prima
facie limits shall not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed
when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and
going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling
upon any narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazards exist
with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or
highway conditions, and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary
to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle, on or entering the
highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all
persons to use due care.
(C) Signs shall be posted describing the prima facie speed limits. The prima
facie speed limits on the streets within the City are as follows:
Name of Street
Prima Facie Speed
Limits
(mph)
87th Street 35
Cicero Avenue 35
Pulaski Road 40
Southwest Highway 35
All other residential or business streets 20
§ 14.40 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.41
1:357
§ 14.42. through § 14.49. (Reserved)
Name of Street
Prima Facie Speed
Limits
(mph)
Shopping centers and cooperative
apartment areas
15
Lanes 15
§ 14.41 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.42
1:358
ARTICLE 5
Miscellaneous Driving Rules
§ 14.50. Following fire apparatus prohibited.124
The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet
or stop such vehicle within 500 feet of any fire apparatus stopped in answer
to a fire alarm.
§ 14.51. Crossing fire hose.125
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department
when laid down on any street, private road or driveway, to be used at any
fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in
command.
§ 14.52. Driving through funeral or other procession.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this Code. This
provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by
traffic-control signals or police officers.
§ 14.53. Drivers in procession.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand
edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as
close as is practical and safe.
§ 14.54. Funeral processions to be identified.126
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such
by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other
identifying insignia or by having the headlights and hazard lights of each
vehicle lighted.
§ 14.55. Permits for parades and processions.
No funeral procession, or parade containing 200 or more persons or 50
or more vehicles, excepting the forces of the United States Army or Navy,
the military forces of this state, and the forces of the Police and Fire
Departments, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.50 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.55
1:359
accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply.
§ 14.56. Vehicles driven on sidewalks.
No motor vehicle shall be driven on or upon any public sidewalk except
when driving over the sidewalk as part of a driveway.
§ 14.57. Limitations on backing.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
§ 14.58. Riding on motorcycles.127
§ 14.59. Clinging to vehicles.
No person riding upon any bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
§ 14.60. Careless driving.
Any person driving a vehicle in the City in a manner whereby the life or
property of a person is endangered shall be guilty of negligent and careless
driving.
§ 14.61. Reckless driving.
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the City in a reckless or wanton
manner or so as to unnecessarily endanger life or property.
(A) A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any
other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless
such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which
event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if
designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the
motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator.
(B) A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat,
facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.
(C) No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebar grips higher
than the height of the head of the operator when the operator is seated
in the normal driving position astride that portion of the seat or saddle
occupied by the operator.
(D) The operator of any motorcycle shall keep at least one hand on a
handlebar grip at all times the motorcycle is in motion.
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.55 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.62
1:360
§ 14.62. Driving under influence of liquor or drugs.128
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or attempt to operate a motor
vehicle on any street or public area while under the influence of alcohol or
drugs or any intoxicating compound or any combination of the foregoing.
§ 14.63. Transporting alcoholic liquor in motor vehicle.
No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor [as
defined in the Dram Shop Act (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.)] in or upon or
about any motor vehicle, except in the original package and with the seal
unbroken. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
transport any alcoholic liquor in any vehicle in the City.
§ 14.64. Exhaust emissions.
Exhaust emissions from a motor vehicle shall not be visible. It shall be zero
capacity using the Ringlemann Chart as published and described in the
Bureau of Mines, U.S. Department of Interior, Circular 8333, or as revised.
§ 14.65. Obedience to traffic-control devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey "stop," "one-way," or "yield"
signs or any other similar traffic-control devices.
§ 14.66. through § 14.69. (Reserved)
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.62 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.66
1:361

ARTICLE 6
Railroad Trains
§ 14.70. Railroad trains not to block streets.
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad
train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to
prevent or obstruct the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period
of time longer than 10 minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to
trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching.
§ 14.71. through § 14.79. (Reserved)
§ 14.70 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.71
1:363

ARTICLE 7
Regulations for Pedestrians and Bicycles
§ 14.80. Prohibited pedestrian crossings.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross a roadway other than at a
designated crosswalk.
§ 14.81. Carrying articles on bicycles.129
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article
which prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of the
bicycle. A person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand on the
handlebars at all times.
§ 14.82. Bicycle parking.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§ 14.83. Riding bicycles on sidewalks.
§ 14.84. Possession of bicycle with altered number.
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive, possess, sell or dispose
of a bicycle or any component part thereof which has a manufacturer's
identification number, an identification number or a registration number
removed, altered, defaced, destroyed or falsified.
§ 14.85. Alteration of bicycle identification number.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, deface, destroy or
falsify a manufacturer's identification number, an identification number or a
registration number of a bicycle or any component part thereof.
§ 14.86. Confiscation of bicycle with altered number.
(A) No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
(B) The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or
roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person; and
when such signs are in place, no person shall disobey the same.
(C) Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.80 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.86
1:365
§ 14.87. Violations by minors.130
In case of minors charged with violating the provisions of § 14.84, 14.85
or 14.86 of this article, the parents or guardians shall be notified of said
violation, requiring their appearance at the time of the disposition of the
violation.
§ 14.88. through § 14.89. (Reserved)
(A) If a bicycle or a component part thereof is found to have the
manufacturer's identification number, an identification number or a
registration number removed, altered, defaced, destroyed or falsified,
the bicycle or component part thereof shall be seized and held for
purposes of identification.
(B) In the event that the identification number or registration number
cannot be identified, the bicycle or component part thereof shall be
considered contraband, and no right of custody shall exist in any person
owning, leasing or possessing such property.
(C) Any such contraband shall be disposed of as provided for by Illinois law.
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.86 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.88
1:366
ARTICLE 8
Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places
§ 14.90. Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited.
§ 14.91. Parking not to obstruct traffic.
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less space than is necessary for free
movement of vehicular traffic.
§ 14.92. Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of:
§ 14.93. Parking adjacent to schools.
The City Traffic Engineer and the Hometown Police Department are hereby
authorized to post and erect signs indicating no parking, stopping and/or
standing on any street adjacent to a school. Any such signage may include
restricted hours for parking, stopping or standing of vehicles. It shall be
(A) No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following
places:
(1) In front of a public or private driveway, or any part thereof.
(2) The following safety islands. There shall be no parking on both
sides of the street at the below-described locations, from the street
curbline to the island curbline, for a distance of 100 feet, measured
from the center of each island, in all directions.
Name of Street Location
Beck Place Approximately opposite 8818 South Beck
Place
Corcoran Road Approximately opposite 8802 and 8808
South Corcoran Road
Kildare Avenue Approximately opposite 8810 South
Kildare Avenue
(3) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing, or
parking.
(B) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(A) Displaying such vehicle for sale.
(B) Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
§ 14.90 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.93
1:367
unlawful for any vehicle to park, stop or stand in violation of any such
signage prohibiting the same.
§ 14.94. Commercial vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to park any commercial vehicle in excess of one-half-ton
capacity on any residential street, except to accomplish delivery or some
like service.
§ 14.95. Flammable liquid transportation vehicles.
§ 14.96. Use of safety belts. [Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord. No.
2-2014]
§ 14.97. through § 14.99. (Reserved)
(A) No vehicle used for the transportation of flammable liquids shall be left
unattended on any street, highway or avenue, provided that this shall
not prevent a driver from the necessary absence from the truck in
connection with the delivery of his load; except during actual discharge
of the liquid, some responsible person shall be present at the vehicle.
(B) No vehicle used for the transportation of flammable liquids shall be
parked out-of-doors in a residential area or closer to a building than 50
feet in other areas at any one point for longer than one hour.
(C) No vehicle used for the transportation of flammable liquids shall be
parked or garaged in any building other than a building specifically
approved for such use by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(A) Each driver and passenger of a motor vehicle stopped or standing in a
lane of traffic on a street or highway in the City of Hometown shall wear
a properly adjusted and fastened seat safety belt.
(B) A violation of this section shall result in a fine in the amount of $50.
§ 14.93 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.97
1:368
ARTICLE 9
Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only
§ 14.100. Designation of curb loading zones.131
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location
of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain
appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which
the provisions of this article are applicable.
§ 14.101. Permits for curb loading zones; fee.132
The City Traffic Engineer shall not hereafter designate or sign any curb
loading zone upon special request of any person unless such person makes
application for a permit for such zone and for two signs to indicate the
ends of each such zone. The City Traffic Engineer, upon granting a permit
and issuing such signs, shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the
City treasury a service fee of $15 per year or fraction thereof and may by
general regulations impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for
reimbursement of the City for the value thereof in the event of their loss or
damage and their return in the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit.
Every such permit shall expire at the end of one year.
§ 14.102. Standing in passenger curb loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in
any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only
for a period not to exceed three minutes.
§ 14.103. Standing in freight curb loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and
loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone
during hours when the provisions applicable to such zone are in effect. In
no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30
minutes.
§ 14.104. Designation of public carrier stops and stands.
The City Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized and required to establish bus
stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger commoncarrier
motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such
number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.100 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.104
1:369
to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand, or other
stand shall be designated by appropriate signs.
§ 14.105. Stopping, standing, and parking of buses and taxicabs.
§ 14.106. Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop,
or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has
been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone.
§ 14.107. through § 14.109. (Reserved)
(A) The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided
herein.
(B) The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any
place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their
baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone
so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
(C) The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position
with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches
from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not
to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
(D) The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as
provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a
taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
§ 14.104 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.107
1:370
ARTICLE 10
Stopping, Standing or Parking Restricted or Prohibited on Certain
Streets
§ 14.110. Applicability.
The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle
shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on
official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic-control device.
§ 14.111. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.
§ 14.112. (Reserved)133
§ 14.113. through § 14.119. (Reserved)
133. Editor's Note: Former § 14.112, Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 14.110 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.113
1:371

ARTICLE 11
Regulating Kinds and Classes of Traffic on Certain Highways
§ 14.120. Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain
streets. [Amended 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. 4-2001]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
commercial vehicle exceeding 14,000 pounds' gross weight at any time
upon any of the residential streets or parts of streets in the City, except
that such vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose of delivering or
picking up materials or merchandise and then only by entering such street
at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and proceeding
thereon no farther than the nearest intersection thereafter.
§ 14.121. Wheel and axle loads and gross weights. [Added
4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 6-2018]
(A) No vehicle or combination of vehicles with pneumatic tires may be
operated, unladen or with load, upon any street or highway within the
City when the total weight on the road surface exceeds the following:
20,000 pounds on a single axle; 34,000 pounds on a tandem axle with
no axle within the tandem exceeding 20,000 pounds; 80,000 pounds
gross weight for vehicle combinations of five or more axles; or a total
weight on a group of two or more consecutive axles in excess of that
weight produced by the application of the following formula: W = 500
times the sum of (LN divided by N-1) + 12N + 36, where "W" equals
overall total weight on any group of two or more consecutive axles to
the nearest 500 pounds, "L" equals the distance measured to the
nearest foot between extremes of any group of two or more consecutive
axles, and "N" equals the number of axles in the group under
consideration.
(1) The above formula when expressed in tabular form results in
allowable loads as follows:
Distance
Measured to
the Nearest
Foot
Between the
Extremes of
Any Group
of 2 or More
Consecutive
Axles
Maximum Weight in Pounds of Any Group of 2
or More Consecutive Axles
Feet 2 Axles 3 Axles 4 Axles 5 Axles 6 Axles
4 34,000
5 34,000
6 34,000
§ 14.120 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.121
1:373
Distance
Measured to
the Nearest
Foot
Between the
Extremes of
Any Group
of 2 or More
Consecutive
Axles
Maximum Weight in Pounds of Any Group of 2
or More Consecutive Axles
Feet 2 Axles 3 Axles 4 Axles 5 Axles 6 Axles
7 34,000
8 38,000* 42,000
9 39,000 42,500
10 40,000 43,500
11 44,000
12 45,000 50,000
13 45,500 50,500
14 46,500 51,500
15 47,000 52,000
16 48,000 52,500 58,000
17 48,500 53,500 58,500
18 49,500 54,000 59,000
19 50,000 54,500 60,000
20 51,000 55,500 60,500 66,000
21 51,500 56,000 61,000 66,500
22 52,500 56,500 61,500 67,000
23 53,000 57,500 62,500 68,000
24 54,000 58,000 63,000 68,500
25 54,500 58,500 63,500 69,000
26 55,500 59,500 64,000 69,500
27 56,000 60,000 65,000 70,000
28 57,000 60,500 65,500 71,000
29 57,500 61,500 66,000 71,500
30 58,500 62,000 66,500 72,000
31 59,000 62,500 67,500 72,500
32 60,000 63,500 68,000 73,000
33 64,000 68,500 74,000
34 64,500 69,000 74,500
§ 14.121 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.121
1:374
Distance
Measured to
the Nearest
Foot
Between the
Extremes of
Any Group
of 2 or More
Consecutive
Axles
Maximum Weight in Pounds of Any Group of 2
or More Consecutive Axles
Feet 2 Axles 3 Axles 4 Axles 5 Axles 6 Axles
35 65,500 70,000 75,000
36 66,000 70,500 75,500
37 66,500 71,000 76,000
38 67,500 72,000 77,000
39 68,000 72,500 77,500
40 68,500 73,000 78,000
41 69,500 73,500 78,500
42 70,000 74,000 79,000
43 70,500 75,000 80,000
44 71,500 75,500
45 72,000 76,000
46 72,500 76,500
47 73,500 77,500
48 74,000 78,000
49 74,500 78,500
50 75,500 79,000
51 76,000 80,000
52 76,500
53 77,500
54 78,000
55 78,500
56 79,500
57 80,000
* If the distance between two axles is 96 inches or less, the two
axles are tandem axles and the maximum total weight may
not exceed 34,000 pounds, notwithstanding the higher limit
resulting from the application of the formula.
§ 14.121 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.121
1:375
(2) Vehicles not in a combination having more than four axles may not
exceed the weight in the table in this Subsection (A) for four axles
measured between the extreme axles of the vehicle.
(3) Vehicles in a combination having more than six axles may not
exceed the weight in the table in this Subsection (A) for six axles
measured between the extreme axles of the combination.
(4) The following are exceptions to the above formula:
(a) Vehicles for which a different limit is established and posted in
accordance with § 15-316 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (the
"IVC").
(b) Vehicles for which the Department of Transportation issue
overweight permits under authority of § 15-301 of the IVC.
These vehicles are not subject to the bridge formula.
(c) Weight limitations shall not apply to vehicles (including loads)
operated by a public utility when transporting equipment
required for emergency repair of public utility facilities or
properties or water wells.
(d) A three-axle or four-axle vehicle (including when laden)
operated or hired by a municipality within Cook, Lake,
McHenry, Kane, DuPage, or Will county being operated for the
purpose of performing emergency sewer repair that would be
subject to a weight limitation less than 66,000 pounds under
the formula in this Subsection (A) shall have a weight limitation
of 66,000 pounds or the vehicle's gross vehicle weight rating,
whichever is less. This subsection does not apply to vehicles
being operated on the national system of interstate and
defense highways, or to vehicles being operated on bridges or
other elevated structures constituting a part of a highway.
(e) Two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a total weight
of 34,000 pounds each if the overall distance between the first
and last axles of the consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet
or more, notwithstanding the lower limit resulting from the
application of the above formula.
(f) A truck, not in combination and used exclusively for the
collection of rendering materials, may, when laden, transmit
upon the road surface, except when on part of the national
system of interstate and defense highways, the following
maximum weights: 22,000 pounds on a single axle; 40,000
pounds on a tandem axle.
(g) A truck not in combination, equipped with a self-compactor or
an industrial roll-off hoist and roll-off container, used
exclusively for garbage, refuse, or recycling operations, may,
when laden, transmit upon the road surface, except when on
§ 14.121 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.121
1:376
part of the national system of interstate and defense highways,
the following maximum weights: 22,000 pounds on a single
axle; 40,000 pounds on a tandem axle; 40,000 pounds gross
weight on a two-axle vehicle; 54,000 pounds gross weight on
a three-axle vehicle. This vehicle is not subject to the bridge
formula.
(h) A three-axle rear discharge truck mixer registered as a special
hauling vehicle, used exclusively for the mixing and
transportation of concrete in the plastic state, may, when
laden, transmit upon the road surface, except when on part of
the national system of interstate and defense highways, the
following maximum weights: 22,000 pounds on single axle;
40,000 pounds on a tandem axle; 54,000 pounds gross weight
on a three-axle vehicle. This vehicle is not subject to the bridge
formula.
(i) Except as provided in Subsection (A)(4)(h), tandem axles on a
three-axle truck registered as a special hauling vehicle,
manufactured prior to or in the model year of 2024 and first
registered in Illinois prior to January 1, 2025, with a distance
greater than 72 inches but not more than 96 inches between
any series of two axles, is allowed a combined weight on the
series not to exceed 36,000 pounds and neither axle of the
series may exceed 20,000 pounds. Any vehicle of this type
manufactured after the model year of 2024 or first registered
in Illinois after December 31, 2024, may not exceed a
combined weight of 34,000 pounds through the series of two
axles and neither axle of the series may exceed 20,000 pounds.
(j) A three-axle combination sewer cleaning jetting vacuum truck
registered as a special hauling vehicle, used exclusively for the
transportation of nonhazardous solid waste, manufactured
before or in the model year of 2014, first registered in Illinois
before January 1, 2015, may, when laden, transmit upon the
road surface, except when on part of the national system of
interstate and defense highways, the following maximum
weights: 22,000 pounds on a single axle; 40,000 pounds on a
tandem axle; 54,000 pounds gross weight on a three-axle
vehicle. This vehicle is not subject to the bridge formula.
(k) A four-axle truck mixer registered as a special hauling vehicle,
used exclusively for the mixing and transportation of concrete
in the plastic state, and not operated on a highway that is part
of the national system of interstate highways, is allowed the
following maximum weights: 20,000 pounds on any single axle;
36,000 pounds on a series of axles greater than 72 inches but
not more than 96 inches; and 34,000 pounds on any series of
two axles greater than 40 inches but not more than 72 inches.
The gross weight of this vehicle may not exceed the weights
allowed by the bridge formula for four axles. The bridge
§ 14.121 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.121
1:377
formula does not apply to any series of three axles while the
vehicle is transporting concrete in the plastic state, but no axle
or tandem axle of the series may exceed the maximum weight
permitted under this subsection.
(l) Combinations of vehicles, registered as special hauling
vehicles that include a semitrailer manufactured prior to or in
the model year of 2024, and registered in Illinois prior to
January 1, 2025, having five axles with a distance of 42 feet or
less between extreme axles, may not exceed the following
maximum weights: 20,000 pounds on a single axle; 34,000
pounds on a tandem axle; and 72,000 pounds gross weight.
This combination of vehicles is not subject to the bridge
formula. For all those combinations of vehicles that include a
semitrailer manufactured after the effective date of P.A.
92-0417, the overall distance between the first and last axles of
the two sets of tandems must be 18 feet six inches or more. Any
combination of vehicles that has had its cargo container
replaced in its entirety after December 31, 2024, may not
exceed the weights allowed by the bridge formula.
(m) The maximum weight allowed on a vehicle with crawler-type
tracks is 40,000 pounds.
(n) A combination of vehicles, including a tow truck and a disabled
vehicle or disabled combination of vehicles, that exceeds the
weight restriction imposed by this section, may be operated on
a public highway provided that neither the disabled vehicle nor
any vehicle being towed nor the tow truck itself shall exceed
the weight limitations permitted under this section. During the
towing operation, neither the tow truck nor the vehicle
combination shall exceed 24,000 pounds on a single rear axle
and 44,000 pounds on a tandem rear axle, provided the towing
vehicle:
(i) Is specifically designed as a tow truck having a gross
vehicle weight rating of at least 18,000 pounds and is
equipped with air brakes, provided that air brakes are
required only if the towing vehicle is towing a vehicle,
semitrailer, or tractor-trailer combination that is equipped
with air brakes;
(ii) Is equipped with flashing, rotating, or oscillating amber
lights, visible for at least 500 feet in all directions;
(iii) Is capable of utilizing the lighting and braking systems of
the disabled vehicle or combination of vehicles; and
(iv) Does not engage in a tow exceeding 20 miles from the
initial point of wreck or disablement. Any additional
movement of the vehicles may occur only upon issuance of
authorization for that movement under the provisions of
§ 14.121 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.121
1:378
§§ 15-301 through 15-319 of the IVC. The towing vehicle,
however, may tow any disabled vehicle to a point where
repairs are actually to occur. This movement shall be valid
only on state routes. The tower must abide by posted
bridge weight limits.
(o) The vehicle weight limitations in this section do not apply to a
covered heavy-duty tow and recovery vehicle. The covered
heavy-duty tow and recovery vehicle license plate must cover
the operating empty weight of the covered heavy-duty tow and
recovery vehicle only.
(p) Upon and during a declaration of an emergency propane
supply disaster by the Governor under § 7 of the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency Act,134 a truck not in
combination, equipped with a cargo tank, used exclusively for
the transportation of propane or liquefied petroleum gas may,
when laden, transmit upon the road surface, except when on
part of the national system of interstate and defense highways,
the following maximum weights: 22,000 pounds on a single
axle; 40,000 pounds on a tandem axle; 40,000 pounds gross
weight on a two-axle vehicle; 54,000 pounds gross weight on a
three-axle vehicle; and a truck when in combination with a
trailer equipped with a cargo tank used exclusively for the
transportation of propane or liquefied petroleum gas may,
when laden, transmit upon the road surface, except when on
part of the national system of interstate and defense highways,
the following maximum weights: 22,000 pounds on a single
axle; 40,000 pounds on a tandem axle; 90,000 pounds gross
weight on a five-axle or six-axle vehicle. Vehicles operating
under this subsection are not subject to the bridge formula.
(q) A vehicle or combination of vehicles that uses natural gas or
propane gas as a motor fuel may exceed the above weight
limitations by up to 2,000 pounds; the total allowance is
calculated by an amount that is equal to the difference
between the weight of the vehicle attributable to the natural
gas or propane gas tank and fueling system carried by the
vehicle, and the weight of a comparable diesel tank and fueling
system. This subsection shall not allow a vehicle to exceed any
posted weight limit on a highway or structure.
(r) An emergency vehicle or fire apparatus that is a vehicle
designed to be used under emergency conditions to transport
personnel and equipment, and used to support the suppression
of fires and mitigation of other hazardous situations on a Class
I highway, may not exceed 86,000 pounds gross weight, or any
of the following weight allowances:
134. Editor's Note: See 20 ILCS 3305/14 et seq.
§ 14.121 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.121
1:379
(i) On a single steering axle, 24,000 pounds;
(ii) On a single drive axle, 33,500 pounds;
(iii) On a tandem axle, 62,000 pounds; or
(iv) On a tandem rear-drive steer axle, 52,000 pounds.
(s) A bus, motor coach, or recreational vehicle may carry a total
weight of 24,000 pounds on a single axle, but may not exceed
other weight provisions of this section.
(5) Gross weight limits shall not apply to the combination of the tow
truck and vehicles being towed. The tow truck license plate must
cover the operating empty weight of the tow truck only. The weight
of each vehicle being towed shall be covered by a valid license plate
issued to the owner or operator of the vehicle being towed and
displayed on that vehicle. If no valid plate issued to the owner or
operator of that vehicle is displayed on that vehicle, or the plate
displayed on that vehicle does not cover the weight of the vehicle,
the weight of the vehicle shall be covered by the third tow truck
plate issued to the owner or operator of the tow truck and
temporarily affixed to the vehicle being towed. If a roll-back carrier
is registered and being used as a tow truck, however, the license
plate or plates for the tow truck must cover the gross vehicle
weight, including any load carried on the bed of the roll-back
carrier.
(6) Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a tow truck under
instructions of a police officer from legally clearing a disabled
vehicle, that may be in violation of weight limitations of this
section, from the roadway to the berm or shoulder of the highway.
If in the opinion of the police officer that location is unsafe, the
officer is authorized to have the disabled vehicle towed to the
nearest place of safety.
(7) For the purpose of this subsection, "gross vehicle weight rating," or
"GVWR," means the value specified by the manufacturer as the
loaded weight of the tow truck.
(B) As used in this section, "recycling haul" or "recycling operation" means
the hauling of nonhazardous, nonspecial, nonputrescible materials,
such as paper, glass, cans, or plastic, for subsequent use in the
secondary materials market.
(C) No vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with pneumatic tires
shall be operated, unladen or with load, upon any street or highway
within the City in violation of the provisions of any permit issued under
the provisions of §§ 15-301 through 15-319 of the IVC.
(D) No vehicle or combination of vehicles equipped with other than
pneumatic tires may be operated, unladen or with load, upon any street
§ 14.121 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.121
1:380
§ 14.122. Overweight on registration. [Added 4-10-2018 by Ord. No.
6-2018]
or highway within the City when the gross weight on the road surface
through any wheel exceeds 800 pounds per inch width of tire tread or
when the gross weight on the road surface through any axle exceeds
16,000 pounds.
(A) A vehicle of the second division moved or operated upon any street or
highway within the City shall have had paid for it the appropriate
registration fees and flat weight tax, as evidenced by the Illinois
registration issued for that vehicle, for the gross weight of the vehicle
and load being operated or moved. Second division vehicles of foreign
jurisdictions operated upon any street or highway within the City under
a single trip permit, fleet reciprocity plan, prorate registration plan, or
apportional registration plan, instead of second division vehicle
registration under Article VIII of the IVC, must have had paid for it the
appropriate registration fees and flat weight tax in the base jurisdiction
of that vehicle, as evidenced by the maximum gross weight shown on
the foreign registration cards, plus any appropriate fees required under
the IVC.
(B) If a vehicle and load are operated upon any street or highway within the
City and the appropriate fees and taxes have not been paid or the
vehicle and load exceed the registered gross weight for which the
required fees and taxes have been paid by 2,001 pounds or more, the
operator or owner shall be fined as provided in § 14.123. However, no
fine shall exceed the actual cost of what the appropriate registration for
that vehicle and load should have been as established in Subsection (a)
of § 3-815 of the IVC regardless of the route traveled. For purposes of
this subsection, "appropriate registration" means the full annual cost of
the required registration and its associated fees.
(C) Any person operating a legal combination of vehicles displaying valid
registration shall not be considered in violation of the registration
provision of this section unless the total gross weight of the
combination exceeds the total licensed weight of the vehicles in the
combination. The gross weight of a vehicle exempt from the registration
requirements of this section shall not be included when determining the
total gross weight of vehicles in combination. Any vehicle operating
under an emergency harvest permit, as described in Subsection (e-1) of
§ 15-301 of the IVC, shall not be in violation of this subsection.
(D) If the person operating a vehicle or in violation of this section claims
that he or she had previously paid the appropriate Illinois registration
fees and taxes for this vehicle before the alleged violation, he shall have
the burden of proving the existence of the payment by competent
evidence. Proof of proper Illinois registration issued by the Secretary of
State, or the appropriate registration authority from the foreign state,
shall be the only competent evidence of payment.
§ 14.121 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.123
1:381
§ 14.123. Penalties.
§ 14.124. Bail.
Persons charged with a violation of § 14.121 or 14.122, unless released on
a written promise to comply, shall post cash bail in an amount equal to the
amount of the minimum fine fixed by § 14.123, plus any other penalties and
costs. The accused may, in lieu of cash bail, deposit a money order issued
by a money transfer service company which has been approved by the
Administrative Director under regulations issued by the Illinois Supreme
Court. The money order shall be made payable to the Clerk of the Circuit
Court of Cook County. When the bail for any offense hereunder does not
exceed $500, the accused may, at his option, deposit a truck bond certificate
(A) Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of
§§ 14.121 or 14.122, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be
deemed guilty of such violation and either the owner or the driver of
such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person charged
with a violation of any of these provisions who pleads not guilty shall be
present in court for the trial on the charge. Any person, firm or
corporation convicted of any such violation shall be fined [except as
may be limited by § 14.122(B)] according to the following schedule:
Gross Pounds Overweight Fine
From 1 through 2,000: $100
From 2,001 through 2,500: $270
From 2,501 through 3,000: $330
From 3,001 through 3,500: $520
From 3,501 through 4,000: $600
From 4,001 through 4,500: $850
From 4,501 through 5,000: $950
For 5,001 and over: For vehicles that are 5,001 or
more pounds overweight, the fine
shall be computed by assessing
$1,500 for the first 5,000 pounds
overweight and $150 for each
additional increment of 500
pounds overweight or fraction
thereof.
(B) In addition any person, firm or corporation convicted of four or more
violations of § 14.121 within any twelve-month period shall be fined an
additional amount of $5,000 for the fourth and each subsequent
conviction within the twelve-month period; provided, however, that with
regard to a firm or corporation, a fourth or subsequent conviction shall
mean a fourth or subsequent conviction attributable to any one
employee-driver.
§ 14.123 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.124
1:382
in lieu of bail. A separate bail shall be required for each case involving truck
violation.
§ 14.125. through § 14.129. (Reserved)
§ 14.124 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.125
1:383

ARTICLE 12
Schedule of Restrictions on Designated Streets
§ 14.130. Through streets; stop intersections.
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to erect stop signs.
Drivers shall come to a complete stop when governed by a stop sign before
entering the intersection.
§ 14.131. Parking prohibited.
(A) Parking prohibited at all times. When signs are erected giving notice
thereof, no person shall at any time park a vehicle upon any of the
following described streets or parts of streets: [Amended 11-22-2016
by Ord. No. 7-2016]
Name of Street Side Location
87th Street Both Entire length
88th Street Both From Cicero Avenue to
Buckley Road
Cicero Avenue Both Entire length
Duffy Avenue Both Between Corcoran Road
and Main Street
Pulaski Avenue Both Entire length
Southwest Highway Both Entire length
Southwest Highway State Aid
Road (Access Roadway) from
91st Street and Duffy Avenue
Both Entire length
West 90th Place Both From South Main Street to
Southwest Highway
(B) Parking prohibited during certain hours. There will be no parking on
the following streets or parts of streets during the times indicated:
§ 14.130 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.131
1:385
Name of
Street Side Location Time Limit
89th Place From Cicero Avenue
to Buckley Road
Between 8:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m. and between
1:00 p.m. and 2:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday,
except weekends and
holidays
Duffy Avenue Both From Kostner
Avenue on the north
to Beck Place on the
south
Between 8:00 a.m. and
4:30 p.m. on school days,
with the exception of duly
designated school buses
for the purpose of loading
and unloading school
children
Kostner
Avenue
Both From Kolmar
Avenue on the north
to Beck Place on the
south
Between 8:00 a.m. and
4:30 p.m. on school days,
and on Saturday from
5:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.,
with the exception of duly
designated school buses
for the purpose of loading
Kostner
Avenue135
East Between Beck Place
and Kolmar Avenue
Between 5:00 p.m. and
11:00 p.m. on Saturdays;
and between 7:00 a.m.
and 1:00 p.m. on Sundays
Kostner
Avenue136
West Between Beck Place
and Duffy Avenue
Between 5:00 p.m. and
11:00 p.m. on Saturdays;
and between 7:00 a.m.
and 1:00 p.m. on Sundays
(C) Parking is prohibited in reserved stalls, except for those permitted in
said stalls.
(D) Where parking stalls are marked, no parking is permitted except in said
lined stalls.
(E) This section shall not apply to a delivery or service vehicle when used to
make a delivery or provide services, provided the parking of said
vehicle does not exceed the time required to make the delivery or
provide services.
(F) The no-parking area is hereby declared a tow-away zone and any
vehicle parked in violation is declared a nuisance which may be
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.131 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.131
1:386
§ 14.132. All-night parking prohibited.
§ 14.133. Parking prohibited in designated access lanes.
The Traffic Engineer and/or Director of Public Works is hereby authorized
to post and erect signs indicating no parking, stopping or standing in a
designated access lane. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop,
stand or leave unattended any vehicle located in a location marked "No
Parking" or parallel to a yellow painted curb. Perpendicular parking of one
car behind another is hereby prohibited.
§ 14.134. Parking prohibited in handicapped zones.
immediately abated by towing. Posted signs shall also state "Tow Away
Zone" or "Vehicle Will Be Towed" or words of similar import.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle
on any street within the City of Hometown for a period of time longer
than 30 minutes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any
day, except where a permit for the purpose of parking during this time
has been obtained from the Police Department.
(B) This section shall not apply to physicians on emergency cases nor to any
emergency vehicles while engaged in emergency duties, or to a
disabled vehicle while temporarily and unavoidably parked; provided,
however, that in no case shall a disabled vehicle remain on any street
longer than a twenty-four-hour period; and provided, further, that
notice of disability of said vehicle shall be given to the Police
Department.
(A) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any parking place
reserved for physically handicapped persons or disabled veterans using
a motor vehicle not bearing registration plates issued to or for a
physically handicapped person, or to a disabled veteran, or a motor
vehicle not bearing a special decal or device issued by the Secretary of
State or by the City or another jurisdiction, state, district, territory or
foreign country.137
(B) Applicability. This section is applicable to any parking place on a public
street, or in a private or public off-street parking facility specifically
reserved by the posting of an official sign for vehicles bearing such
registration plates or special decal or device.
(C) Removal of vehicle. The owner or operator of a private or public offstreet
parking facility may, after notifying the City police, or the police
itself may remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or
place of safety any vehicle in violation of this section without notice to
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.131 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.134
1:387
§ 14.135. One-way streets.
§ 14.136. Parking prohibited on snow routes.
§ 14.137. No left turns.
No left turn shall be permitted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. each day for traffic moving on Southwest
Highway turning onto Keeler Lane or traffic moving on Keeler Lane and
turning onto Southwest Highway.
§ 14.138. through § 14.179. (Reserved)
the owner or operator of the vehicle in violation, at the violator's
expense.
(D) Penalty. Any person in violation of this section shall be fined at least the
minimum sum of $100, but not in any amount more than $350, for each
violation. A separate violation or offense shall occur for every hour such
vehicle is parked in violation of this section. A police officer may issue a
citation "P" ticket in accordance with the procedures set forth in
§ 14-250.1.138
(A) When signs are erected giving notice thereof, the following named
streets shall be open to one-way traffic only in the direction and/or for
the distance specified:
Name of Street Location
Direction of
Travel
West 87th Street State
Aid Road (Private
Roadway)
From Keating Lane to
Keeler Avenue
Eastbound
(A) It shall be unlawful to stand, stop, or to park or cause to be parked a
motor vehicle in any area, zone, lane, or street designated a "Snow
Route" after two inches or more of snowfall until said snow is
completely removed for vehicular traffic. A vehicle parked in violation
of this section is hereby declared a nuisance and may be summarily
abated, without notice, by towing upon order of the Chief of Police or
the Director of the Department of Public Works.
(B) Every street and lane throughout its entire length in the City of
Hometown is hereby designated as a "snow route."
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.134 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.138
1:388
ARTICLE 13
(Reserved)
CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.138
1:389

ARTICLE 14
(Reserved)
CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.138
1:391

ARTICLE 15
(Reserved)
CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.138
1:393

ARTICLE 16
(Reserved)
CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.138
1:395

ARTICLE 17
Mini-Bikes or Motor Bicycles
§ 14.180. Unlawful use.139
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or be a passenger upon a
motorcycle, motorized bicycle, motorized cycle or motorized scooter which
cannot be registered by the Secretary of State under the Illinois Vehicle
Code.
§ 14.181. Registration required.140
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be driven in, upon, or to
use any street, parkway, sidewalk, public way, public alley, public property,
semi-public property, park, or school grounds without having a registration
issued to said vehicle by the State of Illinois.
§ 14.182. (Reserved)141
§ 14.183. Driving in certain places prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven upon any public property,
semi-public property, park, or school property, except in those parts of said
property improved as driveways and recognized portions of the premises
devoted for ingress and egress for motor vehicles or used for parking
incident to the principal uses permitted on said property.
§ 14.184. Impounding of vehicles; liability of owner or person
entitled to possession.
Every such vehicle which shall have been used in violation of any of the
provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may
be summarily abated by any police officer by removing and conveying, or
causing the removing and conveying of such vehicle to the vehicle pound
or pounds designated by the Mayor. For this purpose, any area adjacent to
a police station may be declared to be a vehicle pound. Before the owner
or person entitled to possession of any legally impounded vehicle shall be
permitted to remove the same, he shall furnish evidence of ownership or
right to possession and shall pay for the cost of towing or removal to the
vehicle pound and the cost of storage for each day or fraction thereof in said
pound.
§ 14.185. Liability of parents and guardians.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
141. Editor's Note: Former § 14.182, Driving in certain zoned areas prohibited, was repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 14.180 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.185
1:397
§ 14.186. Possession of vehicle that cannot be registered.142
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession a motor vehicle
for use which cannot be registered by the Secretary of State. The possession
of such vehicle by any person is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 14.187. through § 14.189. (Reserved)
(A) It shall be the duty of all police officers, on discovering that any person
who has violated any of the provisions of this article is a person under
the age of 17 years, to inquire as to the name, age, and last residence of
such person and to promptly notify the parent, guardian, or custodian
of said child, that the child has been detained for violation of the
provisions of this article and to report to the police station for the
return of said child to his custody. Whenever it is impractical to do so,
the child may be returned forthwith to his home but in no case shall the
motor vehicle being used by said child be returned to him. It is the duty
of the parent, guardian, or custodian of said child to recover said motor
vehicle.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or custodian, or other
person to knowingly permit a person to violate any of the provisions of
this article. It shall be presumed that said parent, guardian, or
custodian, or any person knowingly permits the same when said child
has committed his second offense for violating the provisions of this or
any other traffic ordinance or law, whether or not found guilty.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.185 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.187
1:398
ARTICLE 18
Registration of Vehicles; Registration Plates
§ 14.190. Operation of vehicles without evidence of registration.
§ 14.191. Improper use of evidence of registration.144
No person shall lend to another any registration card, registration sticker,
registration plate, special plate or permit or other evidence of proper
registration issued to him if the person desiring to borrow the same would
not be entitled to the use thereof, nor shall any person knowingly permit
the use of any of the same by one not entitled thereto, nor shall any
person display upon a vehicle any registration card, registration sticker,
registration plate or other evidence of proper registration not issued for
such vehicle or not otherwise lawfully used thereon under the laws of the
State of Illinois.
§ 14.192. Display of registration plates.145
No person shall operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be
operated, upon any street or highway of the City, any vehicle which does not
properly display its registration plates in compliance with Subsections (A)
and (B) of this section.
(A) No person shall operate, nor shall an owner knowingly permit to be
operated, upon any street or highway of the City, any vehicle required
to be registered under the laws of the State of Illinois unless there shall
be attached thereto and displayed thereon, when and as required, a
valid registration plate or plates issued therefor by the Secretary of
State for the current registration year.
(B) A person may operate or permit operation upon any highway of a
vehicle that has been properly registered but does not display a current
and valid Illinois registration sticker if he or she has proof, in the form
of a printed receipt from the Secretary, that he or she registered the
vehicle before the previous registration's expiration but has not
received a new registration sticker from the Secretary. This printed
proof of registration is valid for 30 days from the expiration of the
previous registration sticker's date.143
(A) Registration plates, issued by the Secretary of State for a motor vehicle
other than a motorcycle, autocycle, trailer, semi-trailer, or truck-tractor,
apportioned bus or apportioned truck shall be attached thereto, one in
the front and one in the rear. The registration plate issued for a
motorcycle, autocycle, trailer, or semi-trailer shall be attached to the
143. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.190 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.192
1:399
§ 14.193. through § 14.199. (Reserved)
rear thereof. The registration plate issued for a truck-tractor or an
apportioned truck shall be attached to the front thereof.
(B) Except for vehicles with rear-loaded motorized forklifts, every
registration plate shall at all times be securely fastened in a horizontal
position to the vehicle for which it was issued so as to prevent the plate
from swinging and at a height of not less than five inches from the
ground, measuring from the bottom of such plate, in a place and
position to be clearly visible and shall be maintained in a condition to be
clearly legible. Registration stickers issued as evidence of renewed
annual registration shall be attached to registration plates as required
by the Secretary of State, and be clearly visible at all times. For those
vehicles with rear-loaded motorized forklifts, if the rear plate is
securely fastened in a horizontal position as prescribed, the plate and
registration sticker shall not be required to be clearly visible at all times
as a result of the rear-mounted motorized forklift obstructing the view.
§ 14.192 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.193
1:400
ARTICLE 19
Junk, Abandoned or Inoperable Vehicles
§ 14.200. Junk, abandoned, or disabled vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain on any premises,
leased, owned, or of which he may be in possession, any wrecked, junked,
abandoned, or disabled motor vehicles, including parts and pieces thereof,
and motor vehicles, tires or other equipment relating to motor vehicles, to
be stored or accumulated except in such yards or areas where the same
is properly zoned for such activity. Any motor vehicle remaining on private
property in violation hereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance and the
Chief of Police is hereby authorized to abate said nuisance by causing the
same to be towed as set forth in Article 20 of this chapter or by court action.
§ 14.201. Inoperable vehicles.
All inoperable vehicles, whether on public or private property and in view
of the general public, are hereby declared a nuisance and may be abated by
the City.
(A) Definition. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or part of motor
vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven days, the engine,
wheels, or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine,
wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own
motor power.
(B) Notice of violation.
(1) A notice of said violations shall be posted on the vehicle or part
thereof reasonably visible and substantially in the following form:
COLOR: RED, LETTERS BLACK
NOTICE TO REMOVE
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN: __________
(Owner or person in control, if known)
DESCRIPTION OF VEHICLE OR PART: __________
§ 14.200 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.201
1:401
This vehicle or part thereof has been declared a nuisance under
CITY OF HOMETOWN, ILLINOIS, MUNICIPAL CODE § 14.201
as an inoperable vehicle and unless said nuisance is abated by
removal within seven days, said vehicle or part will be towed by
the City to an auto pound. Tow and storage charges and a fine for
failure to obey said notice are to be paid by the person in control
of said motor vehicle or part thereof. If your vehicle is towed, you
are entitled to a post-tow hearing. You may demand said hearing
by contacting the Hometown Police Department located at 4331
Southwest Highway, Hometown, Illinois.
CITY OF HOMETOWN POLICE DEPARTMENT
Date: BY:
Officer
(2) The posting of the notice on the vehicle or part thereof shall be
sufficient notice.
(C) Towing. Unless said vehicle is removed seven days after posting of the
notice, not counting the day of posting, the vehicle or part thereof shall
be towed at the expense of the person responsible for said nuisance, to
the pound designated by the City.
(D) Agency. The Police Department of the City is the law enforcement
agency authorized to enforce this section.
(E) Hearing. The person in control, owner, bailee or occupant of land from
which a vehicle has been towed shall be entitled to a post-tow hearing.
The hearing officer shall be the Chief of Police or Mayor. The hearing
shall be held as soon as is practicable after the tow, with the hearing
officer determining the justification for the tow. If the hearing officer
determines that the tow was justified, costs, including towing and
storage fees, will be assessed against the party. If the hearing officer
determines that the tow was not justified, the party's vehicle shall be
returned to him without the imposition of any towing-related costs.146
(F) Inapplicability. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Any motor vehicle that is kept in a building when not in use;
(2) Operable historic motor vehicles (antiques) over 25 years of age;
(3) A vehicle temporarily inoperable of being driven under its own
power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations. A
vehicle on private or public property for more than seven days
without being repaired and becoming operable shall be deemed an
inoperable vehicle.
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.201 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.201
1:402
§ 14.202. through § 14.209. (Reserved)
(G) Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person having a motor vehicle, or
part thereof under his/her control to fail to obey the notice to remove.
The registered owner of the motor vehicle (or part from said vehicle)
shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner was the person in control.
§ 14.201 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.202
1:403

ARTICLE 20
Towing and Removal of Junked, Abandoned, Inoperable and Other
Vehicles
§ 14.210. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated unless their context clearly requires otherwise:
ABANDONED VEHICLE —
ANTIQUE VEHICLE — Any operable motor vehicle that is more than 25
years of age or a bona fide replica thereof and which is driven on the
highways only going to and returning from an antique auto show or an
exhibition, or for servicing or demonstration, or a fire-fighting vehicle more
than 20 years old which is not used as fire-fighting equipment but is used
only for the purpose of exhibition or demonstration.
GARAGE — Any building or portion thereof constructed for the purpose of
parking vehicles therein and which has walls or doors on all four sides.
OWNER — The person to whom a vehicle is registered on the records of
the Secretary of State or any lienholder or other person legally entitled to
possession thereof.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any property dedicated as a street or alley and
includes all portions thereof; such as parkways, driveways and sidewalks.
§ 14.211. Violations.
All motor vehicles or any part thereof or other vehicles junked or in
a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in
its condition and those vehicles defined as inoperable under Section
11-40-3 of the Illinois Municipal Code on public or private property (see
also § 14.218); or
(A)
Any motor vehicle or any part thereof or other vehicle that has not
been moved or used for 10 hours or more and is apparently deserted on
public property; or
(B)
Any unlicensed motor vehicle, or one that does not have current annual
year license attached to it, or any part of a motor vehicle which has not
been used or moved for seven consecutive days, on private property;
and
(C)
Any privately owned unregistered motor vehicle or other vehicle which
remains on public property for a period of 24 hours or more.147
(D)
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a vehicle to become an
abandoned vehicle.
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.210 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.211
1:405
§ 14.212. Towing without prior notice.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to tow the following vehicles
without prior notice:
§ 14.213. Towing with prior notice.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to tow the following vehicles
with prior notice:
§ 14.214. Pre-tow notice.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon the property
of another without permission of the owner or the occupant thereof.
(A) Vehicles parked in violation of any ordinance of the City or any state law
prohibiting parking, standing or stopping in certain places.
(B) Vehicles which create an imminently dangerous traffic hazard because
of their position in relationship to traffic on the public right-of-way or
because their physical appearance is impending the flow of traffic,
including but not limited to vehicles in a traffic lane or adjacent thereto.
(C) Vehicles which have been reported as stolen.
(D) Vehicles used in violation of the Illinois Criminal Code, or where towing
is permitted by law or court order without prior notice.
(A) An abandoned vehicle.
(B) A trespassing vehicle parked on any private property without
permission of the property owner or occupant.
(A) Where required, a pre-tow notice shall be given as follows:
(1) Where the vehicle is parked on the public right-of-way, a sticker
shall be placed on the window and a written notice shall be sent by
first class mail to the person in whose name the vehicle is
registered. In the event that there are no registration plates on the
vehicle, then notice shall be sent by first class mail to the person in
whose name such vehicle is registered based upon the vehicle
identification number.
(2) Where the vehicle is parked on private property, a sticker shall be
placed on the window, a written notice shall be sent by first class
mail to the person in whose name the vehicle is registered, and in
the case of abandoned vehicles, a written notice shall be served or
mailed to the occupant of the premises, or posted thereon. In the
event that there are no registration plates on the vehicle, then
notice shall be sent by first class mail to the person in whose name
such vehicle is registered based upon the vehicle identification
number.
§ 14.211 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.214
1:406
§ 14.215. Post-tow notice.
§ 14.216. Pre-tow and post-tow hearings.
(B) Such pre-tow notice shall advise that the vehicle is either considered
abandoned or trespassing and that it will be towed on a date no sooner
than four days after the giving of all notices unless a pre-tow notice
hearing is requested to contest the grounds for the towing. Said notice
shall also advise that the owner of the vehicle will be responsible for all
costs of towing and storage in the event that said vehicle is towed and
that no post-tow hearing will be held to determine the validity of the
tow. The failure to request a pre-tow hearing waives any right to contest
the propriety of the tow, and any towing and storage costs resulting
therefrom, and waives any right to a post-tow hearing. Mailed notice
shall be deemed given on the date that it is deposited in the U.S. mail.
(A) Whenever a vehicle is towed without prior notice, a post-tow notice
shall be sent within 24 hours of the tow by first class mail to the person
in whose name the vehicle is registered. In the event that there are no
registration plates on the vehicle, then notice shall be sent by first class
mail to the person in whose name such vehicle is registered based upon
the vehicle identification number.
(B) Said notice shall advise that the owner of the vehicle is responsible for
all costs of towing and storage unless a post-tow hearing is requested
within seven days to contest the ground for the towing. The failure to
request a post-tow hearing waives any right to contest the propriety of
the tow, and any towing and storage costs resulting therefrom.
(A) The Chief of Police and any police officer holding a rank above Sergeant
are hereby authorized to act as hearing officers for the purpose of
holding a pre-tow or post-tow hearing. The hearing officer shall not be
involved in the tow of the vehicle. If requested by the vehicle owner,
such hearing shall be held within 24 hours. At the hearing, a vehicle
owner may contest the grounds for determining whether a vehicle
should be or should have been towed. Any citation or report issued or
otherwise generated as a consequence of the tow shall be prima facie
evidence of the violation. Hearsay testimony is admissible and sworn
testimony is not required. The hearing officer shall prepare a written
report of his findings and decision within 24 hours of the hearing.
(B) At the conclusion of a pre-tow hearing, the hearing officer shall
determine whether there are grounds to authorize a tow. In the event
that grounds do not exist to authorize a tow, then no tow shall be
performed by the Police Department. In the event that grounds do exist
to authorize a tow, then the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for
all towing and storage costs arising from the towing of the vehicle.
(C) At the conclusion of a post-tow hearing, the hearing officer shall
determine whether or not grounds existed to authorize a tow. In the
event that grounds did not exist to authorize a tow, then no towing or
§ 14.214 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.216
1:407
§ 14.217. Unclaimed vehicles.
Vehicles which have been towed and which remain unclaimed by the owner
shall be disposed of pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
§ 14.218. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any antique vehicle or any
vehicle parked in a garage.
§ 14.219. (Reserved)
storage charges shall be assessed against the owner of the vehicle. In
the event that grounds existed to authorize a tow, then the owner of
the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing and storage costs arising
from the towing of the vehicle.
(D) The City, or any towing company authorized by the City, may impound
any towed vehicle and release the same upon payment of towing and
storage costs in the event that the owner has been determined to be
responsible for towing and storage costs or has waived his right to such
determination. In the event that an owner of a vehicle has been
determined by the hearing officer not to be responsible for towing and
storage costs, then the vehicle shall be released without payment upon
request of the owner, or any costs which have been paid shall be
refunded.
§ 14.216 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.219
1:408
ARTICLE 21
Regulation of Traffic in Shopping Centers and Cooperative Parking
Areas
§ 14.220. Speed restrictions.
No person shall drive a vehicle upon any thoroughfare, alley, or parking
area of the Hometown Cooperative Apartments or in any shopping center
adjacent thereto at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having
regard to traffic and the use of the way or so as to endanger the life or
limb or injure the property of any person. The speed of all vehicles shall be
reasonable and safe and be governed by the general requirements of the
preceding sentence. In any case, however, it shall be unlawful at any time to
exceed 15 miles per hour on any such thoroughfare, alley, or parking area.
§ 14.221. Stop signs and intersections.
(A) Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
nearest side of the intersection, or, in the event there is no crosswalk,
shall stop at a clearly marked stop sign, but, if none, then at a point
nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection or junction.
(B) Stop signs shall be posted at the following intersections:
(1) First parking area west of Kenton Avenue between 87th Street and
87th Place at both exits.
(2) First parking area west of Kenton Avenue between 87th Place and
88th Street at both exits.
(3) Second parking area west of Kenton Avenue between 87th Street
and 87th Place at both exits.
(4) Second parking area west of Kenton Avenue between 87th Place
and 88th Street at both exits.
(5) Third parking area west of Kenton Avenue between 87th Street and
87th Place at the south exit.
(6) Third parking area west of Kenton Avenue between 87th Place and
88th Street at both exits.
(7) Fourth parking area west of Kenton Avenue between 87th Place
and 88th Street at South exit.
(8) Parking area in back of building located at 4704 West 87th Place,
office of Hometown Cooperative Apartments, at the exit to the
fourth parking area.
§ 14.220 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.221
1:409
§ 14.222. Parking prohibited in certain specified places.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer, in any of the following places and locations:
§ 14.223. through § 14.229. (Reserved)
(C) A sign: "No left turn between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday."
(A) Specific locations.
First lane east of Cicero Avenue
Second lane east of Cicero Avenue
Third lane east of Cicero Avenue and new drive extension thereof
Lane just west of Kenton Avenue all between 87th Street and 88th
Street
(B) In areas (including public or semi-public parking lots) marked with
lines, lanes, or stalls, it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle except
within said marked lines, lanes, or stalls.
(C) Where official signs are posted in the municipal parking lots, police
areas, fire department areas and public works areas. Parking may be
prohibited by said signs to a designated class of user or users.
§ 14.221 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.223
1:410
ARTICLE 22
Hometown Shopping Center Traffic Regulations
§ 14.230. Regulations.
(A) Pursuant to Ordinance No. 1-1998, approving the agreement between
the City of Hometown and Chicago Title & Trust Company, Trust No.
53052 for the regulation of traffic and parking within the Hometown
Shopping Center recorded February 23, 1998, as Document No.
98141082, the City agreed to establish and enforce the following
regulations within the Hometown Shopping Center.
(B) The City hereby establishes and agrees to enforce the following
regulations within the Center:
(1) Speed. The maximum speed limit for any vehicle shall be 15 miles
per hour.
(2) Stop signs. Stop signs shall be posted at all exits and the driver of a
vehicle emerging from the Center shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or roadway and shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to
avoid collision and, upon entering the street or roadway, shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said street or
roadway.
(3) Stopping, standing or parking. The stopping, standing or parking of
any vehicle within the Center is prohibited in the following places:
(a) Fire lanes on the driveway or roadway which lies directly in
front of the exit and entrance doors and immediate frontage
(designated as "NO PARKING, FIRE LANE" zones by properly
posted signs).
(b) On access driveways from the public street for ingress to and
egress from the parking lot areas as designated "No Parking"
zones by painted yellow curbs.
(c) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(d) Any area where prohibited by properly posted signs.
(e) In any areas when the motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction
to traffic.
(f) Parking permitted only within lined stalls.
(g) Parking prohibited in reserved stalls, except for those
permitted in said stalls, including but not limited to parking in
handicapped designated stalls when not authorized.
(4) Abandoned vehicles. Any abandoned vehicle or inoperable vehicle
as defined in Articles 19 and 20 of this Chapter 14, providing for
§ 14.230 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.230
1:411
the removal of abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles which are
located within the Center, shall be subject to and governed by the
provisions contained in said articles.
(5) Towing.
(a) The City may remove any vehicle parked, abandoned or found
unattended in the parking area during snow storms, floods,
fires or other public emergencies:
(i) When the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic;
(ii) Where standing, stopping or parking is prohibited and
proper tow-away zone or tow-away signs are posted;
(iii) Any vehicle committing a second violation of any provision,
whether or not a tow-away sign is posted;
(iv) Any vehicle used or permitted to be used in violation of any
law.
(b) The cost of towing and storage charge of a towed vehicle shall
be paid the owner, lessor, lessee, agent of the auto before
redemption;
(6) Lane usage. A vehicle shall remain in its properly designated lane
of traffic, whether said lane is designated by striping, cones, or any
other method designating the proper lane or channel for vehicular
traffic within the parking area.
(7) Other laws. Enforce any law, rule or regulations, federal, state or
ordinance, regulating traffic or the use of an automobile. All such
laws regarding public highways or public lands shall be applicable.
To that end, the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/
1-100 et seq., and Chapter 14, Traffic, of the Municipal Code of
Hometown are incorporated into this agreement, and the
ordinance authorizing the agreement, by reference.
(8) Signs. Signage shall conform with the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(9) Penalty. Persons doing any act forbidden or failing to perform any
act required by such parking or traffic regulations shall be guilty of
a petty offense and subject to the penalty provisions of this Chapter
14 of the Municipal Code of Hometown, § 14.250.1, or any other
penalty clauses contained in such chapter as are applicable to the
nature of the offense. Furthermore, any citation issued for
violations of Chapter 14 of the Municipal Code of Hometown
pertaining to vehicular standing, parking and vehicle compliance
violations shall be subject to the administrative adjudication
process contained in Article 25 of this Chapter 14 of the Municipal
Code of Hometown.
§ 14.230 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.231
1:412
§ 14.231. Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions provided
for in this article.
§ 14.232. through § 14.236. (Reserved)
§ 14.231 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.232
1:413

ARTICLE 22A
Hometown School District 123 Traffic Regulations
[Added 6-12-2001 by Ord. No. 5-2001]
§ 14.237. Regulations.
The Agreement Relating to the Regulation of Traffic and Parking within
property owned by School District No. 123, authorized by the provisions
of 625 ILCS 5/11-209, is hereby approved in substantially the same form
attached hereto and is incorporated and made a part of this article. The
Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized to execute the same for and
on behalf of the City of Hometown. The City of Hometown shall cause a
certified copy of this article to be filed with the Cook County Recorder of
Deeds.
(A) The City hereby establishes and agrees to enforce the following
regulations on the property:
(1) Speed. The maximum speed limit for any vehicle shall be 15 miles
per hour.
(2) Stop signs. The District and the City shall agree to the placement of
any stop signs.
(3) Stopping, standing, or parking. The stopping, standing or parking
of any vehicle within the property is prohibited in the following
areas:
(a) On access driveways from the public street for ingress to and
egress from the parking lot area designated as "No Parking" by
properly posted signage.
(b) Any area where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited by
properly posted signs.
(c) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(d) In any area when the motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction
to traffic.
(4) Regulatory signs. It shall be unlawful for any motorist to operate a
vehicle in violation of any designated regulatory signage, including,
but not limited to, "Do Not Enter," "Road Closed," and any other
similar regulatory sign.
(5) Abandoned vehicles. The City is authorized to remove any
abandoned vehicle or inoperable vehicle, as defined in Articles 19
and 20 of this Chapter 14 of the Municipal Code of Hometown,
which is located within the property, which shall be subject to and
governed by the provisions contained in said articles.
(6) Lane usage. A vehicle shall remain in its properly designated lane
of traffic, whether said lane is designated by striping, cones, or any
§ 14.237 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.237
1:415
§ 14.238. through § 14.239. (Reserved)
other method designating the proper lane or channel for vehicular
traffic within the parking area.
(7) Other laws. The City is authorized to enforce any statute, ordinance
or other regulation relating to the use, operation or parking of an
automobile on the property. To that end, the provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., and Chapter 14,
Traffic, of the Municipal Code of Hometown are incorporated into
this agreement, and the ordinance authorizing the agreement, by
reference.
(8) Signs. Signage shall conform with the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(9) Penalty. Persons doing any act forbidden or failing to perform any
act required by such parking or traffic regulation shall be guilty of a
petty offense and subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 14 of
the Municipal Code of Hometown, § 14.250.1, or any other penalty
clauses contained in such article as are applicable to the nature of
the offense. Furthermore, any citation issued for violations of
Chapter 14 of the Municipal Code of Hometown pertaining to
vehicular standing, parking and vehicle compliance violations shall
be subject to the administrative adjudication process contained in
Article 25 of this Chapter 14 of the Municipal Code of Hometown.
(B) The District agrees to bear the costs and expenses of obtaining,
erecting and maintaining any and all signs necessary for the
enforcement of the aforesaid regulations. The City will not be liable for
any towing charges nor will it be required to furnish or pay for any
towing.
(C) The City hereby agrees to regulate the parking of automobiles and the
traffic according to the aforesaid regulations.
(D) This agreement shall cover a period of 20 years from the date hereof.
However, this agreement may be terminated by either party upon 30
days' written notice to the other.
(E) The District hereby grants the City permission to enter upon the
property for the purposes of enforcing the regulations cited herein
without prior consent.
(F) Whenever notice to the City is required, it shall be addressed to the
Mayor of the City of Hometown, 4331 Southwest Highway, Hometown,
Illinois 60456, by certified mail. When notice is required to the District,
it shall be addressed to the Superintendent, by certified mail.
§ 14.237 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.238
1:416
ARTICLE 23
Traffic Violations Section
§ 14.240. Establishment; purpose.
The Chief of Police shall establish a traffic violations section to assist the
court with the clerical work of traffic cases. The Chief shall be in charge of
such person or persons of said section, and the section shall be open at such
hours as the Chief may designate.
§ 14.241. Duties.
The following duties are hereby imposed upon the Traffic Violations Section
in reference to traffic offenses:
§ 14.242. Records.
The Traffic Violations Section shall keep records and submit summarized
monthly reports to the City Council of all notices issued and arrests made
for violations of the traffic laws and ordinances in the City and of all the
fines collected by the Traffic Violations Section or the court, and of the final
disposition or present status of every case of violation of the provisions of
said laws and ordinances. Such records shall be so maintained as to show
all types of violations and the totals of each. Said records shall be public
records.
§ 14.243. Additional duties.
The Traffic Violations Section shall follow such procedure as may be
prescribed by the traffic ordinances of the City or as may be required by any
laws of this state.
§ 14.244. through § 14.249. (Reserved)
(A) When citations are issued, it shall accept designated fines, issue
receipts, and represent in court such violators as are permitted and
desire to plead guilty, waive court appearances, and give power of
attorney.
(B) It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons who
must or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of their appearance on
the court docket, and notify the arresting officer and witnesses, if any,
to be present.
(C) It shall keep an easily accessible record of all violations of which each
person has been guilty during the preceding 12 months, whether such
guilt was established in court or in the Traffic Violations Section.
§ 14.240 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.244
1:417

ARTICLE 24
Penalties and Procedures on Arrest
§ 14.250. Penalties.148
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for in a section of this Code,
and a citation "P" ticket is not given for such violation, every person
convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $750.
§ 14.250.1. Issuance of citations ("P" tickets) in certain traffic
violation cases.
(A) Applicable sections. Whenever a police officer is authorized to arrest a
person without a warrant because of a violation of any section or
provision of this Municipal Code in respect to any of the following
sections, said police officer may, in lieu of the filing of the complaint in
court, in the first instance issue to such alleged violator, a citation:
[Amended 8-22-2006 by Ord. No. 10-2006149]
(1) Advising said person that he has violated a specified ordinance;
(2) Requesting him to make payment in an amount applicable to said
alleged violation as set forth below as settlement of said violation
claim; and
(3) Informing him that upon failure to so settle, a complaint will be
filed in the Circuit Court of Cook County charging him with such
violation.
Section
Settlement
Amount
PARKING - Violation of all sections: Chapter
14
All parking violations committed within a
12-month period, except violations of
§ 14.134(A) (Handicapped Zones)
$50
For each violation of § 14.134(A)
(Handicapped Zones)
$250
NO VEHICLE STICKER — IMPROPER
VEHICLE STICKER OR FAILURE TO
PURCHASE OR DISPLAY VEHICLE STICKER
- Violation of all sections: Article 38, Chapter
11
$50
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.250 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.250.1
1:419
Section
Settlement
Amount
BICYCLE - Violation of all sections: Article 7,
Chapter 14
All bicycle violations committed within a
12-month period
$20
For each and every offense thereafter
committed within said period, for each
such offense
Additional sum of
$10
SPEED - Violation of Article 4, Chapter 14
15 miles or less over speed limit $50
TRAFFIC - Violations not otherwise provided
for - Violations of Chapter 14
$50
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE (IVC) - Violation of
the following sections:
IVC
Section Description
Settlement
Amount
3-413 Display of registration plates,
registration stickers and driveway
decal permits
$50
11-1406 Obstruction to driver's view $50
11-1407 Improper opening of door into
traffic
$50
11-1410 Coasting on downgrade $50
11-1411 Following fire apparatus $50
12-101 Unsafe motor vehicle $50
12-201(a) Driving without lighted lamp
(motorcycle)
$50
12-201(b) Driving without lights when
required
$50
12-201(b) No tail-lights $50
12-201(b) No red tail-light $50
12-201(b) Only one red tail-light $50
12-201(c) No rear registration light $50
12-205.1 No lights when required (specific
vehicle)
$50
12-208 No signal lamp or device $50
12-211 Improper lighting $50
12-212 Illegal lights (red or flashing) $50
§ 14.250.1 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.250.1
1:420
IVC
Section Description
Settlement
Amount
12-215 Illegal use of oscillating, rotating,
or flashing lights
$50
12-301 Defective or no brakes $50
12-401 Use of illegal tires (studs) $50
12-405(c) Use of unsafe tire $50
12-501 No safety glass $50
12-502 Mirrors $50
12-503(a),
(c), (e)
Obstruction of driver's view $50
12-503(d) No windshield wiper or cleaning
device
$50
12-601 Defective horn $50
12-602 Muffler (loud; excessive noise; no
muffler)
$50
12-603 No seat belts $50
12-606 Tow trucks (identification) $50
12-607 Vehicle suspension system $50
12-608 Vehicle bumpers $50
12-610 Wearing headset receiver while
driving
$50
12-702(a) No flags, flares, warning devices
carried
$50
12-702(c) No flags, flares, warning devices
displayed
$50
12-703 Dripping oil on roadway $50
12-710 Inadequate or no splash guards $50
(B) Settlement.
(1) Pursuant to said citation, the person so accused of said violation
may settle and compromise the violation claim in respect to such
Code violation by paying to the municipality the applicable amount
as shown in the schedule set forth as the settlement amount in
Subsection (A) above, within a period to be specified in said
citation, not more than 10 days of the time said alleged offense was
committed.
(2) Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions
contained in the aforesaid citation, at the office of the desk officer
of the police station, who shall issue a receipt for the money so
received and promptly remit said amount to the City Collector, to
§ 14.250.1 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.250.1
1:421
§ 14.251. Citation on illegally parked vehicle.
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped
in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance of the City
or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration
number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which
may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic
citation as provided for in this chapter.
§ 14.252. Presumption in reference to illegal parking.
In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing
the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or
regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint
was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle,
be forwarded to the City Treasurer to be credited to the proper
municipal fund.
(C) Final notice; penalty. In the event that the person to whom said citation
is issued fails to settle and pay said violation within the time specified in
the citation, a final notice shall be mailed to him. When, in fact, the final
notice has been mailed, the violation may then be settled and
compromised by paying two times the amount set forth in the schedule
in Subsection (A) above within the time specified in the final notice.
(D) Issuance of complaint. In the event that the person to whom the citation
is issued fails to settle and pay said violation claim within the time
specified in the final notice (if one is served or mailed to him), then the
police officer is authorized to cause the citation (notice to appear or "P"
ticket) to be served upon said alleged violator and is authorized to file
the same as a complaint in the Circuit Court of Cook County and
prosecute the same. The officer, as an alternative, may file a formal
complaint in the Circuit Court of Cook County in lieu of the citation.
(E) Court penalty; settlement before court date. In the event that payment
is not made within the time prescribed in the final notice and the
citation or a complaint is filed in the Circuit Court, payment of any fine
and costs shall be in such amounts as may be determined and
established by the Circuit Court, but not to exceed the sum of $500 for
any one violation; provided that the offenses may be settled and
compromised for the amount specified in the notice to appear at least
three working days before the court date. Such amount shall be two
times the amount set forth in the schedule set forth in Subsection (A)
above.
(F) Correction of violation. The payment of an amount as settlement herein
will not excuse securing of and the payment of a license fee provided for
in this Code or correction of the violation. Proof of correction must be
furnished before settlement is accepted.
§ 14.250.1 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.252
1:422
shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered
owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle
at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred.
The lessor of any vehicle, whether or not a registered owner, shall be
responsible for such parking violation and subject to the penalty therefor.
§ 14.253. Authority to impound vehicles.
(A) Members of the Police Division are hereby authorized to remove a
vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of
safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police Division,
or otherwise maintained by the City under the circumstances
hereinafter enumerated:
(1) When any vehicle is left unattended where such vehicle constitutes
an obstruction of traffic.
(2) When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the
vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an
extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(3) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(4) When any vehicle is left upon a street in violation of § 14.136,
Parking prohibited on snow routes.
(5) When any vehicle is left parked upon a street in a marked "Tow
Away Zone."
(6) When any vehicle is left parked on the street in violation of any
specific section which does not provide for a method of immediate
tow, the vehicle shall be towed by giving reasonable notice that it
will be towed. A minimum of one hour's and not more than 24
hours' notice shall be given that said vehicle will be towed by
posting a notice on the windshield of the vehicle. Said notice shall
merely state the "vehicle will be towed if not removed within ____
hours" or "a second or more violation of this section will subject the
vehicle to immediate tow."
(7) When any vehicle otherwise constitutes an immediate threat to the
health, safety and welfare of the public.
(B) Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in
this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the
registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner
thereof, such officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice
in writing to such owner of the fact of such removal and the reasons
therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In
§ 14.252 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.253
1:423
§ 14.254. Audit of records and reports.
The Chief of Police shall make a monthly report to the City Council
regarding the number of citations issued, the disposition of those citations
and the revenues received as a result of the citations.
§ 14.255. Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures.
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of
bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be paid into the City treasury and deposited in a corporate
fund.
§ 14.256. through § 14.269. (Reserved)
the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of such
notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage.
(C) Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this section
and does not know, and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner,
or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as
hereinbefore provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to
the owner within a period of three days, then and in that event the
officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of
such removal by mail to the state department whose duty it is to
register motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of such notice with the
proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored.
Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the
date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for such
removal, and name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.
(D) The owner or person entitled to custody of the vehicle shall pay, in case
of redemption, the actual cost and expense of said removal and a
reasonable storage charge in addition to any fine. On written notice to
the City, however, he shall be entitled to a post-tow hearing as to his
liability for the charges and the lawfulness of the tow pursuant to
Article 20.
§ 14.253 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.256
1:424
ARTICLE 25
Administrative Adjudication of Vehicular Standing, Parking and
Vehicle Compliance and Automated Traffic Law Violations
[Added by Ord. No. 7-1997; amended 8-22-2006 by Ord. No.
11-2006150]
§ 14.270. Purpose; definition.
§ 14.271. Administrative bodies and personnel.
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking,
and vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic law violations shall
provide for a traffic compliance administrator, hearing officer, computer
operator/system coordinator and hearing room personnel (deputy) with the
power, authority and limitations as are hereinafter set forth.
(A) The stated purpose of this article is to provide a fair and efficient
enforcement of municipal vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle
compliance violations, automated traffic law violations, and other
municipal regulation violations as may be allowed by law, through an
administrative adjudication of violations of municipal ordinances
regulating the standing, parking, and condition of vehicles or
automated traffic law violations within the geographic boundaries of
this municipality and a schedule of uniform fines and penalties and
authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
(B) For purposes of this article, "compliance violation" means a violation of
a municipal regulation governing the condition or use of equipment on
a vehicle or governing the display of a municipal wheel tax license.
(A) The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall be empowered and is
hereby authorized and directed to:
(1) Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular standing, parking, and compliance regulation violations.
(2) Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking, and compliance
violation notices and other notices as may be required under this
article or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of
this article.
(3) Collect moneys paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final
determination of vehicular standing, parking, or compliance
regulation violation(s) liability.
(4) Conduct hearings, as a hearing officer, with the same power and
authority as is hereinafter set forth, during the absence of the
appointed hearing officer.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 14.270 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.271
1:425
(5) Certify copies of final determination(s) of vehicular standing,
parking, and vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic
law violations liability and factual reports verifying that the final
determination of vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle
compliance violations and automated traffic law violations liability
was issued in accordance with this article and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3.
(6) Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions
of this article, hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 ILCS 5/
6-306.5.
(7) Review final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking, and
vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic law violations
liability, validity of notices of impending impoundment or validity of
notice of impending driver's license suspension, in an
administrative review capacity in accordance with the provisions of
this article, hereinafter set forth.
(8) Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate
and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby
created.
(9) Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints in the Circuit
Court or selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on
behalf of this municipality in filing complaints seeking judgments
for unpaid fines or penalties and pursuit of all post-judgment
remedies available by current law.
(10) To select or appoint an individual, agency or firm to tow and
impound vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this article,
hereinafter set forth.
(B) The hearing officer shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and
directed to:
(1) Preside over the administrative hearings, established herein, as the
adjudicator.
(2) Administer oaths.
(3) Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and
production of relevant papers or documentation.
(4) Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular standing,
parking, and vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic
law violations as are established in § 14.268 hereof.
(5) Make final determination of:
(a) Vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations
and automated traffic law violations liability.
§ 14.271 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.271
1:426
(b) Validity of notice of impending impoundment.
(c) Validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension in
accordance with the provisions of this article, hereinafter set
forth.
(6) Provide for the accurate recordation of the administrative
adjudication hearing(s).
(C) The System Coordinator/Computer Operator are hereby authorized and
directed to operate and maintain the computer program(s) for the
administrative adjudication system hereby created, on a day-to-day
basis, including, but not limited to:
(1) Input of violation notice information.
(2) Hearing date(s) and notice dates.
(3) Fine and penalty assessments and payment(s).
(4) Issue payment receipts.
(5) Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates, final determination of
liability, notice of impending impoundment and notice of impending
driver's license suspension, as directed by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set
forth.
(6) Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties
assessed and paid.
(D) Hearing room personnel.
(1) Hearing room personnel are hereby authorized and directed to:
(a) Maintain hearing room decorum.
(b) Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom
deputies of the Circuit Court.
(c) Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be
required and as directed by the hearing officer or Traffic
Compliance Administrator.
(2) This position is limited to off-duty, full-time, part-time or auxiliary
police officers.
(E) Appointments. The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint persons to
hold the positions above set forth. One person may hold and fulfill the
requirements of one or more of the above-stated positions.
(F) Compensation to be paid for each of the above-stated positions shall be
as determined by the Mayor and approved by the City Council.
§ 14.271 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.272
1:427
§ 14.272. Procedure.
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking,
and vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic law violations shall
be in accordance with the following procedures and final determination(s)
of vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations and
automated traffic law violations liability, validity of notice of impending
impoundment, validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension,
impoundment of vehicle and collections shall be made only in accordance
with the provisions set forth below:
(A) Violation notice. Vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle compliance
violations and automated traffic law violations notices ["violation
notice(s)"] shall be issued by the person(s) authorized herein and shall
contain information and shall be served, certified and have evidentiary
admissibility as is hereinafter set forth.
(B) Authorization. All full-time, part-time, auxiliary police and community
service officers, as well as other specifically appointed individuals shall
have the authority to issue violation(s) notices.
(C) Detection of violations. Any individual authorized hereby to issue
violation(s) notices and who detects a violation of any section of any
applicable municipal ordinance, shall issue a notice of violation thereof
and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.
(D) The vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations and
automated traffic law violations violation notice shall contain, but shall
not be limited to, the following information:
(1) The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
(2) The particular vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle compliance
and automated traffic law regulation violated.
(3) Vehicle make and state registration number. With regard to
automated traffic law violations, vehicle make shall be specified on
the automated speed enforcement system or automated traffic law
violation notice if the make is available and readily discernible.
(4) The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment
or failure to complete a required traffic education program, or
both.
(5) The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice.
(6) A section entitled "Request for Hearing," which shall clearly set
forth that the registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial
administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice
on the date and at the time and place as specified in the violation
notice by:
§ 14.272 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.272
1:428
(a) Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified "Request for Hearing."
(b) Placing his/her name and current address in the place
provided.
(c) Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.
(d) Filing the violation notice, with the "Request for Hearing"
portion fully completed, with the Traffic Compliance
Administrator, postmarked within 10 days of the violation
notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon
receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.
(7) The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which the
violation may be contested on its merits.
(8) That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty,
completion of a required traffic education program, or both, shall
operate as a final disposition of the violation.
(9) A section entitled "Nonresident Request for Hearing - Non-
Appearance," which clearly sets forth that a nonresident registered
owner or lessee may appear at the initial administrative hearing to
contest the validity of the violation notice without personally
appearing by:
(a) Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and Clearly
identified "Nonresident Request for Hearing - Nonappearance."
(b) Placing his/her name and current address in the place
provided.
(c) Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.
(d) Filing the violation notice, with the "Nonresident Request for
Hearing" portion fully completed, with the Traffic Compliance
Administrator, postmarked within 10 days of the violation
notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed upon
receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.
(e) Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice, which must be filed with the
Traffic Compliance Administrator postmarked within 10 days
of the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed
filed if postmarked by the due dates herein specified.
(f) A clearly marked statement that execution of the Nonresident
Request for Hearing is a waiver of the nonresident's right to a
personal appearance and that the adjudication will be made
based upon the notarized statement of facts submitted by the
§ 14.272 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.272
1:429
nonresident and the facts contained in the violation(s)
notice(s).
(E) Service of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be made by the person issuing
such notice by:
(1) Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully
standing or parked vehicle; or
(2) Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of
the vehicle, if present; or
(3) In the case of an automated traffic law violation notice, by mail to
the address of the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle as
recorded with the Secretary of State or the lessor of the motor
vehicle within 30 days after the Secretary of State or the lessor of
the motor vehicle notifies the municipality of the identity of the
owner or lessee of the vehicle, but not later than 90 days after the
violation, except that in the case of a lessee of a motor vehicle,
service of an automated traffic law violation notice may occur no
later than 210 days after the violation. A technician employed or
contracted by the municipality shall determine that, based on
inspection of recorded images, the motor vehicle was being
operated in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-208.6, 11-208.9, or
11-1201.1 or a local ordinance. If the technician determines that
the vehicle entered the intersection as part of a funeral procession
or in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle, a
citation shall not be issued.
(F) The correctness of facts contained in the vehicular standing, parking,
and vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic law violations
notice(s) shall be certified by the person issuing said notice by:
(1) Signing his/her name to the notice(s) at the time of service; or
(2) In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificate, to be kept by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced
by the device while under his/her control.
(G) The original or a facsimile of the violation(s) notice(s) shall be retained
by the Traffic Compliance Administrator and kept as a record in the
ordinary course of business.
(H) Prima facie evidence of correctness. Any violation(s) notice(s) issued,
signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall
be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the
correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
(I) Admissibility. The violation(s) notice(s) or a copy(s) shall be admissible
in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding.
§ 14.272 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.273
1:430
§ 14.273. Administrative hearings.
§ 14.274. Additional notices.
(A) An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged vehicular standing,
parking, and vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic law
violations on its merits: shall be granted to the registered owner or
operator of the cited vehicle, pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 or the
lessee of the cited vehicle, pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-1306,
incorporated herein by reference.
(B) Hearing dates shall be at the date, time and place as is set forth in the
violation notice issued and served, or such additional notices issued in
accordance with this article. Violators shall be given no fewer than
three opportunities to appear, and failure to appear by the third
scheduled hearing date will result in a final determination of liability as
hereinafter set forth.
(C) The hearing shall be recorded.
(D) The hearing shall culminate in a determination of liability or nonliability
made by the hearing officer, who shall consider testimony and other
evidence without the application of the formal or technical rules of
evidence. The hearing officer shall, upon a determination of liability,
assess fines and penalties in accordance with § 14.278 hereof.
(E) Representation by attorney. Persons appearing to contest the alleged
standing, parking, or compliance violation on its merits may be
represented by counsel at their own expense.
(F) Review. The final determination of any matter which may be decided by
the hearing officer may be reviewed as is hereinafter set forth.
(A) Upon failure of the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle to
appear at the administrative hearing indicated in the vehicular
standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations and automated
traffic law violations notice(s), or upon final determination of violation
liability, the Traffic Compliance Administrator shall send or cause to be
sent additional notices which:
(1) Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle
at the address as is recorded with the Secretary of State or, if any
notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last
known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved
database.
(2) Shall be sent to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the address last
known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if
any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last
known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved
database.
§ 14.273 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.274
1:431
(3) Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.
(B) Service of additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
(C) The additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the
following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:
(1) Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the "cited
vehicle" to appear at the hearing set forth in the vehicular
standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations and
automated traffic law violations notice(s), additional notice(s) shall
be sent, as above set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to
the following information:
(a) Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing,
parking, or compliance regulation or automated traffic law
violation(s) notice(s).
(b) Particular standing, parking, or compliance regulation or
automated traffic law violated.
(c) Vehicle make and state registration.
(d) Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment or
failure to complete a required traffic education program, or
both.
(e) Notice to the registered owner or lessee of his or her current
status, other than paid in full.
(f) Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
(g) Statement that failure to either pay the fine and any applicable
penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the
date and at the time and place specified will result in a final
determination of vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle
compliance violations and automated traffic law violations
liability for the cited violation in the amount of the fine and
penalty indicated.
(h) Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
vehicular standing, parking, or compliance violation(s) liability
for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any
unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the
municipality.
(2) A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking, and
vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic law violations
liability shall be sent following an appearance by the violator and a
§ 14.274 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.274
1:432
determination of liability, or the failure to appear by the violator
by the third and final hearing date upon conclusion of any
administrative and/or judicial review, as is hereinafter set forth,
and the notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
information and warnings:
(a) A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a
debt due and owing the municipality.
(b) A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and
owing the municipality within the time specified may result in
the municipality's filing a complaint in the Circuit Court to
have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered a judgment in
accordance with 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(f), incorporated herein
by reference.
(c) A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located
within the municipality may be impounded for failure to pay
fines or penalties for five or more vehicular standing, parking,
or compliance regulation violations.
(d) A warning that the person's driver's license may be suspended
for failure to pay fines or penalties for 10 or more vehicular
standing or parking violations under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5,
incorporated herein by reference, or a combination of five or
more automated traffic law violations under Article 26 of this
chapter.
(3) A notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license
shall be sent to any person liable for failure to complete a required
traffic education program or determined to be liable for the
payment of any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on 10 or
more vehicular standing or parking regulation violations or
combination of five or more unpaid automated traffic law
violations.
(a) The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty
owing within 45 days of the date of the notice will result in the
municipality's notifying the Secretary of State that the person
is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625
ILCS 5/6-306.5, incorporated herein by reference.
(b) The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be
sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address
recorded with the Secretary of State or, if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address
recorded in a United States Post Office approved database.
(c) The notice shall also state that the person may obtain a
photostatic copy of an original ticket imposing a fine or penalty
by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the
municipality along with a request for the photostatic copy.
§ 14.274 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.275
1:433
§ 14.275. Final determination of liability.
§ 14.276. Administrative review.
A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking, and
vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic law violations liability
may be filed by a person owing an unpaid fine or penalty or required to
complete a traffic education program in the manner and subject to the
restrictions and grounds hereinafter set forth.
(A) A final determination of vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle
compliance violations and automated traffic law violations liability shall
occur following the failure to complete the required traffic education
program or to pay the total assessed fine or penalty, or both, after the
hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, and
vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic law violations
liability and the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any
administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth; or
(B) Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the third and
final administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged violation(s)
on the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or
mailed notice, the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing,
parking, and vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic law
violations liability shall become final:
(1) Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination; or
(2) Upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition without a
filing having been made.
(A) A written petition to set aside a determination of liability must be filed
in the office of the Traffic Compliance Administrator within, but not
later than, 14 days from the date the determination of liability is made.
(B) The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall act upon the petition(s)
timely filed and render a decision thereon within 14 days of the date
filed.
(C) The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be
limited to the following:
(1) The person against whom the determination of liability is made was
not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the date the
vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations and
automated traffic law violations notice(s) were issued.
(2) The person's having paid the fine or penalty prior to the
determination of liability for the violation(s) in question.
(3) Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
(D) Should the determination of liability be set aside:
§ 14.275 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.276
1:434
§ 14.277. Nonresident procedures.
(1) The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall notify the registered
owner, or lessee, as the case may be, that the determination of
liability has been set aside.
(2) The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall notify the registered
owner, or lessee, as the case may be, of a date, time and place for a
hearing on the merits of the violation for which determination of
liability has been set aside.
(3) Notice of setting aside of the determination of liability and the
notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage
prepaid to the address set forth on the petition to set aside the
determination of liability.
(4) Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice(s) is
deposited in the United States mail.
(A) Nonresidents of this municipality who have been served vehicular
standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations and automated
traffic law violations notices, in accordance with this article, may
contest the alleged violation on its merits, as could a resident, or may
contest the validity without personally appearing at an administrative
hearing by:
(1) Completing, in full, the "Nonresident Request for Hearing" section
of the violation notice, served upon him/her pursuant to this article.
(2) Signing the Nonresident Request for Hearing in the space specified
in the violation notice, and acknowledging that his/her personal
appearance is waived and submitting to an adjudication based
upon the notarized statement filed by him/her and the facts
contained in the violation notice.
(3) Filing the violation notice with the "Request for Hearing" section
fully completed with the Traffic Compliance Administrator
postmarked within 10 days of the violation notice issuance. The
request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic
Compliance Administrator.
(4) Filing a notarized a statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice, which must be filed with the
Traffic Compliance Administrator, postmarked within 10 days of
the violation notice issuance. The request shall be deemed filed
upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator. A
Nonresident Request for Hearing after the due date or with cause,
at the discretion of the Traffic Compliance Administrator, may be
accepted for hearing consideration and decision.
§ 14.276 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.277
1:435
§ 14.278. Schedule of fines and penalties.
(B) The Hearing Officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts set
forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident as is
contained in the violation notice.
(C) Notice of the determination of the hearing officer shall be served upon
the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted.
(D) Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is placed
in the United States mail.
(E) All other provisions of this article shall apply equally to nonresidents of
this municipality.
(A) The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of
vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations and
automated traffic law violations shall be as follows:
Fine Payment Schedule
General Fine
Settlement
Amount
General
Fine
Amount
Handicapped
Fine
Amount
Traffic
Compliance
Step
1
Upon service
of a violation
notice, a
violator can
choose to
settle the
claim by
paying, within
10 days of the
violation
notice
issuance, the
following
amount:
$50 N/A $250 $50
Step
2
Upon failure
to settle as
specified in
Step 1, the
fine amount, if
paid prior to
or on the first
hearing date,
shall be:
N/A $100 $500 $100
§ 14.277 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.278
1:436
§ 14.279. Certified report of failure to pay fines or penalties.
Fine Payment Schedule
General Fine
Settlement
Amount
General
Fine
Amount
Handicapped
Fine
Amount
Traffic
Compliance
Step
3
Upon failure
to pay the fine
amount
specified in
Step 2 prior to
or on the
second
hearing date,
the fine
amount, if
paid, shall be:
N/A $200 $500 $150
Step
4
Upon failure
to pay the fine
amount
specified in
Step 3, prior
to or on the
third hearing
date, or upon
the finding of
liability for the
violation, after
failure to
appear at the
third hearing,
shall be:
N/A $250 $500 $250
(B) Completion of a traffic education program may be required in lieu of or
in addition to the fines set forth above.
(C) The fines and penalties herein set forth shall be uniformly applied for
each violation of any applicable municipal ordinance.
(D) The municipality adopts by reference all current and future local
vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations and
automated traffic law violations, and those provisions of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes governing the standing, parking, or condition of
vehicles, for its enforcement and adjudication within the geographical
boundaries of the municipality and in those areas subject to off-street
parking agreements.
(A) Upon a failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing the
City after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth herein
§ 14.278 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.279
1:437
§ 14.280. Immobilization, towing and impoundment.
for 10 or more vehicular parking regulation violations or five or more
automated traffic law violations, the Traffic Compliance Administrator
shall make a certified report to the Secretary of State stating that the
owner of a registered vehicle has failed to pay any fine or penalty due
and owing the City as a result of 10 or more violations of municipal
vehicular standing or parking regulations or five or more automated
traffic law violations and thereby cause the suspension of that person's
driver's license.
(B) The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall take no further action
unless and until the fines and penalties due and owing the City are paid
or upon determination that the inclusion of the person's name on the
certified report was in error. At such time, the Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall submit to the Secretary of State a notification,
which shall result in the halting of driver's license suspension
proceedings. The person named therein shall receive a certified copy of
such notification upon request and at no charge.
(C) Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by
completing a form provided by the Office of the Traffic Compliance
Administrator. The form shall specify the grounds on which such
challenge is based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the
following:
(1) The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the vehicle so
receiving 10 or more violation notices or five or more automated
traffic law violations on the date or dates such notices were issued;
or
(2) The person has paid the fine and/or penalty for the 10 or more
violations or five or more automated traffic law violations indicated
on the certified report.
(D) The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall render a determination
within 14 business days of receipt of the objection form and shall notify
the objector of the determination.
(A) Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be
liable for five or more vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle
compliance violations and automated traffic law violations, for which
the fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be immobilized or
towed and impounded if:
(1) The Traffic Compliance Administrator has determined that a
person has been determined to be liable for five or more vehicular
standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations and
automated traffic law violations, the fines or penalties for which
remain unpaid.
§ 14.279 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.280
1:438
(2) The person determined to be liable for five or more violations is the
registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the
municipality's geographical boundaries.
(3) A pre-towing notice has been sent to the registered owner of the
motor vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the
municipality which contains, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
(a) That a final determination has been made on five or more
vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations
and automated traffic law violations, the fines and penalties for
which remain unpaid.
(b) A listing of the violation(s) for which the person has been
determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
(i) The vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle compliance
violations and automated traffic law violation notice
number.
(ii) Date of issuance.
(iii) Total amount of fine(s) and penalty(s) assessed.
(c) That the motor vehicle(s) owned by the person and located
within the municipality is subject to immobilization and/or
towing and impoundment if the fines and penalties are not paid
within 14 days of the date of the notice.
(d) That the registered owner may contest the validity of the
notice by fully completing and signing the request for hearing
portion of one notice and by filing the request for hearing with
the Traffic Compliance Administrator within, but not later
than, 14 days of the date of the notice. The request for hearing
shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance
Administrator.
(4) The motor vehicle(s) of the registered owner to whom notice is sent
has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in
the notice and no timely request for hearing has been filed with the
Traffic Compliance Administrator to contest the validity of the
notice.
(B) Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the
notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment, the
Traffic Compliance Administrator shall schedule an administrative
hearing to contest the validity of said notice, by disproving liability for
the unpaid final determinations of parking, standing, or compliance
violation liability listed on the notice, on the next available hearing
date, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than 60 days
after the request for hearing is filed.
§ 14.280 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.280
1:439
(1) The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve notice of the
hearing date upon the registered owner.
(2) Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address as set forth on the request for hearing.
(3) Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in
the United States mail.
(C) The registered owner of a vehicle(s) immobilized or towed and
impounded under this section shall have the right to a prompt
administrative hearing without the requirement of payment of
outstanding fines and penalties for which final determination has been
made.
(1) The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve a post-towing
notice upon the registered owner of a vehicle immobilized or towed
and impounded under this section, which notice shall contain, but
not be limited to, the following information:
(a) Date of immobilization or towing and date of impoundment.
(b) Location of vehicle.
(c) That the vehicle was immobilized under this section of this
chapter for nonpayment of fines or penalties assessed for five
or more violations of vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle
compliance and automated traffic law regulations for which the
registered owner has been determined liable and notified of
impending immobilization or towing and impoundment.
(d) Date of notice of impending immobilization or towing and
impoundment.
(e) That the registered owner may contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment by completing and
signing the request for hearing portion of the notice and filing
the request for hearing with the Traffic Compliance
Administrator within, but not later than, 14 days of the date of
the notice, which shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the
Traffic Compliance Administrator.
(2) Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of
the immobilization or towing and impoundment, the Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing
to contest the validity of the immobilization or towing and
impoundment on the next available hearing date or if sooner
scheduled by the Traffic Compliance Administrator for good cause
shown, but in no case shall the hearing be scheduled later than 60
days after the request for hearing is filed.
(a) The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve notice of the
hearing date upon the registered owner.
§ 14.280 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.280
1:440
§ 14.281. Judicial review.
Judicial review of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, and
vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic law violations and final
administrative decisions issued after a hearing(s) regarding vehicle
immobilization or towing and impoundment made under this article shall be
subject to the provisions of the Administrative Review Law as is set forth in
735 ILCS 5/301 et seq., incorporated herein by reference.
§ 14.282. Debt to municipality; final disposition.
Any fine, penalty, incomplete traffic education program or part of any fine
or any penalty assessed in accordance with the provisions of this article
and remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
administrative remedies created under this article and the conclusion of any
judicial review procedures shall be a debt due and owing the municipality
and, as such, may be collected in accordance with the applicable law.
(b) Notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
(c) Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed
in the United States mail.
(3) An order entered after the hearing to contest the validity of the
immobilization or towing and impoundment is a final administrative
decision within the meaning of 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.,
incorporated herein by reference.
(D) A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released to the
registered owner thereof, or his agent, upon payment of the fines and
penalties due and owing the municipality as specified in the notice sent
in accordance with Subsection A(3) hereof and the payment of towing
charges and accrued daily impound charges or upon order of the
hearing officer following hearing contesting the validity of the
impoundment.
(E) The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall appoint or retain the
services of an individual agency or company to tow and impound
vehicles in accordance herewith, provided:
(1) The individual, agency or company is fully licensed according to
local and state law.
(2) The individual, agency or company is fully insured.
(3) The individual, agency or company has available a secured
impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded
hereunder. For the purpose of this section, a "secured area" shall
mean an area bounded by a fence, chain link or otherwise, of a
sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize or
prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles.
§ 14.280 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.282
1:441
Completion of any required traffic education program and payment in full
of any fine or penalty resulting from a standing, parking, or compliance or
automated traffic law violation shall constitute a final disposition of that
violation.
§ 14.283. Judgment.
(A) The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall, following the expiration of
the period within which administrative or judicial review may be sought
for a final determination of violation, take all necessary action(s),
execute all required documents and appoint or retain any individual or
agency deemed appropriate to obtain a judgment against and collect
moneys from the person(s) who has been assessed fines or penalties
which remain unpaid and have become a debt due and owing the
municipality in accordance with the provisions of this article and 625
ILCS 5/11-208.3 by:
(1) Filing a complaint in the Circuit Court praying for the entry of a
judgment against the person for whom a final determination of
vehicular standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations and
automated traffic law violations liability has been made.
(a) The complaint filed by the Traffic Compliance Administrator or
individual or agency on behalf of the municipality seeking
entry of a judgment against an individual for unpaid fines and/
or penalties pursuant to a final determination of vehicular
standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations and
automated traffic law violations shall have appended:
(i) A certified copy of the final determination of the vehicular
standing, parking, and vehicle compliance violations and
automated traffic law violations.
(ii) A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the
final determination of vehicular standing, parking, and
vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic law
violations was issued in accordance with this article and
625 ILCS 5/11-208.3.
(b) Nothing shall prevent the municipality from consolidating
multiple final determinations of vehicular standing, parking,
and vehicle compliance violations and automated traffic law
violations liability in an action in the Circuit Court against an
individual.
(2) Pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect money
judgments.
(B) Service of the summons and a copy of the complaint may be served
upon the person against whom a judgment is sought under the
provisions of this article by any method provided under 735 ILCS 5/
2-203, incorporated herein by reference, or by certified mail, return
§ 14.282 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.283
1:442
§ 14.284. through § 14.299. (Reserved)
receipt requested, provided the total amount of fines and penalties for
final determination of standing, parking, or compliance regulation or
automated traffic law violations does not exceed $2,500.
§ 14.283 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.284
1:443

ARTICLE 26
Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System
[Added 1-9-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007; amended 9-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 12-2010; 12-10-2013 by Ord. No. 5-2013]
§ 14.300. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words or terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context or usage clearly indicates another meaning
was intended:
ADMINISTRATOR — The City's Traffic Control Administrator.
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM — A device within
the City of Hometown with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in
conjunction with a red light signal to produce recorded images of motor
vehicles entering an intersection against a steady or flashing red signal
indication in violation of Section 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
("Code"), 625 ILCS 5/11-306, or similar violation of the Municipal Code of
the City of Hometown. The automated traffic law enforcement system shall
not be used to enforce speed regulations.
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION — A "disregarding a traffic control
device" violation or a "no turn on red" violation, as those terms are defined
in this section.
CERTIFIED REPORT — A report to the Illinois Secretary of State
concerning five or more unpaid fines or penalties for automated traffic law
violations made by the City to the Secretary in accordance with Section
6-306.5 of the Code.
CITY — The City of Hometown, Cook County, Illinois.
CODE — The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
DETERMINATION NOTICE — A notice of final determination of automated
traffic law violation liability issued pursuant to Section 11-208.3 of the Code
and pursuant to the provisions of this article.
DISREGARDING A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE — A failure to stop and
remain stopped before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as
provided for in Section 11-306 of the Code. Disregarding a traffic control
device, for purposes of the automated traffic law enforcement system, shall
not include:
Those instances when a motor vehicle comes to a complete stop and
does not enter the intersection, as defined by Section 1-132 of the Code,
during the cycle of the red signal unless one or more pedestrians or
bicyclists are present, even if the motor vehicle stops at a point past a
stop line or crosswalk where the driver is required to stop, as specified
in Section 11-306(c) of the Code, or similar violation of the Municipal
Code of the City of Hometown; or
(A)
§ 14.300 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.300
1:445
NO TURN ON RED — A failure to stop and remain stopped, and not
proceeding to turn right at, an intersection controlled by both a sign
indicating "No turn on red," or other similar language, and a red signal as
provided for in Section 11-306 of the Code.
RECORDED IMAGES — Images showing the time, date and location of
an automated traffic law violation recorded by an automated traffic law
enforcement system on two or more photographs; two or more
microphotographs; two or more electronic images; or a video recording
showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the
recording, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor
vehicle.
SECRETARY — The Illinois Secretary of State.
SUSPENSION NOTICE — A notice of impending driver's license suspension
issued pursuant to Section 11-208.3 of the Code and pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
VIOLATION NOTICE — An automated traffic law violation notice issued
pursuant to Sections 11-208.3 and 11-208.6 of the Code and pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
§ 14.301. System established.
There is established within the City an automated traffic law enforcement
system program.
Those instances where a motorcyclist enters an intersection against a
red signal indication when the red signal fails to change to green within
a reasonable period of time, not less than 120 seconds, because of a
signal malfunction or because the signal has failed to detect the arrival
of the motorcycle due to the motorcycle's size or weight.
(B)
(A) The City shall have the discretion to locate individual automated traffic
law enforcement systems at such intersections as may be deemed
appropriate.
(B) An intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement
system shall be posted with a sign visible to approaching traffic
indicating that the intersection is being monitored by an automated
traffic law enforcement system.
(C) The City shall provide notice to drivers on its website of the location of
all intersections equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement
system. Any intersection equipped with an automated traffic law
enforcement system shall have a yellow change interval that conforms
to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
[Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 7-2016]
(D) The City shall conduct a statistical analysis to assess the safety impact
of each automated traffic law enforcement system at an intersection
following installation of the system. The statistical analysis shall be
based upon the best available crash, traffic, and other data, and shall
§ 14.300 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.301
1:446
§ 14.302. Administrator.
There is hereby established the office of Administrator, which shall be
filled by appointment of the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Aldermen. The Administrator, or his or her designee, shall be authorized to
adopt, distribute and process violation notices and other notices required
by this article and the Code, collect money paid as fines and penalties
for automated traffic law violations, and administer the administrative
adjudication system for automated traffic law violations. The Administrator
is also authorized to draft and issue any certified reports to the Illinois
Secretary of State as required by this article and the Code. The
Administrator shall make the recorded images of a violation accessible to
an alleged violator by providing the alleged violator with a website address,
accessible through the internet.
§ 14.303. Violations.
It shall be unlawful to "disregard a traffic control device" or violate a "no
turn on red" as those terms are defined in this article.
§ 14.304. Violation notices. [Amended 5-8-2018 by Ord. No. 8-2018]
cover a period of time before and after installation of the system
sufficient to provide a statistically valid comparison of safety impact.
The statistical analysis shall be consistent with professional judgment
and acceptable industry practice. The statistical analysis also shall be
consistent with the data required for valid comparisons of "before"
and "after" conditions and shall be conducted within a reasonable
time period following the installation of the automated traffic law
enforcement system. If the statistical analysis for the thirty-six-month
period following installation of the system indicates that there has been
an increase in the rate of accidents at the approach to the intersection
monitored, additional studies shall be undertaken to determine the
cause and severity of the accidents, and the City may take any action
that it determines is necessary or appropriate to reduce the number or
severity of the accidents at the intersection.
(A) When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor
vehicle violating § 14.303 of this article, the Administrator shall issue a
written violation notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, which
shall be delivered by U.S. mail within 30 days after the Illinois Secretary
of State notifies the City of the identity of the registered owner of the
vehicle, and in no event later than 90 days following the violation. If any
notice to an addressee is returned as undeliverable, a second notice
shall be sent to the last known address recorded in a United States Post
Office approved database of the owner of the cited vehicle. The second
notice shall be made by first-class mail, postage prepaid.
(B) No person who is the lessor of a motor vehicle pursuant to a written
lease agreement shall be liable for an automated traffic law
§ 14.301 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.304
1:447
enforcement system violation involving such motor vehicle during the
period of the lease, provided that upon the request of the Administrator
received within 120 days after the violation occurred, the lessor
provides within 60 days after such receipt the name and address of the
lessee. The driver's license number of a lessee may be subsequently
individually requested by the Administrator if needed for enforcement
purposes. Upon the provision of information by the lessor, the
Administrator shall issue the violation notice to the lessee of the vehicle
in the same manner as it would issue a violation notice to a registered
owner, and the lessee may be held liable for the violation, and all other
provisions applicable to owners in this article shall apply to the lessee.
(C) Before a violation notice is issued, a determination must be made by a
technician employed or contracted by the City that, based on the
inspection of recorded images generated by the system, the motor
vehicle was being operated in violation of § 14.303 of this article. Upon
determination that the recorded image captures a violation, a violation
notice shall be issued and served upon the registered vehicle owner in
the manner provided for above. If the technician determines that the
vehicle entered the intersection as part of a funeral procession or in
order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle, a citation shall
not be issued. The Administrator, or his/her designee, shall retain a
copy of all violation notices, recorded images and other correspondence
mailed to the registered owner of the motor vehicle. Such documents
shall be kept in the ordinary course of business. Each violation notice
and the recorded images shall constitute evidence of the facts
contained in the notice, is admissible in any proceeding relative to the
violation, and shall be prima facie evidence of a violation.
(D) The violation notice shall include the following information:
(1) The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if
such information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known
address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database;
(2) The make (only if discernable) and registration number of the
motor vehicle involved in the violation;
(3) The violation charged;
(4) The location where the violation occurred;
(5) The date and time of the violation;
(6) A copy of the recorded images;
(7) The amount of the civil fine imposed and the date on which the civil
fine should be paid;
(8) A statement that recorded images constitute prima facie evidence
of a violation;
§ 14.304 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.304
1:448
§ 14.305. Hearing; defenses.
(9) A statement that a failure to pay the civil fine or to contest liability
in a timely fashion is an admission of liability and may result in the
suspension of driving privileges of the registered owner of the
vehicle, as well as the imposition of additional penalty of $100 for
failure to pay the original fine in a timely manner, and any costs
incurred by the City for the costs of collection;
(10) A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the
fine; or challenging the charge by mail or in person at an
administrative hearing;
(11) A statement that the payment of any fine, and the payment of any
applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final
disposition of the violation;
(12) A statement indicating the date and time of the administrative
hearing; and
(13) A website address, accessible through the Internet, where the
person may view the recorded images of the violation.
(A) The registered owner or lessee of a motor vehicle cited in a violation
notice shall have the opportunity for a hearing in which said owner or
lessee may challenge the evidence or set forth an applicable defense by
filling in all relevant information on the violation notice and returning
the same to the Administrator in a timely fashion. The violation notice
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the
basis of applicable defenses. Formal rules of evidence will not apply at
the hearing. Hearings shall be recorded, and the hearing officer shall
be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant
books and papers. Persons appearing at the hearing may be
represented by counsel at their own expense. A registered owner or
lessee who fails to appear at a hearing which he/she has requested will
be found in default and a final determination will be entered.
(B) The following may be considered defenses by the hearing officer for a
violation of § 14.303 of this article:
(1) The operator of the vehicle was issued a Uniform Traffic Control
Citation by a police officer for the same incident;
(2) The motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were
stolen before the violation occurred and not under the control of or
in the possession of the owner at the time of the violation; provided,
however, to demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration
plates were stolen before the violation occurred and were not
under the control or possession of the owner at the time of the
violation, the owner must submit proof that a report concerning the
§ 14.304 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.305
1:449
§ 14.306. Final determination of liability.
A final determination of an automated traffic law violation liability shall
occur under the following circumstances:
stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed with a law
enforcement agency in a timely manner.
(3) The vehicle was leased to another, and within 60 days after the
citation was mailed to the lessor, lessor submitted to the City,
together with a copy of the lease agreement, the lessee's driver's
license number, and any additional information as may be required;
(4) The vehicle was an authorized emergency vehicle;
(5) The operator of the vehicle passed through the intersection when
the light was red in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency
vehicle or as part of a funeral procession; or
(6) The respondent was not the registered vehicle owner or lessee of
the cited vehicle at the time of the violation.
(C) Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle cannot attend
the hearing in person, but seeks to contest the merits of the alleged
violation, such person may contest the charges using the same available
defenses as stated above, but rather than attend the administrative
hearing, he or she may submit any and all documentary evidence to the
Administrator. The person shall send a signed statement, under oath,
together with any supporting documentation, to the Administrator via
certified mail, return receipt requested, within 10 days after service of
the violation notice. Such statement shall set forth the reasons why a
finding of liability should not be entered. The Administrator shall
forward all timely submitted materials to the hearing officer for review
and determination. Notice of the hearing officer's determination shall
be sent by mail to said person.
(D) No additional fee shall be charged to an alleged violator for exercising
the right to an administrative hearing.
(A) Upon the failure to pay the fine or penalty after the hearing officer's
determination of liability and the exhaustion of or failure to exhaust
administrative review; or
(B) Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged
violation in the time and manner specified, the hearing officer's
determination shall become final upon the denial of a timely petition to
set aside a determination, or upon the expiration of the period for filing
the petition without a filing having been made.
§ 14.305 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.307
1:450
§ 14.307. Determination notice.
A determination notice shall be sent following the final determination of
automated traffic law violation liability and the conclusion of judicial review.
The determination notice shall include the following information:
§ 14.308. Petition to set aside determination.
§ 14.309. Suspension notice.
(A) A statement that the unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due and owing the
City; and
(B) A warning that a failure to pay any fine or penalty due and owing the
City within 10 days may result in the filing of a petition in the Circuit
Court of Cook County to have the unpaid fine or penalty rendered as a
judgment or may result in the suspension of the person's driver's
license for failure to pay fines or penalties for five or more automated
traffic law violations.
(A) A petition to set aside determination of an automated traffic law
violation must be filed with or mailed to the Administrator within 10
days of the date of mailing of the determination notice. The grounds for
the petition are limited to:
(1) The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the
date of the violation notice was issued;
(2) The person has paid the fine or penalty, or both, for the violation in
question;
(3) Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing;
or
(4) Such other grounds the hearing officer may deem appropriate for
granting the petition, including the defenses set forth in
§ 14.305(B).
(B) Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of
liability, the hearing officer shall review the petition to determine if
cause has been shown to set aside the determination. If cause has been
shown, the Administrator shall forward to the petitioner a new hearing
date on which the petitioner must appear to present his case on the
underlying violation. The Administrator shall notify the petitioner of the
hearing officer's decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within
14 days of the hearing officer's decision.
(A) A suspension notice shall be sent to the person liable for failing to pay
any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five or more
automated traffic law violations. The suspension notice shall state the
following information:
§ 14.307 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.309
1:451
§ 14.310. Driver's license suspension.
(1) The failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within 45 days of the
notice's date will result in the Administrator notifying the Illinois
Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of
suspension proceedings under Section 6-306.5 of the Code; and
(2) A statement that the person may obtain a photostatic copy of the
original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a selfaddressed,
stamped envelope to the Administrator, along with a
request for the copy.
(B) The suspension notice shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid,
to the address recorded with the Illinois Secretary of State or, if any
notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known
address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database.
(A) The Administrator, by certified report, shall request that the Illinois
Secretary of State suspend the driving privileges of an owner of a
registered vehicle or lessee who has failed to pay any fine or penalty
due and owing the City of Hometown as a result of five automated
traffic law violations. The report shall be certified and contain the
following information:
(1) The name, last known address as recorded with the Illinois
Secretary of State, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at
the time of lease, or as recorded in a United States Post Office
approved database if any notice sent under this section is returned
as undeliverable, and driver's license number of the person who
failed to pay the fine or penalty, and the registration number of any
vehicle known to be registered to such person in the State of
Illinois;
(2) The name of the municipality making the report;
(3) A statement that a suspension notice has been sent to the person
named in the report at the address recorded with the Illinois
Secretary of State or at the last address known to the lessor of the
cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice is returned as
undeliverable, at the last known address recorded at a United
States Post Office approved database; the date on which such
notice was sent; and address to which such notice was sent; and
(4) A unique identifying reference number for each request of
suspension.
(B) The Administrator shall notify the Illinois Secretary of State whenever a
person named in the certified report has paid the previously recorded
fine or penalty or whenever the City determines that the original report
was in error. A certified copy of such notification shall also be given to
the person named therein upon request and at no additional charge.
§ 14.309 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.311
1:452
§ 14.311. Challenging accuracy of certified report.
§ 14.312. Penalties. [Amended 5-8-2018 by Ord. No. 8-2018]
§ 14.313. Administrative adjudication.
This article shall be implemented through Article 25, Administrative
Adjudication of Vehicular Standing, Parking and Vehicle Compliance and
Automated Traffic Law Violations, of this chapter; provided, however, in
the event a procedural provision of this article conflicts with a procedural
provision of Article 25, the procedural provision set forth in this article shall
control.
(A) If the Administrator provides a suspension notice and subsequently
makes a certified report to the Illinois Secretary of State, the vehicle
owner may challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing.
(B) The vehicle owner shall submit to the Administrator a written statement
under oath, together with any supporting documentation, establishing
one of the following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the
certified report:
(1) That the person was not the owner or lessee of the subject vehicle
or vehicles receiving five or more automated traffic law violations
on the date or dates such violation notices were issued; or
(2) That the person already paid the fine or penalty owing as indicated
on the certified report.
(C) A statement challenging the accuracy of a certified report shall be sent
to the Administrator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
hand-delivered to the Administrator within five days after the person
receives notice from the Illinois Secretary of State that the person's
driver's license will be suspended at the end of a specified period of
time unless the Secretary is presented with notice from the City
certifying that the fines or penalties due and owing have been satisfied
or that the inclusion of the person's name on the certified report was in
error.
(A) Any person violating § 14.303 of this article shall be fined $100 for each
offense.
(B) If a person fails to request a hearing and does not otherwise pay the
applicable fine indicated in the violation notice by the date specified
(i.e., 30 days after the violation notice date), or fails to pay the original
fine within 30 days after an administrative hearing, an additional
penalty of $100 will be automatically assessed against the violator.
(C) All costs incurred by the City to collect penalties (including attorney's
fees and collection agency fees) not paid in a timely manner shall be
assessed against a violator.
§ 14.311 CITY GOVERNMENT § 14.313
1:453
Chapter 15
HEALTH REGULATIONS
§ 14.313 HOMETOWN CODE § 14.313
1:454
ARTICLE 1
Births, Deaths and Burials
§ 15.01. Burial and cremation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to bury, inter or cremate any human body or any part of
a human body in the City.
§ 15.02. Local registrar.
The City Clerk is hereby made Local Registrar for the City, and shall be
governed by the provisions set forth in the Vital Records Act (410 ILCS 535/
1 et seq.).
§ 15.03. Statutory rules for vital statistics; records.
The provisions of the Vital Records Act (410 ILCS 535/1 et seq.) shall be
fully complied with by the City Clerk in connection with vital statistics
reports. The City Clerk shall make or cause to be made sufficient copies of
all such records so that one complete set thereof may be retained and kept
by the City.
§ 15.04. through § 15.09. (Reserved)
§ 15.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 15.04
1:455

ARTICLE 2
(Reserved)151
§ 15.10. through § 15.19. (Reserved)
151. Editor's Note: Former Art. 2, Contagious Diseases, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 15.10 CITY GOVERNMENT § 15.10
1:457

ARTICLE 3
Garbage, Refuse, Landscape Waste (Compost) and Recycling
§ 15.20. Receptacle required.
It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any house, building, flat
or apartment in the City of Hometown where people reside, board or lodge,
or where animal or vegetable food is prepared or served, at all times to
maintain in good order and repair a container for garbage, tin cans, bottles,
ashes, and similar refuse. Each family must provide, or be provided with, at
least one such container.
§ 15.21. Receptacle specifications.
The container for garbage or refuse shall be either metal or a polyethylene
watertight container with a close-fitting cover (which must be covered at
all times). All edible garbage or refuse shall be placed in said container.
("Edible garbage or refuse" is defined as that garbage or refuse which could
be a food source for rodents.) Containers must have adequate capacity,
but not to exceed 32 gallons, except that single-family and two-family
duplex dwellings may use a polyethylene or similar material watertight
container (not to exceed 90 gallons' capacity) with a close-fitting hinged
cover, with wheels and handle for easy wheeling designed for use in an
automated cart (mechanical lift) system, and with the further exception that
multiple dwellings, as referred to in Chapter 22, Zoning, public buildings,
and commercial establishments may use containers with a capacity
exceeding 32 gallons. Bags constructed of plastic (minimum of 1.5 mil in
thickness), securely tied at all times, may be used for nonedible refuse items
such as papers, grass clippings, leaves, and so forth, except that during the
hours of regular garbage pickup, edible garbage may be removed from said
metal or polyethylene container and be in plastic bags for the purpose of
pickup.
§ 15.22. Deposits in streets; storage and placement of receptacles.
[Amended 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011]
No garbage or refuse of any kind shall be deposited in any street, public
way or sidewalk, except as provided for in this section; and no such refuse
shall be so placed that it can be blown about, scattered by the wind, or
impede the progress of pedestrians on sidewalks. Containers and refuse for
pickup or collection may be placed in front of the property on pickup days
but shall not be put out before 4:00 p.m. on the day prior to the day before
such pickup. Removal of the empty container from in front of the property
must be accomplished on the day of pickup. Containers used for the storage,
collection and removal of garbage or refuse other than at such pickup time
shall be placed behind the front of the house. All containers shall be placed
on the private property of the user.
§ 15.20 CITY GOVERNMENT § 15.23
1:459
§ 15.23. Burning or burying of garbage or refuse.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to burn or bury
any type of garbage or refuse within the corporate limits of the City, except
that upon application made to the City Council, the Council may authorize a
temporary permit to be granted to persons, firms, or corporations wishing
to burn refuse, when in the Council's opinion such an operation will be
conducted in such a manner as not to endanger the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
§ 15.24. Landscape waste (compost) recycling.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Mix landscape waste with any other waste;
(2) Dump landscape waste on any property, except that landscape
waste may be spread or composted on the property from which it
was collected;
(3) Place landscape waste in any container for collection unless that
type of container has been approved by the City;
(4) Compost landscape waste within 50 feet of any residential
structure located on another property;
(5) Burn any landscape waste;
(6) Place landscape waste into a collection container of another
person;
(7) Take any material which has been placed in a recycling bin or
container; or
(8) Take any newspaper or paper set out for recycling collection.
(B) For violations of Subsection A(1) through (8) above, such person shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $750 for each
offense. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the City from
prosecuting for several violations of the same subsection on the same
day or for each day of said violations, although the same may continue;
and each of said violations shall be separate and distinct violations and
subject to the penalties of this subsection.152
(C) Citation proceedings may be used as provided for in Chapter 1, § 1.03,
Penalties, of the City Code.
(D) For the purpose of this section, "landscape waste" means
accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs and
other materials accumulated as a result of the care of lawns, shrubbery,
vines and trees. Landscape waste also includes Christmas trees.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 15.23 HOMETOWN CODE § 15.25
1:460
§ 15.25. Scavenger service required. [Added 5-4-2004 by Ord. No.
7-2004]
Every occupant and owner of a single-family residential structure and
duplex shall provide and pay for weekly collection of garbage, landscape
waste and recyclables from a scavenger operating under a franchise
agreement with the City.
§ 15.26. Penalties.
§ 15.27. through § 15.29. (Reserved)
(A) When any person has violated the terms of §§ 15.20, 15.21, 15.22, and
15.23 of this article, the officer making the arrest may issue a notice to
appear at the police station of the City of Hometown within 48 hours
after said arrest to pay the fines as provided therein. Every person
issued a notification of such garbage and refuse violation, after
consenting to a waiver of court hearing and trial, within 48 hours after
said notification is issued, may pay the sums for the violation at the
police station, Hometown, Illinois, in lieu of said person's appearance in
court. Failure to pay the fine herein provided within 48 hours shall
subject the person to whom the notification was given to an issuance of
a warrant for his arrest, and the police officer issuing said notification
shall swear out a complaint for the arrest.
(B) All said violations shall be payable as follows:
(1) First offense: $10.
(2) Second offense: $25.
(3) Third offense: $50.
(C) For each and every offense thereafter, an additional sum of $50 shall be
paid; provided, however, that fines for the additional offenses shall be
assessable only if the violations have been committed within the same
calendar year. Any person who fails to appear after notification thereof
and for whom a complaint and warrant is issued shall pay the fines
provided in Subsection (B) of this section. If a second notice to appear is
issued, an additional sum of double the amount will be added to the
fines herein provided.153
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 15.25 CITY GOVERNMENT § 15.27
1:461

ARTICLE 4
Other Regulations
§ 15.30. Unwholesome food or drink.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any unwholesome or polluted
food or drink of any kind in the City.
§ 15.31. Sanitary regulations.
All premises used in the sale or storage of food or drink intended for human
consumption shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be
unlawful to permit any person who is afflicted with a contagious disease to
handle any food or drink intended for sale, or for any such person to handle
such food or drink. All such premises shall be kept free from flies and from
vermin of all kinds.
§ 15.32. Watercourses.
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute any
watercourse or source of water supply in the City.
§ 15.33. Stagnant pools of water.
Any stagnant pool of water in the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 15.34. Refuse.154
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit anywhere in the City any
uncovered pile of refuse, garbage, offal, or the carcass of any dead animal.
Such refuse must be properly disposed of. Any uncovered pile of refuse is
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 15.35. Cemeteries.
It shall be unlawful to establish a cemetery within the City limits.
§ 15.36. Nuisance premises.
It shall be unlawful to permit any building, structure or place to be or
remain in such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health safety
in any way. Any such building, structure or place is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
§ 15.37. (Reserved)155
§ 15.38. (Reserved)156
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
155. Editor's Note: Former § 15.37, Acts, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30,
General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 15.30 CITY GOVERNMENT § 15.39
1:463
§ 15.39. (Reserved)157
§ 15.40. Nuisances; abatement.158
It shall be unlawful to permit or maintain the existence of any nuisance on
any property in the City. The Mayor is hereby authorized, at his discretion,
to direct the Chief of Police and the Health Officer to abate any nuisance
existing in the City, whether such nuisance is one specifically recognized by
ordinance or not.
§ 15.41. Expectorating.
It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk, street, or
other public place, or on the floor or walls of any store, theater, hall, public
vehicle or other place to which the public is invited.
§ 15.42. Logs and firewood.
Logs, firewood, lumber and all material of this nature must be stored on
a rack 12 inches above the ground and at least six inches from any wall
or building. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the storing of any of the above
other than on a rack may become a breeding ground or harborage for
rodents, insects or other possible disease-carrying life or growth and is
prohibited on any property or lot within the City.
§ 15.43. Hedges and mass plantings.159
A hedge or mass planting shall comply with the requirements set forth in
Chapter 21, Article 11, § 21.126, of the City Code. The thirty-inch height
maximum shall be maintained for the first 10 feet of party line planting,
beginning at the sidewalk, and may gradually slope upward to a height not
to exceed 48 inches.
§ 15.44. Rain barrels. [Added 8-11-2015 by Ord. No. 9-2015]
(A) Policy and purpose. The City has entered into an intergovernmental
agreement with the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater
Chicago (MWRDGC) whereby the latter has agreed to supply at no cost
to the City for its residents rain barrels that are intended to "catch" rain
water. The rain barrel program is designed to:
(1) Alleviate stormwater capacity issues by deferring run-off to nonevent
times; and
156. Editor's Note: Former § 15.38, Drinking cups, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
157. Editor's Note: Former § 15.39, Privy vaults, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 15.39 HOMETOWN CODE § 15.44
1:464
(2) Allow for use of rainwater, as an alternative to the potable water
supply, to engage in common domestic tasks.
(B) Supply and registration. Rain barrels supplied to the City by the
MWRDGC will be made available for use by registered residents. Rain
barrels will be supplied to residents on a first-come-first-served basis.
Residents requesting a rain barrel will be required to register with the
City Clerk.
(C) Location. No more than two rain barrels shall be placed on each
registered residential lot. No rain barrels shall be placed in the front or
side yard of a residential lot. Rain barrels shall be placed under a
downspout, in a location that will not obstruct ingress to and egress
from the residence, and in such a manner that will prevent overflow to
adjoining property or in the direction of a resident's foundation. All rain
barrels shall be placed on or above a pervious surface to prevent the
accumulation of standing water during an overflow. Use or relocation of
a rain barrel at or to locations other than a registered residence is
prohibited.
(D) Appurtenances. Rain barrels shall be installed with supplied
appurtenances such as the rain barrel lid, rain barrel water intake
screen, and rain barrel mosquito screen. Residents may attach a hose to
the overflow fitting to direct an overflow of water away from the
residence onto a pervious surface. Should the rain barrel be placed on a
platform, the platform shall not exceed 1.5 feet in height and shall be
constructed of such materials that will support weight between 500
pounds and 600 pounds.
(E) Alterations. Alterations of rain barrels and supplied appurtenances are
prohibited. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, residents may
make cosmetic alterations to personalize rain barrels, such as painting
the exterior. Use of rain barrels for any purpose other than as intended
by this section shall be prohibited.
(F) Maintenance. All rain barrels and supplied appurtenances shall be
installed and maintained in a safe and good working order. Rain barrels
shall be emptied within seven days of the last rain event or prior to any
likely overflow, in the absence of an attached overflow hose, from a
subsequent rain event, whichever is earlier. Any accumulated water on
top of a rain barrel lid shall be removed every three to four days.
Emptying of rain barrels directly into the stormwater system is
prohibited. Rain barrels and appurtenances, including platforms, shall
be inspected by users prior to installation, every 30 days thereafter, and
prior to being placed in service after winterization, to ensure the same
exist in safe working order. All rain barrels shall be placed in a
winterized state from December 1 of a calendar year through April 1 of
the following calendar year, which at a minimum shall require the rain
barrel spigot to remain open on a continuous basis.
§ 15.44 CITY GOVERNMENT § 15.44
1:465
§ 15.45. through § 15.49. (Reserved)
(G) Disposal. Residents no longer desiring to participate in the rain barrel
program, or in need of a replacement rain barrel or other
appurtenance, shall contact the City to make arrangements to have the
same retrieved and/or replaced, as the case may be. Disposal of rain
barrels or supplied appurtenances by a resident shall be prohibited
unless through the City.
(H) Volunteer program. The rain barrel program is a volunteer program and
participation in the same is neither required nor encouraged by the
City. Every resident participating in the rain barrel program shall be
required to sign a document releasing the City and MWRDGC from any
and all liability that may arise due to a resident's participation in the
same.
(I) Penalty. Owners/Occupiers violating the terms and provisions of this
section shall be fined no less than $100 nor more than $750 for each
violation. Each violation or day a violation is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense. The City reserves the right to disqualify
and prevent owners/occupiers from participation in the rain barrel
program upon a finding of liability for two or more violations of this
section within a calendar year, or in the event a resident's participation
constitutes an immediate hazard to the health and safety of persons or
property. In such instances, supplied rain barrels and appurtenances
shall be recalled by and returned to the City.
§ 15.44 HOMETOWN CODE § 15.45
1:466
ARTICLE 5
Offensive Odor, Dumping and Noise
§ 15.50. Smoke and other particulate matter.
§ 15.51. Dumping or depositing refuse without permit; use of fill;
removal of topsoil.
(A) It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of smoke or other
particulate matter from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other
agency in the City so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the public.
(B) For the purpose of testing and grading density of smoke or other
particulate matter, the Ringelmann Chart published and described in
the Bureau of Mines, U.S. Department of Interior Information Circular
9333, or as revised, and on which are illustrated graduated shades of
gray to black for use in estimating the apparent density of smoke, is
hereby adopted as a standard for said grading; and smoke or other
particulate matter is hereby defined and declared to be in violation of
the permitted standards when it is a degree of density of No. 3 or
greater on said chart for more than six minutes in any one hour,
provided that such No. 3 or more opaque omissions permitted shall be
limited to three times in any twenty-four-hour period.
(A) "Refuse," for the purpose of this section, is herein defined as any
garbage or other discarded materials.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, place, leave, dump or
deposit any refuse, junk, waste material, disabled vehicles, or waste byproduct
on any premises in the City without first having secured a
permit from the City to do so.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessor, lessee, or occupant of any
premises to allow or permit any person to abandon, place, leave, dump
or deposit any refuse, junk, waste material, disabled vehicles, or waste
by-product on any premises in the City without a permit.
(D) It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessor, lessee, or occupant of any
premise to permit to remain on the premises or permit the
accumulation on any premises of any such refuse, junk, waste material,
disabled vehicles, or waste by-product dumped or deposited on the
premises without a permit.
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, place, leave, dump, or
deposit any refuse, junk, waste material, abandoned or disabled
vehicles, or waste by-product on any premises in violation of 415 ILCS
5/21 of the Environmental Protection Act or in violation of any
regulation or rule of the Pollution Control Board of the State of Illinois.
(F) It shall be unlawful for any person to use fill on any premises or permit
topsoil to be removed from any premises, or for any owner, lessor,
lessee or occupant to permit fill to be used on his premises or topsoil
§ 15.50 CITY GOVERNMENT § 15.51
1:467
§ 15.52. Noise and vibration.
removed therefrom, except in the ordinary course of construction under
a valid building permit, without first securing a permit.
(G) Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $5,000 or
imprisonment by incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period not to exceed six months, or both a fine and
imprisonment, for each violation. Each day said violation shall continue
shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(A) No person shall cause or allow noise to be emitted from any motor
vehicle to exceed the levels specified below in any designated octave
band measured at 50 feet or more from the center line of the road or
way.
Noise Limit in Relation to Posted
Speed Limit
Type of Vehicle
35 mph or Less
[db(A)]
Over 35 mph
[db(A)]
Any motorcycle 80 78
Any vehicle of Second Division 80 84
Vehicles of First Division and
any other motor vehicle, or
combination of motor vehicles,
or trailers towed by such
vehicle, or snowmobile, or
other motor-driven means of
travel
80 86
(B) No person shall operate any construction equipment or machinery or do
construction work which produces noises in excess of 82 db(A), except
as provided in Subsection (E) as measured 50 feet from the source.
(C) No person shall cause or allow noise of any other nature to be emitted,
except as provided for in Subsections (A) and (B), as measured at a
distance of 50 feet from the source of noise in excess of the following
level: 80 db(A).
(D) No person shall emit any noise which can be heard 50 feet from the
source of the noise in excess of the level of 78 db(A) for the purpose of
advertising goods, wares or merchandise, or for the use of any musical
instrument or device, or for the use of demonstration purposes between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following morning local time.
(E) No person shall do construction work or repair noises in excess of 80
db(A) measured 50 feet from the source in the City between the hours
of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following morning local time.
§ 15.51 HOMETOWN CODE § 15.52
1:468
(F) No person shall conduct or participate in private refuse disposal
collections within the City between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
the following morning local time.160
160. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (F), prohibiting motor vehicles or locomotives from
idling for more than five minutes, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30,
General Provisions, Art. 2). Former § 15.53, Penalties, which immediately followed this
section, is now included as § 15.26 of this chapter.
§ 15.52 CITY GOVERNMENT § 15.52
1:469
Chapter 16
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
§ 15.52 HOMETOWN CODE § 15.52
1:470
ARTICLE 1
Administration; Connection to and Use of System
§ 16.01. Authority to provide and regulate facilities.
The City is hereby empowered to provide and otherwise regulate water
and sewer facilities in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Water and Sewer
Department adopted from time to time as hereinafter provided.
§ 16.02. Water and Sewer Department.161
There is hereby created a division of the Department of Public Works to be
known as the "Water and Sewer Department." Said Department shall have
jurisdiction over all aspects of the water distribution and sewer systems,
including, but not limited to, meters, the pumping and distribution of water,
water mains, and all lateral sewer and drains, in accordance with Division
139 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-139-1 et seq.).
§ 16.03. Jurisdiction of Water and Sewer Department.
The Water and Sewer Department shall be under the direction of the
Director of Public Works and such other officers and employees as may be
from time to time appointed. They shall be responsible for the supervision,
management and control, subject to the Mayor and City Council, of the
maintenance, enlargement and operation of the waterworks system owned
and controlled by said City, the procuring and selling of water, and all
matters and things connected with the operation, maintenance, and
extension or improvement of the waterworks and sewerage system and
preserving the property belonging thereto.
§ 16.04. Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works shall have supervision over all buildings and
equipment used in the furnishing of water in the City and shall see that
the object and purposes of the Water and Sewer Department are carried
out, and that the waterworks and sewerage system is conducted on an
economical, businesslike basis, and for this purpose it shall be the duty of
the Director of Public Works, hereinafter referred to as "Director," and all of
the officers, employees and servants of said Department to enforce all the
provisions of this chapter and to observe and obey and carry out the orders
and directions of the Mayor and Council. Where the streets are required to
be opened for repairs or extensions, the Director shall protect the public
against accidents during such repairs and extensions. He shall prepare
and keep in his office a complete atlas of the waterworks, with all valves,
hydrants, water service, sewerage connections and other appurtenances
distinctly recorded therein.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 16.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 16.05
1:471
§ 16.05. Compensation of Department.
The Director of Public Works and other officers and employees of the
Department shall receive as compensation for their service amounts to be
fixed by the City Council from time to time.
§ 16.06. Reports.
The Director shall provide such reports as the City Council shall from time
to time direct.
§ 16.07. Water and sewer fee collector.
The City Clerk is hereby appointed and designated as the collector for the
Water and Sewer Department. He shall have active charge and control of
the billing and collecting of all water bills rendered by the City. He shall
include in his reports to the Council his reports of collections for the Water
and Sewer Department, and shall make further reports and take such steps
toward the collection of water and sewer bills as are herein prescribed.
§ 16.08. Reading meters.
The Clerk, or such officer or employees of the Department as he shall direct,
shall read water meters.
§ 16.09. Application for service; connections.
(A) Any person or corporation desiring to make any connection with said
water and sewer system or plant, or to use water therefrom, shall first
make application to the Director upon a blank form, or forms, to be
furnished by the Department. Said application shall contain an
agreement on the part of the applicant that all the rules and
regulations, conditions and provisions of any ordinance relating to the
water and sewer system will be complied with; that he notify the City
Clerk when the premises are sold or there is a change in the use or
occupant; that an escrow of $30 shall be made and that any escrow
deposit shall remain with the City to guarantee the payment of the
water and sewer rates until such charges are paid and a new escrow
deposit is made; that all water and sewer rates, assessments and rents,
and all fines and penalties assessed, charged or imposed against said
applicant or the property described in said application will be paid.
When an applicant hereunder has complied with all the provisions of
the ordinances of the City, a permit shall then be issued by the Director
authorizing the connection to be made, specifying the size thereof. All
plumbing and plumbing work, as well as all excavating, filling and
replacement of pavement, shall be done by a plumber authorized by the
ordinances of the City to do such plumbing; provided, however, that all
such replacement of pavement shall be done by the City, in accordance
with the provisions of this Code or other applicable ordinances. The
permit shall authorize any such plumber to do such plumbing and
plumbing work as is described in the permit. A street opening charge of
§ 16.05 HOMETOWN CODE § 16.09
1:472
§ 16.10. Turning on water; seals.
§ 16.11. Meters.
$125 shall be deposited with the City before a permit is issued, which
is refundable, less any expenses incurred by the City to replace the
pavement surface whenever a street is cut open for the purpose of
connecting to the water or sewer system. If the expense is more than
$125, the permit holder shall pay such overage.162
(B) No service pipe shall be laid or used to supply water to two or more
distinct premises or buildings unless separate stopcocks for each of the
premises or buildings shall be placed outside of such premises in the
parkway, as hereinafter provided, and a permit fee shall be obtained for
each service.
(C) Each separately owned parcel of land shall have a separate sewer
lateral to the City connecting sewer.
(A) No person not duly authorized shall turn an any service cock, or use
water therefrom when so turned on, under penalty of a fine for each
offense, and the person so using or wasting water in such unlawful
manner shall be liable to pay therefor at the regular water rates without
discount.
(B) No seal placed by the Department for the protection of any meter, valve,
fitting or other water connection shall be defaced or broken, except on
written authority from the Director of Public Works.
(C) No person shall turn on any service cock if the same has been turned off
by reason of the nonpayment of water or sewerage fees.
(A) All water consumers supplied by the City shall be supplied through
meters only, except that in cases where it is impracticable to set a
meter, the use and consumption of water shall be governed by other
applicable provisions of this Code.
(B) All meters used in connection with said water system shall be and
remain for all time the property of the City of Hometown and shall be
purchased by the City.
(C) After the meter is placed, only officers or employees of the Department
shall be allowed to repair, remove or in any manner interfere with the
same. A stop-cock or valve shall be placed immediately after the meter.
Adequate distance shall be provided to accommodate the water meter
and meter connector for each side of the meter.
(D) Water meters shall be located inside the building in a heated area to
prevent freezing. Such location should be easily accessible for reading,
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 16.09 CITY GOVERNMENT § 16.11
1:473
§ 16.12. Access to premises.
As a condition of water and sewer services, all duly authorized employees
of the City are hereby granted access to any premises, place or building for
the purpose of installing, reading, examining, testing and repairing water
meters or otherwise examining or testing for the consumption, use and flow
of water. The City is hereby authorized to shut off the water supply to any
person who wrongfully refuses access under this section.
§ 16.13. Rates.
All consumers, users, or owners of properties (who shall be jointly and
severally responsible to pay the same) in the City of Hometown shall pay
the following rates:
repairs or replacement as the City, through its Director, shall direct.
The owner or tenant of a premises may request a remote meter reading
device to be located on the outside of the premises; however, any said
device must be installed and supplied by said City, with all expenses
for purchase and installation of said device charged to the owner or
tenant making the request, and all charges must be paid prior to the
installation of the device; the owner or tenant will be liable for any and
all damages or repairs to said remote device. However, accessibility to
the meter for repairs or inspection will be required at least once in any
twelve-month period.
(E) Any water meter to be located outside the building will have to be
approved by the Director and Water and Sewer Committee according to
City specifications for such installation.
(F) The cost of keeping each meter in repair shall be paid by the Water and
Sewer Department. The person upon whose application any meter is
installed shall be liable for any breakage or any loss or damage to such
meter in any way, except by ordinary use and wear, and the cost of
making good such loss or damage shall be paid by the person upon
whose application such meter was installed or repaired as soon as the
bill for same is presented, and the amount therefor shall be a lien
against the premises for which said meter was installed, to the extent
and with the same effect as water rates.163
(G) The Director shall in all cases determine the kind and pattern of water
meters to be adopted and no other kind shall be installed at any time.
(A) For water service:
(1) All residential users (single-family, two-family and apartments)
shall be charged at the rate of $14.74 per 1,000 cubic feet of usage,
with a minimum quarterly charge of $29.48 for the first 2,000 cubic
feet.
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 16.11 HOMETOWN CODE § 16.13
1:474
§ 16.14. Prohibition on purchase of water.
No person, firm, association, corporation or partnership having its
residence or place of business within the territorial limits of the City of
Hometown shall be permitted to buy water from any other municipal
corporation or other public utility for such residence or place of business
(2) Commercial establishments shall pay a monthly water service
charge of $11.94 per 1,000 cubic feet and a minimum monthly
service charge of $3.64.
(3) Schools; others. All schools, not-for-profit corporations, and all
users not otherwise classified above shall be billed monthly at the
same rate as commercial users.
(4) For any percentage increase in the water rate by the City of
Chicago, there shall be an increase in the then water rate to the
City of Hometown's users at the same percentage rate, which shall
apply to all billings for water used in the month of the effective date
of the City of Chicago's rate increase. For purposes of this section,
a rate increase shall also include an increase to a user's gross
billing amount as a result of an abatement of any discount from the
City of Chicago to the City of Hometown. [Amended 2-14-2006 by
Ord. No. 2-2006]
(B) For sewerage:
(1) In addition, at the time of the payment of the water rates, there
shall be paid the following charge for use of the sewerage system:
[Amended 12-13-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
(a) For each separately owned or used residential unit, the sum of
$14.27 per month.
(b) For each separately used commercial establishment, the sum
of $14.27 per month.
(2) For any percentage increase in the sewer charge by the City of
Chicago, there shall be an increase in the existing sewer rate
charged to the City's users at the same percentage rate, effective
the date of the City of Chicago's increase. [Added 12-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 8-2011]
(3) There shall be no charge to a municipal corporation, a public or
parochial school, or any other religious or charitable institution
duly chartered for such purpose by the State of Illinois.
(4) The sewer charge shall be added to the water rate charge at each
billing and shall be a combined charge. The failure to pay the
combined charge when due shall subject the user to the penalties
provided in § 16.15.
§ 16.13 CITY GOVERNMENT § 16.14
1:475
located in the City whenever the water of said City is adjacent to its
property.
§ 16.15. Payment of charges; penalties for delinquencies.
(A) All water and sewer charges shall be due and payable on or before the
15th day after the date when statements of such charges are rendered
and shall become delinquent if remaining unpaid thereafter.
(B) It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to cause said statements for water
and sewer charges to be delivered on the respective dates thereof, and
at least every three months, to each consumer or user.
(C) Upon the monthly and quarterly service charge for water supplied,
there shall be added a charge of 10% for each month the charges
remain unpaid.
(D) Whenever any such charges shall remain unpaid for a period of more
than 30 days from the due date of the statement herein provided for, the
water may be turned off from the premises of such delinquent
consumer and the service shall not be resumed until all water and
sewer bills in arrears have been paid, including a charge of $20 for the
services of the Water and Sewer Department to visit the premises in
order to turn off the water, whether it is turned off or not, and an
additional $20 to turn on the water. When the water is shut off
temporarily at the request of any consumer, and the meter is not
removed, the consumer shall pay $20 for turn off and an additional $20
to turn it on.
(E) Before water is shut off by the City for unpaid water or sewer charges,
the owner or tax assessee shall be entitled to a hearing before a person
designated by the Mayor to hear whether the amount of the charges are
true and correct and why or whether or not, because of said charges,
the water should be turned off.
(F) The hearing officer shall give the owner and tax assessee notice of his
right to request a hearing to dispute any delinquency. If a hearing is not
requested in writing in the time allotted in the notice, water service
may be terminated. The delinquent party shall be given reasonable
notice before water service is terminated. If a party agrees to pay any
delinquency in installments, the City is hereby authorized to terminate
water service upon nonpayment of the installment without notice or a
hearing.
(G) The above procedure does not apply to opening water service to a new
tenant or owner for unpaid charges for the same premises.
(H) No person, firm, association, or corporation owing water and sewer
charges and removing to other premises where there are water
connections, or where connections shall afterward be made, shall be
supplied with water and sewer until such charges in arrears are paid in
full.
§ 16.14 HOMETOWN CODE § 16.16
1:476
§ 16.16. Responsibility for water registered by meters.
§ 16.17. Water taps.
(A) The owner and tenant of a premises supplied with water will be held
jointly responsible for all water registered by the meter and for the
sewer charges, and no reduction shall be made or rebate allowed to any
consumer on account of leakage, or alleged leakage, in any pipe, tank,
or other apparatus or device.
(B) Any person or party who or which shall vacate any premises, and any
agent or broker leasing the same, or any party who shall enter upon and
occupy any premises, shall immediately, before vacating said premises
or moving to said premises, notify the Water and Sewer Department
and secure reading of the meter. All water and sewer charges shall be
immediately paid upon reading of said meter. No water shall turn on for
a new occupant until all the unpaid water and sewer charges have been
paid.164
(A) The fees to be charged for a permit to tap or otherwise make a
connection with any water main constructed shall be as follows:
(1) Where the meter is installed in the basement of a building, the
charges shall be $150 and said owner shall receive for said charge
the use of one meter, one round way, one valve, one corporation
cock, one buffalo box and one tap, which articles shall remain at all
times the property of the City of Hometown.
(2) Where the meter is installed in a vault outside of the building on the
premises, the charge shall be $165 and the owner of said real
estate hereinbefore described shall receive for said charge the use
of the following items: one meter, one round way, one valve, one
corporation cock, one buffalo box, one tap, two eighteen-inch or
twenty-inch tiles, and one cast iron cover for said tile, which
articles shall remain at all times the property of the City of
Hometown.
(B) Provided that the above charges are for lots of 40 feet or less in
frontage; in case of lots over 40 feet in frontage, there shall be an
additional charge of $3 for each foot of frontage of said lot over 40 feet.
On corner lots, the narrowest side of the lot shall be used in counting
feet for frontage. If the connection or tap to the water main is over two
inches in diameter, a charge in addition to the above of $50 for every
inch over two inches shall be made and no materials or articles
provided above shall be furnished.
(C) Provided further, however, that in any case where the lateral water
main to which the connection is to be made has been constructed by the
person, firm, association or corporation desiring such connection, or
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 16.16 CITY GOVERNMENT § 16.17
1:477
§ 16.18. Sewer connections and charges.
§ 16.19. Tapping water mains; obstructions prohibited; fee.
where the costs of construction of such lateral water main to which
the connection is to be made have been paid for in whole or in part by
the person, firm, association or corporation desiring such connection,
the charge for such tapping permit shall be reduced to such amount as
may have been agreed upon between such person, firm, association or
corporation and the Council of the City of Hometown at the time of the
construction and installation of such lateral water main, but in no case
shall the fee be less than $80 in the case of a meter installed in the
basement of a building, or less than $95 in the case of a meter installed
in a vault outside of the building.
(D) All the above articles or materials shall be and remain the property of
the City.
(A) Permit required. No connection shall be made to the sewerage system
or to any pipe or lateral which may dispose of sewage or stormwater in
the sewerage system of the City without first securing a permit from the
Director.
(B) Fees. All connections to the sewerage system shall be at the cost of the
applicant and shall be made by a licensed plumber authorized to do
business in the City. In addition, the Director shall estimate the cost of
the Department's inspection and require the applicant to pay said sum
before any permit is issued.
(C) A permit is required from the Director for any person or persons to
repair or replace any damaged or clogged sanitary sewer line from a
premises. Such repaired sewer line may not be backfilled until the
repairs or replacement is inspected and approved by the Director or an
officer or employee designated by him to make such inspection. Should
such excavation require the removal of street pavement, a street
opening charge will be required as prescribed in § 16.09(A).
(A) Whenever any permit for a connection with the water mains of the City
of Hometown is used hereunder, the Director or an employee of the City
so designated for the work by the Director shall tap the main of said
system where such connection is to be made and shall insert the
corporation cock.
(B) No connection with any water main of said City shall be less than 3/4
inch.
(C) All corporation cocks and goosenecks, curb cocks and buffalo or shutoff
boxes and meter boxes installed in connection with the water system
of the City of Hometown must be purchased through the City.
(D) No person shall, in any manner, obstruct or cause to be obstructed the
free access of any duly authorized officer or employee of the City of
§ 16.17 HOMETOWN CODE § 16.19
1:478
§ 16.20. Connection standards; maintenance.
Hometown to any stop cock, water meter, elevator dial, buffalo or shutoff
box or connection with any water main or service pipe by means
of any coal, lumber, brick, building material or by any other means or
device whatsoever or to use or prevent free access thereto by such
officer or employee whenever such officer or employee shall desire
access thereto.
(E) In addition to the other charges, the fee payable by the permit holder to
the City for installing all taps under permits will be $25.
(A) The connection from the main to the service cock shall be placed at
least five feet below the level of the ground. All service lines from the
main to the service cock and from the service cock to the meter shall be
of Type IK copper in sizes 3/4 of an inch internal diameter to and
including two inches internal diameter. Service lines larger than two
inches internal diameter shall be of cast iron. Such service lines shall be
placed in such a manner as to prevent rupture or breakage from
settling of the ground.
(B) No person, whether as owner or occupant, in possession or control of
any building, structure or premises into which water is supplied
through the Hometown water system shall be allowed, without
permission from the Mayor and City Council of said City, to supply other
persons or families, or to supply water from such building or premises
to any building, structure or premises. In the event of violations of any
of the foregoing provisions of this section, the supply of water to the
building, structure or premises of such person shall be shut off and
stopped forthwith, and the water shall not again be turned on to such
building, structure, or premises from which it was cut off until there
shall have been paid to the City such sum of money as the Mayor and
City Council of said City shall deem properly due to the City.
(C) If, after the water supply shall have been turned on to any building,
structure or premises, it shall be found by any officer or employee of the
City that fraudulent representations have been made by an applicant
for such water supply or that water is being used in or upon such
building, structure or premises for purposes not set forth in the
application made for such water supply, or that there is willful and
unreasonable use or waste of water, the Director or employee of the
City of Hometown shall have the authority, and it shall be his duty, to cut
off and stop the supply of water into such building, structure or
premises forthwith, and the water shall not be turned on to such
building, structure or premises until the person or persons responsible
for such fraudulent representation or for such use of water or willful or
unreasonable waste thereof shall pay to the City such additional sums
of money for such water supply on account of such unreasonable waste
of water as the Mayor and City Council shall find properly to be due to
the City.
§ 16.19 CITY GOVERNMENT § 16.20
1:479
§ 16.21. Connection to standard main required.
In all cases where a standard water main is now installed or hereafter
may be installed in any street or alley or other public way in the City
of Hometown, all water users located on any lot or parcel of real estate
fronting or abutting on any such street or alley or other public way shall
make or cause to be made connections to such standard water main and
pay the tapping charges therefor within six months after the installation of
such standard water main if the same is not now installed, and each user
shall discontinue within the same period of time any connection which they
theretofore may have had with any temporary water line.
§ 16.22. Inspection and approval of service pipes.
All service pipes and connections shall be inspected and approved by the
Director or other persons under his direction, and no such service pipes
shall be covered until they have been inspected.
§ 16.23. Use of water without meters.
Before a permit for use of water shall be issued where meters cannot be
conveniently used, the person applying for the same shall deposit $10 with
the Collector as payment on account of water to be used by him on or before
30 days from the date of the permit; the person to whom such permit is
(D) Every person supplied with water from the Hometown water system
shall, at his or their own cost and expense, have installed and kept in
repair all pipes leading from the buffalo or shut-off box to his or her
building, structure or premises, which are supplied with water through
such service pipe. All service pipes laid from the water main to the
buffalo or shut-off box, and from the buffalo or shut-off box to the
building, structure or premises, shall not be less than 3/4 inch internal
diameter.
(E) Each water service pipe shall be connected with said main water pipe
and shall extend horizontally at right angles with said main water pipe
to a point at least 18 feet from the center line of the street and shall be
provided with a brass stop cock of not less than 3/4 of an inch internal
diameter, to be installed within a telescopic shut-off box of the best
quality of cast iron or first grade steel pipe.
(F) All corporation and curb cocks used in connection with the water
system shall be made of bronze which shall have the following
composition: copper 80%, tin 4% to 6%, zinc 4% to 6%, Lead, not more
than 5%. All castings shall be high grade, true to form and dimensions,
smooth and free from all sand or blow holes or other foundry defects,
and all material uses herein shall be of the best quality and subject to
the approval of the Director.
(G) The main must be tapped at an angle of 45°, with the vertical and the
corporation cock turned so that the T handle will be on top.
§ 16.20 HOMETOWN CODE § 16.23
1:480
issued shall file with the Department a statement in writing, verified by his
affidavit, showing fully the purpose for which the water was used by him
for that time, and the amount and location of all work done by him during
said time in connection with which any water was used, or required. The
Director shall ascertain from said statement, and any other information, the
amount due for water so used. If the amount so found to be due, together
with all other fees and costs chargeable against such person, is less than the
sum deposited, the surplus shall be paid back to the depositor. If the amount
due for water so used is more than the sum deposited, then the excess shall
be paid at once to the Collector by such person. If such person desires to
continue to use the water after he shall have filed his statement, he shall
again deposit $10 with the Collector and shall continue to make deposits
thereafter and in the same manner as is provided therein with respect to
the first deposit, and the method of determining the amount of water used
and the charge for the same shall be the same as the provisions respecting
the first deposit as hereinbefore provided.
§ 16.24. Use of plumber's name.
No plumber shall allow his name to be used by any other person or party
directly for the purpose of obtaining permits or doing any work under his
license.
§ 16.25. through § 16.29. (Reserved)
§ 16.23 CITY GOVERNMENT § 16.25
1:481

ARTICLE 2
Revenue
§ 16.30. Accounts to be kept; audit.165
All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the waterworks
and sewer system shall be held by the Collector separate and apart from
his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the City,
and all of said funds shall be deposited by the Collector in the depository
designated by the City Council and known as the "City of Hometown Water
and Sewer Department Fund" at whatever frequency and with any
supporting records the City Treasurer may require. The City Treasurer
shall receive all receipts of such deposits from the water system and all
other funds and moneys incident to the operation of said system. The
City Treasurer shall administer said funds in every respect in the manner
provided by the statutes of the State of Illinois. Said City Treasurer shall
establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records
and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all
transactions relative to the water works, and at regular annual intervals, he
shall cause to be made, under the direction of the Mayor and City Council of
said City, an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show
the receipts and disbursements of the water and sewer system.
§ 16.31. through § 16.39. (Reserved)
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 16.30 CITY GOVERNMENT § 16.31
1:483

ARTICLE 3
General Provisions
§ 16.40. Right to amend regulations and rates.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the City from changing or
altering the provisions hereof, and said City shall have and retain authority
from time to time to change, increase, decrease or improve said system and
plant, or any part or portion thereof, or to establish new or different rates,
regulations, or provisions concerning the use of said system or plant, or to
alter, amend, change or repeal the provisions of this chapter.
§ 16.41. City not liable for damage; liability for cost of repairs.
§ 16.42. Installation and materials.
Water consumers, licensed plumbers and others shall be governed by the
following rules and regulations which are hereby attached:
(A) All connections and water applied for hereunder, and all the water used
hereunder, shall be upon the express condition that the City of
Hometown shall not be liable, nor shall any claim be made against it, for
damage or injury caused by reason of the breakage of any main,
branches, service pipes, apparatus, or appurtenances connected with
said system or plant, or any part or portion of said plant, or for any
interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage of machinery or by
reason of stoppage, alteration, extension and renewals.
(B) All repairs to service pipes and sewers and connections therefrom shall
be at the expense of the owner or tenant of the premises supplied,
except repairs on the pipes included between the corporation cock at
the main and the curb cock in the parkway.
(A) All work done in the streets and alleys or public places of said City, in
said City, in connection with the water and sewer system shall be done
in a thorough and workmanlike manner and shall be under the
supervision and direction of the Director and subject to his approval.
(B) No connection shall be made with the water and sewer system without
a proper permit from the Water and Sewer Department.
(C) No water service shall be laid nearer than 18 inches to a parallel
trench.
(D) A gooseneck shall be provided for each service pipe and must be
supported by tamped soil or sand from the bottom of the trench.
(E) All earth removed in excavating for said sewer and water service pipes
shall be returned to the trenches from which it was taken, and shall be
replaced in layers not exceeding six inches in depth; each layer shall be
thoroughly compacted by ramming, and the earth shall be moistened
sufficiently to permit the return of all the earth to the trenches by
§ 16.40 CITY GOVERNMENT § 16.42
1:485
ramming as above specified. When completed, the surface of the
backfilling in the trenches shall not be higher than the general surface
of the ground on either side of same and the roadway of all streets shall
be left, and shall be maintained for a period of one year, in as good
a condition for travel as they were before the commencement of said
work.166
(F) The installation of all service pipes must be done in a workmanlike
manner under the supervision of the Director and shall withstand a test
of 125 pounds of pressure for a period of 10 minutes without leaking.
(G) There shall be a shut-off provided for every connection or tap, which
shut-off must be in what is commonly called a "buffalo box"; the same
shall be located as near the main as conditions will permit. Meters must
be installed in heated rooms of the premises. All meters shall be easily
accessible for reading or maintenance.
(H) The pipe to be used in construction of the service pipe from the shut-off
box to the meter shall be Type K copper or cast iron as prescribed in
§ 16.20.
(I) All service pipes shall be so laid as to prevent freezing, breaking or
rupture by settling.
(J) Boilers connected with the sewer and water system shall be provided
with a tank of sufficient capacity to hold at least six hours' supply, and in
case this supply is shut off for the purpose of repair or any other
purpose, the City will not be responsible for any damage that may
result. Consumers and other persons are prohibited from connecting
pipe direct with the City pressure to supply steam boilers.
(K) No alteration, change of location or addition of any kind shall be made
at any water meter, water cock or service pipe, connected in any way
with the supply to any building or premises, without first obtaining
approval from the Director and a written permit from the City.
(L) A complete statement, in writing, shall be made to the Director by the
person doing the work of all connections made with the water system.
(M) All hydrants or plugs placed in said City, for fire purposes, are hereby
declared to be the public hydrants, and no person, except such as have
been authorized by the Director, shall open or draw water therefrom, or
in any manner interfere with same except in case of fire.
(N) The Director and the City Clerk and other authorized persons shall have
free access to any premises in which water is introduced for the
purpose of examining the fixtures and pipes at any time between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day.
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 16.42 HOMETOWN CODE § 16.42
1:486
§ 16.43. Special connections for fire purposes.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which is a regular consumer may
be permitted by the City Council to make special connection with the street
mains, together with hydrants and house cocks, to be used in case of fire.
For such permit, and for all water used for fire purposes, there will be no
charge, but all such work in connection with the water system must be done
by the City or under the direction of the Director.
§ 16.44. Enforcement authority.
It shall be the duty of the Director and police of the City and all persons
in the employ of the City, having police power, to enforce the provisions of
all ordinances, rules and regulations in respect to the water system and to
arrest or cause to be arrested all persons violating the same.
§ 16.45. Liens.
§ 16.46. Foreclosure of lien.
(O) No booster pump or other apparatus intended to increase water
pressure shall be installed unless a tank or reservoir is provided
between the meter and such pump or apparatus. Said tank or reservoir
shall be covered, and shall be provided with a vent or overflow to
atmosphere, and shall be so designed as to prevent a direct hydraulic
connection between the meter and the pump or pressure-increasing
apparatus.
(A) Charges for water shall be a lien upon the premises served as provided
by statute, whenever a water bill remains unpaid; and where such bill
remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been rendered, the City Clerk
may file with the Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of Titles of Cook
County a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a
notice that the City claims a lien for this amount as well as for all
charges for water served subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
(B) If the consumer of water whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises, and the City Clerk has notice of this, notice must be mailed to
the owner of the premises, if his address is known to the Clerk,
whenever such bill remains unpaid for a period of 60 days after it has
been rendered.
(C) The failure of the City Clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such
notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect
the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid water bills as mentioned in the
following § 16.46.
(A) Property subject to a lien for unpaid water charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied
to pay the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the
§ 16.42 CITY GOVERNMENT § 16.46
1:487
§ 16.47. Testing meters; deposit.167
If a meter shall be found inaccurate, a tested meter shall be installed by
the Water and Sewer Department. Any consumer believing that the water
meter on his or her premises is not accurate and stating that such is the
reason for nonpayment of bills may, by depositing the sum of $10 with the
Collector, have the same tested. If on a test the meter is found to be correct
or to under-register, the $10 so deposited shall be retained to cover the
cost of the test. If the meter is found to over-register, a tested meter shall
be installed and the $10 deposited shall be returned to the consumer who
deposited the same. If any disagreement or dispute over the amount of
water consumed in such cases is not settled by the Collector or the Water
and Sewer Department within 10 days from the date of such test, the matter
shall be referred to the Water and Sewer Committee of the City Council
for review and adjustment, and may be settled by the Water and Sewer
Committee on such basis as may be considered fair and equitable by such
Committee.
§ 16.48. Repairs.
All repairs to service pipe and the plumbing systems of buildings served
shall be made by and at the expense of the owners of the premises, except
that meters shall be repaired only by the City. The City is responsible for
maintenance of entrance to the main and piping to the buffalo box and the
box itself.
§ 16.49. Fire hydrants.168
No person except a regularly authorized agent of the City shall cause water
to flow from any public or private fire hydrant, except for the purpose of
extinguishing fire, unless such person shall have first secured a permit from
the Water and Sewer Department for such use of said water. No person shall
interfere with any public or private fire hydrant or stop cock, or commit any
act tending to obstruct the use thereof, without a special permit from the
Department.
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in the name of
the City.
(B) The City Attorney is hereby authorized to institute such proceedings, in
the name of the City, in any court having jurisdiction over such matters,
against any property for which the water bill has remained unpaid 60
days after it has been rendered, when instructed to do so by the Mayor
and City Council.
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 16.46 HOMETOWN CODE § 16.50
1:488
§ 16.50. Excavations.
Excavations made for installing service pipe or repairing the same shall be
made in compliance with the ordinance provisions relating to excavation in
streets.
§ 16.51. Frozen ground.
No person shall make any excavation in any street or other public place or
easement within 4 1/2 feet of any water main or service connection while
the ground is frozen, without a special permit from the Department.
§ 16.52. Interference with meters.169
No person shall remove, reset or otherwise interfere with any water meter,
or install or use a pipe around the meter so as to use water without the
same being measured therein, without a special permit to do so from the
Water and Sewer Committee. No person shall remove, tamper with or in
any manner interfere with any seal placed upon any water meter, or any
seal placed on or over any reduction disc or placed on or over any union
placed over such disc, set or placed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter or the rules and regulations of the Department. In addition
to all other penalties, the Department shall have the right to shut off or
curtail the supply of water furnished to premises where such interference or
tampering, as above, is perpetrated, until a satisfactory settlement therefor
is made.
§ 16.53. Service pipe.
Service pipes will not be permitted to go from one lot to another along
the streets where mains are laid, but water for each lot must be obtained
directly from the mains in front of or adjacent to the lot, provided that one
service pipe may be used to supply all parties occupying the same building.
The two halves of a duplex-type dwelling are not to be considered the same
building. All service pipes must be laid at least 3 1/2 feet below the surface
of the ground.
§ 16.54. Illegal use of water; prohibited hours of sprinkling.
[Amended 9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 10-2015]
(A) No person shall, during the period of May 15 through September 15,
permit or sprinkle any lawn, garden or landscape area during the hours
of 12:00 noon to 6:00 p.m. Lawn sprinkling shall not occur on
consecutive days and is only allowed on an odd/even basis: sprinkling is
permitted on odd calendar days if the last digit of the street address is
an odd number or on even calendar days if the last digit of the street
address is an even number. New lawns less than three months old are
exempt from the foregoing restrictions.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 16.50 CITY GOVERNMENT § 16.54
1:489
(B) No person shall sprinkle any lawn, garden or landscape area during
prohibited hours after a temporary emergency water shortage is
declared by the Mayor prohibiting the same.
(C) No person shall use water for any outside purpose, including, but not
limited to, watering of lawns; watering of gardens; watering of
landscaping; washing of cars; washing of outside areas such as
windows, buildings, sidewalks or driveways; or filling of swimming
pools during prohibited hours after a temporary emergency water
shortage is declared by the Mayor prohibiting the same.
(D) For the purposes of this section, the word "sprinkle" means the use of
any device for distributing water over an area not under the active
control and in the possession of a person such as by a mechanical or
automatic sprinkler or sprinkler system.
(E) For the purposes of this section, the word "watering" means the
distribution of water over an area under the active control and in the
possession of a person, such as by hose or sprinkling can.
(F) All new and replacement sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a
WaterSense® labeled irrigation controller and shall otherwise be in
compliance with Section 2.5(g) of the Illinois Plumbing License Law
[225 ILCS 320/2.5(g)].
§ 16.54 HOMETOWN CODE § 16.54
1:490
ARTICLE 4
(Reserved)
§ 16.55. through § 16.59. (Reserved)
§ 16.55 CITY GOVERNMENT § 16.55
1:491

ARTICLE 5
Penalty
§ 16.60. Penalties and citations.
§ 16.61. through § 16.69. (Reserved)
(A) Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, permits, allows, or
refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any provision of
this chapter shall be fined as follows, unless a different fine is provided
for under another section of this chapter:170
(1) For violations of § 16.54, a fine of not less than $20 for the first
offense, and for each additional offense thereafter in the same
calendar year, the sum of $20 for each such offense shall be added
to said fine, so that the fine for the latest offense shall be the
number of violations multiplied by $20, but shall in no case exceed
$750.
(2) For violations of other sections, such person shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $20 nor more than $750 for each offense.
Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the City from prosecuting
for several violations of the same section on the same day or for
each day of said violation, although the same may continue; and
each of said violations shall be separate and distinct violations and
subject to the penalties of this subsection.
(B) Citation proceedings may be used as provided for in Chapter 1, § 1.03,
Penalties, of the City Code.
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 16.60 CITY GOVERNMENT § 16.61
1:493
Chapter 17
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General licensing requirements — See Ch. 11,
Art. 1.
Dealers in small animals — See Ch. 11, Art. 3.
§ 16.61 HOMETOWN CODE § 16.61
1:494
ARTICLE 1
Purpose and Definitions
§ 17.01. Purpose.
It is the purpose of the City of Hometown to protect animals from neglect
and abuse, to protect residents from annoyance and injury by animals, to
assist in providing housing for animals in the custody of the City, to cover
the cost of licensing and caring for animals and to establish a program
to discourage the excessive multiplication of animals; and also provide for
the assessment of penalties for violations and for the enforcement and
administration of this chapter.
§ 17.02. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Every living creature, domestic or wild, except man.
ANIMAL CONTROL CENTER — A place designated by the Mayor or
Director of Public Health and Safety for the housing of animals in the
temporary custody of the City.171
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A person performing duties prescribed
by the Mayor or Director of Public Health and Safety to effectuate this
chapter.172
DANGEROUS DOG — 173
NEUTERED ANIMAL — A male or female animal treated by a licensed
veterinarian to render it incapable of reproduction.
OWNER — Any person who:174
Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property of the owner
or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by its
owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person
would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious
physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal; or
(A)
A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not cause
serious physical injury.
(B)
(A) Has a right of property in an animal;
(B) Keeps or harbors an animal; or
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 17.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 17.02
1:495
RUN AT LARGE — To be free of restraint off the premises of the owner.
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Any animal which bites or in any other manner attacks
or attempts to attack, except that any animal that bites, attacks or attempts
to attack any person entering unlawfully upon its owner's premises, or
which is provoked to attack, shall not be deemed a vicious animal.
§ 17.03. through § 17.09. (Reserved)
(C) Has an animal in his care or custody; or
Knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises
occupied by him.
(D)
§ 17.02 HOMETOWN CODE § 17.03
1:496
ARTICLE 2
Administration of Chapter
§ 17.10. Administration; delegation of authority; designation of
animal control centers.175
The Director of Public Health and Safety is responsible for the
administration of this chapter. Powers delegated to the Director of Public
Health and Safety may be delegated by him to other appropriate City
departments as he may deem expedient for the effectuation of this chapter.
The Director of Public Health and Safety shall establish or designate animal
control centers as are necessary to effectuate this chapter.
§ 17.11. Enforcement; authority of Animal Control Officer.
An Animal Control Officer and police officers shall enforce animal
regulations. An Animal Control Officer shall have control over the Animal
Control Center; shall have authority to issue citations for violations of this
chapter; and shall wear identification designating the person as an Animal
Control Officer.
§ 17.12. through § 17.19. (Reserved)
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 17.10 CITY GOVERNMENT § 17.12
1:497

ARTICLE 3
Impounding Procedures
§ 17.20. Impounding animals.
The Animal Control Officer or a police officer may impound in an animal
control center unlicensed dogs four months of age or over; unlicensed cats
four months of age or over; any dog or cat found running at large; any
abandoned animal; or any animal maintained in violation of this chapter.
§ 17.21. Record of impounded animals.
A record shall be made of all impounded animals by the Animal Control
Officer and the Police Department, entering the breed, color, and sex,
whether licensed or not, if known, and the name and address of the owner
or keeper, if known. If practicable, the Animal Control Officer shall keep
licensed animals separated from unlicensed ones. These records will be
maintained for one year by the Police Department.
§ 17.22. Notice to owner of impoundment.
Immediately upon impoundment of dogs or cats wearing a current license
tag, notice shall be given to the owner, by telephone and mail, as set forth in
the license application. Such notice shall inform the owner of the procedure
to regain custody of the animal.
§ 17.23. Redemption of impounded animals.
§ 17.24. Disposition of animals not redeemed; deceased animals.
(A) An animal impounded under the provisions of this article may be
redeemed by the owner within seven days after the impounding thereof,
upon the payment of fees. (See Article 8, Penalties.)
(B) Sundays and holidays shall not be counted as "days" for the purpose of
this section. The payment of the fees provided for in this section shall be
in addition to any fines levied by the Circuit Court of Cook County. Any
redeemed cat or dog not inoculated against rabies shall be taken
forthwith by the owner to a licensed veterinarian for rabies inoculation.
(A) Any animal not redeemed, as provided herein, shall be destroyed in a
humane fashion unless the animal can be placed for adoption or placed
with a humane society licensed under the Animal Welfare Act of the
State of Illinois (225 ILCS 605/1 et seq.).
(B) All dead animals not impounded shall be disposed of by the owner.
Deceased animals found on public property, streets, or parkways shall
be disposed of by the Public Works Department.
§ 17.20 CITY GOVERNMENT § 17.25
1:499
§ 17.25. Interference prohibited.
No unauthorized person shall interfere with the impounding of or shall
release any animal that has been impounded by the City.
§ 17.26. through § 17.29. (Reserved)
§ 17.25 HOMETOWN CODE § 17.26
1:500
ARTICLE 4
Owner's Duties
§ 17.30. Rabies vaccination.
It is the duty of all persons owning or keeping a dog over four months
of age, or a cat over four months of age, to have such animal vaccinated
against rabies. The rabies vaccination shall be given in an amount sufficient
to provide immunities from rabies for one year and shall be administered
by a licensed veterinarian. A certificate from a licensed veterinarian shall
be furnished the City Clerk or, upon request, shown to an Animal Control
Officer or police officer. If the rabies inoculation is effective for a period in
excess of one year, the certificate shall so state.
§ 17.31. Animal bites.
The Police Department shall cause to be investigated reports of animal
bites. If an animal has bitten a person, the Police Department shall notify
the owner of the animal and the animal shall be delivered promptly to a
licensed veterinarian, who shall confine or cause to be confined such animal
as provided in the Animal Control Act (510 ILCS 510/1 et seq.).
§ 17.32. Adoption of state law.
Every owner of an animal in the City shall comply with the Animal Control
Act of the Illinois Compiled Statutes (510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.).
§ 17.33. Female dogs or cats in heat.
Any person in control of a female dog or cat in heat shall confine such dog
or cat in an enclosed area so as to preclude other dogs or cats from coming
in contact with such female except for planned breeding. Any cat allowed to
run at large shall be neutered at the expense of the owner.
§ 17.34. License required; rabies inoculation prerequisite; registry;
fees. [Amended 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
(A) Any person owning any dog or cat four months of age or older within
the City limits shall obtain a license for each such animal prior to the
commencement of the upcoming license year or, if such animal is
acquired or becomes subject to licensure after the commencement of
the license year, then no later than 10 days thereafter. Animal licenses
shall be valid from each July 1 of a calendar year to June 30 of the
following calendar year. A written application for such license shall be
made to the City Clerk and shall state the name, address, and telephone
number of the owner, and the name, breed, color, age and sex of the
animal, the applicable rabies inoculation certificate number, and any
other information deemed necessary by the City Clerk. A current rabies
inoculation certificate shall be required at the time of the application
which shall certify that the inoculation is effective upon payment of a
license fee. The City Clerk shall issue a memorandum of registry and
§ 17.30 CITY GOVERNMENT § 17.34
1:501
§ 17.35. Animal care.
tag for each animal licensed. No tag issued shall be transferable.
[Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 3-2015]
(B) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal required to be licensed
to keep such animal within the City unless it wears a collar with the
animal license tag for the current license year attached at all times the
animal is off the premises of the owner.
(C) The City Clerk shall keep a complete registry of all licensed animals,
describing the same by name, species, breed, color, and sex; the name,
address, and telephone number of the owner as given; and the number
of the rabies inoculation certificate and license tag.
(D) Animals belonging to nonresidents keeping animals temporarily within
the corporate limits of Hometown shall be exempt from this section;
provided, however, that such animals have a license from the
jurisdiction of the owner, if required, and that all the other provisions of
this chapter are complied with.
(E) The annual license fee applicable to each animal shall be as set forth in
Chapter 11, Article 1, § 11.17, of the City Code. There shall be imposed
a late fee in the amount of 100% of the annual license fee on those
persons purchasing a license after the commencement of the license
year, or after the ten-day period referenced in Subsection (A), as may be
applicable. Replacement tags may be purchased from the City Clerk at
a cost as set forth in Chapter 11, Article 1, § 11.17. Notwithstanding
anything herein to the contrary, no license fee shall be charged to an
owner of a police dog or a dog used to assist the visually impaired.
[Amended 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 3-2015176]
(A) Each owner shall provide for each of his animals:
(1) Sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water.
(2) Adequate shelter and protection from the weather.
(3) Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering.
(4) Humane care and treatment.
(B) No person shall leave any animal unattended in a motor vehicle or
enclosed trailer when the outside temperature shall exceed 30° C. (86°
F.) or contain any animal in such manner that said animal does not have
proper air circulation while confined in a motor vehicle, trailer, kennel,
dog house, or any type of container or structure in which an animal may
be confined.
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 17.34 HOMETOWN CODE § 17.36
1:502
§ 17.36. Miscellaneous offenses.
No owner shall permit or suffer his animal to:
§ 17.37. Animals at large; removal of waste.177
(A) Molest persons or vehicles by chasing or barking or biting.
(B) Attack other animals.
(C) Damage property other than that of the owner.
(D) Bark, whine, or howl excessively.
(E) Create noxious or offensive odors.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control ("owner") of a
dog, cat or other domesticated animal to:
(1) Allow the animal to run at large or upon any public premises within
the City. Any animal in public shall be on a leash no longer than
eight feet in length controlled by a responsible party. Any animal
illegally running at large shall be impounded by the City or its
designee.
(2) Allow any animal in any park or area used for recreational
purposes.
(B) Removal of waste.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps, maintains,
harbors or walks a dog or cat to be on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by such person unless such dog or
cat is accompanied by a person who has in his possession a device
for the removal of excrement and a depository for the transmission
of excrement to a receptacle located upon property owned or
possessed by such person.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps, maintains,
harbors or walks a dog or cat to fail to immediately remove
excrement left by such dog or cat on property, public or private, not
owned or possessed by such person. The excrement shall be
removed to a proper receptacle located on property owned or
possessed by such person.
(3) No person shall allow cat or dog excretion to accumulate in any
yard, pen, or premises in or upon which a cat or dog shall be
confined or kept to the extent that the stench becomes offensive to
those residing in the vicinity or results in a health hazard or
nuisance.
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 17.36 CITY GOVERNMENT § 17.37
1:503
§ 17.38. Unlawful to run at large; leash required.
(Reserved)
§ 17.39. Prohibited animals.
It shall be unlawful to keep any pigs, swine, sheep, cattle, horses, goats,
or similar animals, or any naturally wild animals, within the City, except
in zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, educational institutions,
veterinary hospitals, or animal shelters.
§ 17.40. Limitation on number of animals.
§ 17.41. Nuisances; dangerous dogs.
(C) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the blind and visually impaired, persons
who are subject to epilepsy or other seizure disorders, or persons with
any other physical disability or a trainer of support dogs, guide dogs,
seizure-alert dogs, seizure-response dogs, or hearing dogs shall have
the right to be accompanied by a support dog or guide dog, especially
trained for that purpose, or a dog that is being trained to be a support
dog, guide dog, seizure-alert dog, seizure-response dog or hearing dog,
in public places or as otherwise allowed by the provisions of the Illinois
Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.) and the White Cane Law
(775 ILCS 30/1 et seq.).
(A) No person shall keep more than two of the following in the City: guinea
pigs, gerbils, hamsters, or white mice, except under those
circumstances enumerated in Subsection (D) or in pet shops.
(B) No person shall keep or permit more than two dogs to be or remain in
or about any single-family residence, building or lot, or more than one
dog in any unit of a multifamily residence within the City, except for the
permitted exceptions in § 17.39, Prohibited animals.
(C) No person shall keep or permit more than two cats to be or remain in or
about any single-family residence, building or lot or more than one cat
in any unit of a multifamily residence where cats are allowed out-ofdoors.
Where cats are not allowed out-of-doors, no more than four shall
be allowed in a single-family residence, building or lot, and no more
than two in any unit of a multifamily residence, except for the permitted
exceptions enumerated in § 17.39, Prohibited animals.
(D) The limit on the total number of animals, counting dogs and cats,
allowed in a single-family residence is four and a unit of multifamily
residence is two.
(A) Any animal that repeatedly violates the provisions of this chapter is
hereby declared a public nuisance and said animal may be destroyed in
a humane fashion.
§ 17.37 HOMETOWN CODE § 17.41
1:504
§ 17.42. through § 17.49. (Reserved)
(B) Any dangerous dog or other animal is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. The owner of any dangerous dog or other animal shall keep
the same confined in a secure enclosure, or on a leash controlled by the
owner or his or her agent at all times, and the owner shall not permit
such dog or other animal to be at large within the City.
§ 17.41 CITY GOVERNMENT § 17.42
1:505

ARTICLE 5
Prohibited Activities of Owners and Others
§ 17.50. Cruelty to animals.
§ 17.51. Unauthorized removal of collars, tags, and muzzles.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a police officer, Animal
Control Officer, licensed veterinarian or owner, to remove the collar, license
tag or muzzle from any dog or cat within the limits of the City without the
consent of the owner of such animal.
§ 17.52. Animals prohibited in public buildings and stores.
It shall be unlawful for any animal, even though on a leash, to be in or enter
any public building, food establishment, or any store except a store for the
sale of animals, anywhere within the City during the time that any of said
places are open for use by the public. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to dogs leading blind persons, nor to animal exhibits or animal
obedience training classes.
§ 17.53. Vicious animals.
(A) No person or owner shall abandon, cruelly beat, torment, overload,
overwork, or otherwise abuse animals in a manner to cause
unnecessary suffering.
(B) No person shall sell, offer for sale, or give away as a pet any rabbit or
fowl which has been dyed, colored, or otherwise treated to impart an
artificial color thereto. Baby chicks, ducklings, goslings, or turtles shall
not be sold, offered for sale, bartered or given away as pets or novelties.
(C) No person shall give away live animals, fish, reptiles or birds as a prize,
or as an inducement to any business agreement for the purpose of
attracting trade.
(D) No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed
with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any
animal, provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on
his own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable
substances.
(A) No owner shall permit any vicious animal to be on any street, alley, or
other public place within the City or upon the private premises of any
person other than the owner of such animal, unless such animal is
securely muzzled or caged. Vicious animals on the premises of the
owner shall be restrained so that they cannot attack persons lawfully on
the premises, and the premises shall be maintained so that children
cannot gain access thereto. Any animal found in violation of this section
shall be impounded.
§ 17.50 CITY GOVERNMENT § 17.53
1:507
§ 17.54. Diseased animals.
No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an infectious
disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place
whereby the health of other animals or man may be affected.
§ 17.55. Birds, squirrels and rabbits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound, or attempt to kill or
wound, any squirrel, rabbit, or bird, or for any person to take the eggs or
young of any bird within the limits of the City.
§ 17.56. Animal exhibitions and fights.
No person shall instigate, cause or procure any dog fight, cockfight or any
public or private fighting, or in any manner instigate, cause or procure, or
assist in any indecent or immoral show or exhibition of any animal.
§ 17.57. Trapping of animals.
No person shall trap, snare, dig a hole, pit or use any other method or device
to capture animals which are ferae naturae or domesticated in the City. The
placing of any such trap, snare, hole, pit or device is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance and shall be summarily abated.
§ 17.58. through § 17.59. (Reserved)
(B) If any vicious animal cannot be safely taken and impounded when
necessary for the protection of any person or property, such animal may
be slain by a police officer or person authorized by the City; provided,
however, that in all cases where any animal so slain has bitten any
person or caused an abrasion to the skin of such person, no injury shall
be done to the head of the animal and it shall be the duty of the person
slaying the animal to immediately deliver the carcass to a licensed
veterinarian to prepare the head and brain for delivery to the Cook
County Rabies Control Department.
(C) If any animal such as a mouse, rat, squirrel, or any other animal bites a
person or other animal and subsequently expires, the bite shall be
reported and the carcass delivered to the City Department of Public
Health.
§ 17.53 HOMETOWN CODE § 17.58
1:508
ARTICLE 6
(Reserved)178
§ 17.60. through § 17.69. (Reserved)
178. Editor's Note: Former Art. 6, Dealers in Household Pets, was repealed at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2). See now Ch. 11, Licenses, Art. 3, Dealers
in Small Animals.
§ 17.60 CITY GOVERNMENT § 17.60
1:509

ARTICLE 7
Veterinary Hospitals
§ 17.70. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VETERINARY HOSPITAL — Any institution, place, or enclosure used for the
harboring or reception for care or treatment of two or more horses, dogs,
cats, or other animals.
§ 17.71. License required.
No person shall manage, conduct, operate, or carry on the business of a
veterinary hospital without first having obtained a license therefor.
§ 17.72. Application for license.179
Any person desiring to conduct, carry on or operate a veterinary hospital,
as defined in this article, shall make a written application to the City Clerk
for a license to do so, which shall conform to the general requirements of
the City Code relating to applications for licenses.180 Such application shall
be filed with the City Clerk, who shall thereupon transmit it to the Director
of Public Health and Safety.
§ 17.73. Investigation of applicant; issuance of license.181
Upon receipt of the application referred to in § 17.72, the Director of Public
Health and Safety shall cause such investigation to be made as in his
judgment is necessary for the issuance of the license. If the Director of
Public Health and Safety approves the application, and the applicant has
paid the license fee required by the City Code, the City Clerk shall issue to
the applicant the license required by this article.
§ 17.74. Sanitary regulations; suspension or revocation of license;
reports; rabies impoundments.182
(A) All veterinary hospitals shall be kept free and clean from decaying food
and from filth of any kind. Every veterinary hospital conducted,
maintained, or managed by any person licensed by this article shall at
all times be open to the inspection of the Director of Public Health and
Safety, his duly appointed assistants or inspectors; and the Director of
Public Health and Safety is hereby authorized and empowered to
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 11, Licenses, Art. 1.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 17.70 CITY GOVERNMENT § 17.74
1:511
inspect the same, or cause inspection thereof to be made, whenever
and as often as he may deem proper; and if, upon such inspection, he
shall find any such hospital to be conducted, managed or maintained
in violation of the terms of the application for the license under which
such hospital was opened, conducted, managed or maintained, or in
violation of any of the provisions of this article, or any of the health or
sanitary ordinances, rules or regulations of the City, then and in that
event he may suspend the license for 10 days pending final action by
the Mayor and the City Council on revocation.
(B) It shall also be the further duty of all persons licensed under this article
to make a report to the Director of Public Health and Safety of any
communicable diseases or disease due to poisoning which may exist in
such veterinary hospital.
(C) Provision shall be made in such veterinary hospital for securely
impounding any animal confined for observation for rabies. Special
precaution shall be taken to securely and separately confine any such
animals during such period of observation, and a report shall be made
to the Director of Public Health and Safety of any such animal confined
in any veterinary hospital. Said veterinary hospitals shall comply with
the Animal Welfare Act of the State of Illinois (225 ILCS 605/1 et seq.).
§ 17.74 HOMETOWN CODE § 17.74
1:512
ARTICLE 8
Penalties
§ 17.75. Violations; penalty.
(A) When any person has violated the terms of § 17.34, License required, or
any other provision of this chapter, the officer making the arrest may, in
lieu of an arrest and bond or in lieu of filing a quasi-criminal complaint
and warrant or summons, issue a notice to appear at the police station
of the City of Hometown within 48 hours after said arrest to pay the
fines as provided for herein. Every person issued a notification of such
license violation, after consenting to a waiver of court hearing and trial,
within 48 hours after said notification is issued, may pay the sums for
the violation at the police station, Hometown, Illinois, in lieu of said
person's appearance in court. Failure to pay the fine herein provided
within 48 hours shall subject the person to whom the notification was
given to an issuance of a warrant for his arrest, and the police officer
issuing said notification shall swear out a complaint for the arrest.
(B) Penalties.
(1) All said violations shall be payable as follows:
(a) For animals wearing a current valid license tag:
(i) First offense: $5.
(ii) Second offense: $10.
(iii) Third offense: $15.
(iv) For each and every offense thereafter, an additional sum of
$15 shall be paid.
(b) For animals not wearing a current valid license tag:
(i) First offense: $10.
(ii) Second offense: $15.
(iii) Third offense: $20.
(iv) For each and every offense thereafter, an additional sum of
$20 shall be paid.
(2) Provided, however, that fines for the additional offenses shall be
assessable only if the violations have been committed within the
same calendar year.
(3) Any person who fails to appear after notification thereof and for
whom a complaint and warrant is issued shall pay the fines
provided for in Subsection (C) of this section. If a second notice to
appear is issued, an additional sum of double the amount shall be
added to the fines herein provided.
§ 17.75 CITY GOVERNMENT § 17.75
1:513
(C) Unless another penalty is expressly provided for in this chapter, every
person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $750.183
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 17.75 HOMETOWN CODE § 17.75
1:514
Chapter 18
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code — See Ch. 21. Zoning — See Ch. 22.
§ 17.75 CITY GOVERNMENT § 17.75
1:515

ARTICLE 1
Explosives; Fireworks
§ 18.01. Fireworks.
§ 18.02. Explosives.
It shall be unlawful to keep or store any explosives in the City without
written permission of the Department of Public Safety, except that
ammunition for small firearms shall not be construed as explosives.
§ 18.03. Rules of State Fire Marshal.
All explosives kept or stored in the City shall be kept and stored in
accordance with the rules enforced by the State Fire Marshal with regard
thereto.
§ 18.04. through § 18.09. (Reserved)
(A) The sale, storage or possession in any manner of fireworks, as defined
by 425 ILCS 35/1, shall be unlawful, except as may be necessary for the
giving of a licensed public exhibition of pyrotechnics as hereinafter
provided. Any such storage must be under the supervision of the
Department of Public Safety.
(B) It shall be unlawful to discharge or set off any fireworks or pyrotechnics
in the City, except that public exhibitions of fireworks and pyrotechnics
may be given if a license therefor is granted by the Council. Such
exhibitions shall be given subject to the supervision of the Department
of Public Safety.
§ 18.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.04
1:517

ARTICLE 2
Handbills
§ 18.10. Distribution in public places.
It shall be unlawful to distribute indiscriminately to the public any cards,
circulars, handbills, samples of merchandise, or any advertising matter
whatsoever on any public street or sidewalk or other public place in the
City; provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
peddling or sale of any article or publication that may carry or be
accompanied by advertising matter where a charge is made or a price paid
for such article or publication.
§ 18.11. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to distribute indiscriminately to the public, by leaving
at stores, offices or houses or residences in the City, any cards, circulars,
handbills, samples of merchandise, or any advertising matter whatsoever
without having first secured a permit therefor.
§ 18.12. Application for permit; qualifications of applicant.184
§ 18.13. through § 18.19. (Reserved)
(A) Applications for such permits shall be made to the City Clerk, and shall
contain a statement of the nature of the article, cards or advertisement
to be distributed and the name of the applicant and the name of the
manufacturer or distributor of such article or service advertised.
(B) The permit shall be issued at no fee. No such permit shall be issued to
any but a person of good character. The Chief of Police shall make or
cause to be made an investigation into the character of each applicant
and shall report the results thereof to the City Clerk before any such
permit shall be issued.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 18.10 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.13
1:519

ARTICLE 3
Plants and Weeds; Property Maintenance
§ 18.20. Nuisances.
§ 18.21. Height restrictions.
It shall be unlawful to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees,
bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, to grow to a height exceeding
eight inches anywhere in the City. Any such weeds or plants exceeding such
height are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 18.22. Owner and occupant duties and liability.
(A) Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cockleburs or
other weeds of a like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the
City are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for
the owner or occupant of such land to permit the same to grow or
remain thereon.
(B) All weeds and underbrush, including those which, due to dissemination
of pollen, are a menace to health, as well as weeds otherwise injurious
to public health or welfare, are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.185
(1) All such plants shall be pulled out, destroyed or chemically sprayed
with an effective chemical weed killer by the owner or person in
control of said plot of ground at least twice a year, once between
May 15 and June 15, and once between July 1 and August 1, of each
year.
(2) The failure to destroy such plants within the designated periods
shall constitute a violation of this section.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant, or any agent,
servant, representative or employee of such owner, lessee or occupant
having control of any lot or part of a lot:
(1) To allow or maintain any growth of weeds to a height over eight
inches.
(2) To allow the growth of noxious weeds as defined in 505 ILCS 100/
2(5) to any height.
(3) To allow garbage and debris to remain thereon.
(4) To allow a wrecked or partially wrecked motor vehicle, or parts
thereof, to remain thereon, except on lots duly licensed as
junkyards and motor vehicle repair shops.
185. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 18.20 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.22
1:521
§ 18.23. Abatement of nuisances.
Any violation of any section of this article is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. After notice as provided in § 18.22, if the person so served with
such a notice fails to abate the nuisance within the time provided for in
said notice, the Health Officer may proceed to abate such nuisance. Nothing
in this section shall prevent the Health Officer from abating any such
nuisance without notice in cases of emergency and immediate danger to
public health.
§ 18.24. through § 18.29. (Reserved)
(5) To allow the accumulation of garbage or debris in the public alley,
sidewalk, parkway, or street contiguous thereto.
(6) To allow a diseased Dutch Elm tree or ash tree infected with the
emerald ash borer to remain on the premises.186
(7) To allow a rat harborage and fail to exterminate or prevent the
ingress of rats thereto.
(B) It shall be the duty of every owner to cut such weeds and to remove the
garbage, debris, wrecked or partially wrecked vehicles, or parts
thereof, diseased elm or ash trees, and to exterminate and prevent rats
from ingressing on said lot or part thereof, at his own expense. In the
event said owner refuses or neglects to do the same as herein provided,
the City may provide for the cutting or removal of the same and collect
the reasonable costs thereof from the owner after serving a notice on
the person who refuses or neglects to do so. The notice of the time to
remove or correct shall depend on the hazard to the health or danger to
the public, but in no case shall be less than seven days, nor less than 30
days in case of Dutch Elm or ash trees. Within 60 days after such cost or
expense is incurred, the City shall file a lien upon the real estate
affected which shall include the cost, plus statutory interest from the
date said cost was incurred, together with the cost of recording. The
lien may be enforced by a proceeding to foreclose as in the case of
mortgages or mechanics' liens. Suits to foreclose this lien shall be
commenced within two years after the date of the filing of the lien.187
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 18.22 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.24
1:522
ARTICLE 4
Solicitation by Nonprofit Organizations
§ 18.30. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to publicly solicit,
either in person or by agent, upon the streets or any other public place
in the City, contributions, donations, or subscriptions for charitable or
religious or educational or other organizations or purposes, without having
first secured a permit therefor.
§ 18.31. Application for permit; issuance.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be
referred to the City Council, and no such permit shall be issued except upon
order of the City Council.
§ 18.32. through § 18.39. (Reserved)
§ 18.30 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.32
1:523

ARTICLE 5
Mosquito Abatement
§ 18.40. Sanitation and engineering standards.
All open excavations, including the removal of topsoil, except those
excavations or topsoil removals that are referred to in §§ 18.41, 18.42 and
18.43 hereinafter, shall comply with the following conditions:
§ 18.41. Building construction exception.
Those open excavations or removal of topsoil necessary or incidental to
the construction or installation of buildings, structures or other fixed works
shall be excluded from the provisions of § 18.40; provided, however, that
in the event such necessary or incidental excavations or areas of topsoil
removal are not completely covered within a period of six months after
commencing the excavation or removal of topsoil, then such excavations
shall be made self-draining or shall be backfilled within 30 days after
notification as provided for in § 18.46.
§ 18.42. Ditches, culverts and natural watercourses.
All ditches and culverts shall be constructed so that they are completely
self-draining, and all ditches, culverts and natural watercourses shall be
maintained free of debris and other obstructions.
(A) Excavations must provide for complete self-drainage; or
(B) In the event self-drainage is not provided, then the following conditions
must be met:
(1) A minimum water depth of four feet shall be maintained at all
times; and
(2) All shorelines within the zone of water level fluctuation shall be
constructed and maintained on a slope of four feet (horizontal) to
one foot (vertical), or steeper, and where such sloping may result in
the creation of a hazardous or dangerous condition, the provision of
fencing exit ramps or stairs, ladders or other safety devices may be
required; and
(3) The topmost berm around such excavation shall be constructed and
maintained to permit ready access of, and shall be continuously
available to, light vehicles for purposes of mosquito control; and
(4) Provision shall be made for prompt and adequate control of all
aquatic and semi-aquatic vegetation, and the removal of debris and
floatage below the topmost berm.
§ 18.40 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.43
1:525
§ 18.43. Ponds, lakes and artificial impoundments.
All ponds, lakes, or other artificial impoundments shall be constructed and
maintained in a manner to conform with the provisions of § 18.40(B).
§ 18.44. Artificial containers and water-holding devices.
All artificial containers and water-holding devices so placed that they may
hold water for a period of five days or longer, unless such containers or
devices are tightly covered or screened to prevent the entry of mosquitoes,
constitute a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain
on his premises unscreened or uncovered containers or other water-holding
devices under conditions that permit mosquito larvae or pupae to develop.
All such uncovered or unscreened containers or other water-holding devices
shall be completely drained or the water therein changed at intervals of
not more than five days between April 1 and October 25, or effective
insecticides must be applied to all exposed water surfaces at intervals of not
more than five days during the above period. The failure to maintain such
containers or devices free of mosquito larvae or pupae during the above
period constitutes a violation of this article.188
§ 18.45. Permits required.
A permit shall be obtained from the Building Commissioner for each
excavation, construction or installation referred to in §§ 18.40 through
18.44. Drawings and other information pertaining to compliance with
requirements hereinbefore stipulated may be required in the application for
said permit.
§ 18.46. Notice to comply.
When the owner or person in control of any property fails to comply with
the provisions of § 18.45, the Health Officer shall immediately serve written
notice upon such owner or person to obtain compliance therewith. The
notice shall stipulate the time allowed for full and complete compliance as
set forth hereinabove, and each day of failure to comply with the notice
within the time stipulated therein shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 18.47. through § 18.49. (Reserved)
188. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (F), regarding nuisance weeds, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General
Provisions, Art. 2). See now Art. 3 of this chapter.
§ 18.43 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.47
1:526
ARTICLE 6
(Reserved)189
§ 18.50. through § 18.69. (Reserved)
189. Editor's Note: Former Art. 6, Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and
Responsibility Procedures, was moved to Ch. 3, Art. 6, at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 18.50 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.50
1:527

ARTICLE 7
Discrimination in Housing and Public Accommodations
[Added 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3-2002; amended 8-11-2009 by Ord.
No. 12-2009; 6-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2-2013]
§ 18.70. Definitions.
Unless otherwise specified, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings ascribed to them for the purposes of this article:
AGE — The chronological age of not less than 40 years.
COVERED ACCESSIBLE MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS —
CREDIT TRANSACTION — The grant, denial, extension or termination of
credit to an individual.
DISABILITY — A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
one or more of the major life activities of an individual; a record of such
impairment; or being regarded as having such impairment. Excluded from
this definition is an impairment relating to the illegal use, possession or
distribution of controlled substances as defined in Schedules I through V of
the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. § 812).
ELDERLY/OLDER PERSON — A person 55 years of age or older.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual, whether paid or unpaid, engaged in
employment for an employer, or an applicant for employment.
EMPLOYER —
Buildings consisting of four or more units, that were first occupied after
March 13, 1991, if such buildings have one or more elevators; or
(A)
Ground-floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units,
that were first occupied after March 13, 1991.
(B)
Any person employing one or more employees, or seeking to employ
one or more employees if the person:
(1) Has its principal place of business within the City of Hometown; or
(2) Does business within the City of Hometown.
(A)
"Employer" does not mean:
The government of the United States or a corporation wholly
owned by the government of the United States;
(1)
(2) An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe;
(3) The State of Illinois or an agency or department thereof; or
(4) A unit of local government in the County of Cook.
(B)
§ 18.70 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.70
1:529
EMPLOYMENT — The performance of services for an employer for
remuneration, as a volunteer, or as a participant in a training or
apprenticeship program.190
FAMILIAL STATUS —
GENDER IDENTITY — The actual or perceived appearance, expression,
identity, or behavior of a person as being male or female, whether or not
that appearance, expression, identity, or behavior is different from that
traditionally associated with the person's designated sex at birth.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Any improved or unimproved real
property, or part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of
one or more individuals.
HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS — Housing:
LABOR ORGANIZATION — Any organization, labor union, or craft union,
or any voluntary incorporated association designed to further the cause of
union labor, which is constituted for the purpose, in whole or in part, of
collective bargaining or of dealing with an employer concerning grievances,
terms or conditions of employment, or apprenticeships or applications for
apprenticeships, or of other mutual aid or protection in connection with
employment, including apprenticeships or application for apprenticeships.
MARITAL STATUS — The legal status of being married, single, separated,
divorced or widowed.
MILITARY DISCHARGE STATUS — A person's status as having been
discharged from the Armed Forces of the United States of America, their
Reserve components or any National Guard or Naval Militia, other than by
a dishonorable discharge.
One or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years)
being domiciled with a parent or person having legal custody of such
individual or individuals, or the designee of such parent or other person
having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or
other person;
(A)
(B) Any person who is pregnant; or
Any person who is in the process of securing legal custody of any
individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
(C)
Provided under any government program designed and operated to
assist elderly persons;
(A)
(B) Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older; or
Intended or operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of
age or older per unit.
(C)
190. Editor's Note: The definition of "employment agency," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 18.70 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.70
1:530
NATIONAL ORIGIN — The place in which a person or one of his or her
ancestors was born.
OPERATOR — Any owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent,
agent or occupant of a place of public accommodation, or an employee of
any such person or persons.
PARENTAL STATUS — The status of living with one or more dependent
minors or disabled children.
PERSON — One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations or organizations, labor organizations, labor unions, joint
apprenticeship committees, or union labor associations, corporations, the
State of Illinois and its instrumentalities, political subdivisions, units of
local government, legal representatives, trusts, trustees in bankruptcy or
receivers, state governments other than Illinois, or commercial operations
or entities controlled by governments other than those of Illinois or of the
United States.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION — Includes, but is not limited to:191
An inn, hotel, motel, or other place of lodging, except for an
establishment located within a building that contains not more than five
units for rent or hire and that is actually occupied by the proprietor of
such establishment as the residence of such proprietor;
(A)
(B) A restaurant, bar, or other establishment serving food or drink;
A motion-picture house, theater, concert hall, stadium, or other place of
exhibition or entertainment;
(C)
An auditorium, convention center, lecture hall, or other place of public
gathering;
(D)
A bakery, grocery store, clothing store, hardware store, shopping
center, or other sales or rental establishment;
(E)
A laundromat, dry-cleaner, bank, barber shop, beauty shop, travel
service, shoe repair service, funeral parlor, gas station, office of an
accountant or lawyer, pharmacy, insurance office, professional office of
a health-care provider, hospital, or other service establishment;
(F)
(G) Public conveyances on air, water, or land;
A terminal, depot, or other station used for specified public
transportation;
(H)
(I) A museum, library, gallery, or other place of public display or collection;
(J) A park, zoo, amusement park, or other place of recreation;
191. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 18.70 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.70
1:531
PUBLIC OFFICIAL — Any officer or employee of the state or any agency
thereof, including state political subdivisions, municipal corporations, park
districts, forest preserve districts, educational institutions and schools.
REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESMAN — A person, whether licensed or
not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells,
purchases, exchanges, rents, or leases real property, or who negotiates or
attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself or herself
out as engaged in these activities.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION — The sale, exchange, rental, occupancy,
lease, sublease, or lease renewal of real property for residential purposes in
the City of Hometown, or the provision of services or utilities in connection
with such sale, exchange, rental, occupancy, lease, sublease or lease
renewal. "Real estate transaction" also means, with respect to activities
conducted or property located within the City of Hometown, the brokering
or appraising of residential real property and the making, purchasing,
or guaranteeing of loans or mortgages, or providing any other financial
assistance either for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or
maintaining a dwelling, secured by residential real property.
REAL PROPERTY — Buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements,
leaseholds, interest in real estate cooperatives, condominiums, and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any interest therein.
RELIGION — Any belief protected by the Free Exercise Clause of the
First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States, including all
aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as beliefs or the actual
identification with, or perceived identification with, a religion.
SEX — The status of being male or female.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — The status or expression, whether actual or
perceived, of heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality.
SOURCE OF INCOME — The lawful manner by which an individual supports
himself/herself and his/her dependents.
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION — Discrimination against a person because
of the actual or perceived status, practice, or expression of that person's
race, color, sex, age, religion, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, marital status, parental status, military discharge status, source
of income, gender identity, or housing status, or the actual or perceived
association with such a person.
A nonsectarian nursery, day-care center, elementary, secondary,
undergraduate, or postgraduate school, or other place of education;
(K)
A senior citizen center, homeless shelter, food bank, nonsectarian
adoption agency, or other social service center establishment; and
(L)
A gymnasium, health spa, bowling alley, golf course, or other place of
exercise or recreation.
(M)
§ 18.70 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.71
1:532
§ 18.71. Real estate transactions.
It is a violation for any person engaging in a real estate transaction because
of unlawful discrimination, or because of familial status, to:
§ 18.72. Exemptions concerning real estate transactions.
Nothing contained in § 18.71 shall prohibit:
(A) Refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a person or to
discriminate in making available such transaction.
(B) Alter terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate transaction or in
the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith.
(C) Refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a bona fide offer to engage in a
real estate transaction from a person.
(D) Refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person.
(E) Represent to a person that real property is not available for inspection,
sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so available, or to fail to bring a
property listing to his or her attention, or to refuse to permit him or her
to inspect real property.
(F) Print, circulate, post, mail, publish or cause to be published a written or
oral statement, advertisement or sign, or to use a form of application for
a real estate transaction, or to make a record or inquiry in connection
with a prospective real estate transaction, which expresses any
limitation founded upon, or indicates, directly or indirectly, an intent to
engage in unlawful discrimination.
(G) Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing or real property with
knowledge that unlawful discrimination in a real estate transaction is
intended.
(A) The sale of a single-family home by its owner so long as the following
criteria are met:
(1) The owner does not own or have a beneficial interest in more than
three single-family homes at the time of the sale.
(2) The owner or a member of his or her family was the last current
resident of the home.
(3) The home is sold without the use of the sales or rental facilities or
services of any real estate broker or salesman, or of any employee
or agent of any real estate broker or salesman.
(4) The home is sold without the publication, posting or mailing, after
notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of
§ 18.71(F).
§ 18.71 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.72
1:533
§ 18.73. Disability.
It is a violation to deny or refuse to sell or rent, or to otherwise make
available, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of:
(B) Rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains
housing accommodations for not more than four families living
independently of each other, if the lessor or a member of his or her
family resides in one of the housing accommodations.
(C) Rental of a room or rooms in a private home by an owner if he or she or
a member of his or her family resides therein or, while absent for a
period of not more than 12 months, if he or she or a member of his or
her family intends to return to reside therein.
(D) Restriction of the rental or sale of a housing accommodation to a person
of a certain age group when such housing accommodation is
authorized, approved, financed or subsidized, in whole or in part, for
the benefit of that age group, by the United States of America, the State
of Illinois, or by a unit of local government.
(E) A religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit
institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in
conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society from
limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of a dwelling which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership
in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national
origin.
(F) Restricting the rental of rooms in a housing accommodation to persons
of one sex.
(G) Conduct against a person because such person has been convicted of
the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance.
(H) Persons engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real
property from taking into consideration factors other than those based
on unlawful discrimination or familial status.
(I) Taking familial status into consideration with respect to housing for
older persons.
(A) A disability of a buyer or renter, a disability of a person residing or
intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made
available, or a disability of any person associated with the buyer or
renter.
(B) To refuse to permit, at the expense of a disabled person, reasonable
modifications to the premises occupied, or to be occupied, by such
person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full
enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental, the
§ 18.72 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.73
1:534
§ 18.74. Blockbusting.192
It is a violation for any person to:
landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission
for a modification on the lessee agreeing to restore the interior of the
premises to the condition that existed before modifications, reasonable
wear and tear excepted. The landlord may not increase any customarily
required security deposit on the basis of a person's disability. However,
where it is necessary in order to ensure with reasonable certainty
that funds will be available to pay for the restorations at the end of
the tenancy, the landlord may negotiate as part of such a restoration
agreement a provision requiring that the tenant pay into an interestbearing
escrow account, over a reasonable period, a reasonable amount
of money not to exceed the cost of the restorations. The interest in
any such account shall accrue to the benefit of the tenant. A landlord
may condition permission for a modification on the lessee providing
a reasonable description of the proposed modifications as well as
reasonable assurances that the work will be done in a workmanlike
manner and that any required building permits will be obtained.
(C) To refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to
afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.
(D) To fail to design and construct subject multifamily dwellings in such a
manner that the public use and common use portions of such dwellings
are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons. Specifically, all
doors shall be designed to allow disabled persons in wheelchairs
passage into and within all premises within such dwellings.
Additionally, all premises within such dwellings shall feature:
(1) An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
(2) Utility controls in accessible locations;
(3) Reinforcements in bathroom walls for the installation of grab bars
and usable kitchens; and
(4) Bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver
about the space.
(A) Solicit for sale, lease, list or purchase any residential real estate on the
grounds of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into the
vicinity of the property of any person or persons of a particular race,
color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, marital status or
disability.
192. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 18.73 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.74
1:535
§ 18.75. Public accommodations.
It is a violation for any person on the basis of unlawful discrimination to:
§ 18.76. Exemptions concerning public accommodations.
Nothing in § 18.75 shall apply to:
(B) Distribute or cause to be distributed written material or statements
designed to induce any owner of residential real estate to sell or lease
his or her property because of any present or prospective changes in
the race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, marital
status or disability of residents in the vicinity of the property involved.
(C) Intentionally create alarm among residents of any community by
transmitting communications in any manner, including a telephone call,
whether or not a conversation thereby ensues, designed to induce any
owner of residential real estate to sell or lease his or her property
because of any present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the
property involved of any person of any national origin, ancestry, age,
sex, marital status or disability.
(A) Deny or refuse to another the full and equal enjoyment of the facilities
and services of any public place of accommodation;
(B) Directly or indirectly, as the operator of a place of public
accommodation, publish, circulate, display or mail any written
communication, except a private communication sent in response to a
specific inquiry, through which the operator communicates that the
facilities of the place of public accommodation will be denied to any
person, or that any person is unwelcome, objectionable or
unacceptable, because of unlawful discrimination;
(C) Deny or refuse to another, as a public official, the full and equal
enjoyment of the accommodations, advantage, facilities or privileges of
the official's office or services or of any property under the official's
care because of unlawful discrimination.
(A) A private club, or other establishment, not in fact open to the public,
except to the extent that the goods, services, facilities, privileges,
advantages, or accommodations of the establishment are made
available to the customers or patrons of another establishment that is a
place of public accommodation.
(B) Any facility, as to discrimination based on sex, which is distinctly private
in nature such as rest rooms, show rooms, bath houses, health clubs
and other similar facilities for which the City of Hometown, in its rules
and regulations, may grant exemptions based on bona fide
considerations of public policy.
(C) Any facility, as to discrimination based on sex, which restricts the rental
of rooms to individuals of one sex.
§ 18.74 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.76
1:536
§ 18.77. through § 18.79. (Reserved)
(D) Facilities regulated under the Environmental Barriers Act (410 ILCS 25/
1 et seq.), as amended, with respect to allegations of discrimination
based upon disability resulting from a denial of access due to the
physical structure of a public accommodation.193
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 18.76 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.77
1:537

ARTICLE 8
Signs
[Added 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
§ 18.80. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Hometown Sign Ordinance."
§ 18.81. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the use of signs in the City
which are safe, aesthetically pleasing, compatible with their surroundings
and legible in the circumstances in which they are seen. This article also
recognizes the need for a well-maintained and attractive physical
appearance of the community and the need for adequate business
identification for the conduct of competitive commerce. This article is also
adopted for the purpose of reducing sign or advertising distractions which
may increase traffic accidents by distracting drivers' attention from the
roadway.
§ 18.82. Definitions.
Terms used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, mean as
follows:
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign which includes action or motion.
ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICE — A flag, propeller, spinner, streamer,
search light or similar device or ornamentation which is designed or used
for the purpose of promoting, advertising, or attracting attention for
commercial purposes.
BANNER SIGN — A temporary sign composed of lightweight material,
either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame, secured or mounted to an
existing structure.
CANOPY OR AWNING — A permanent roof-like shelter which may be
freestanding or extending from part or all of a building face and which
is constructed of durable material such as metal, cloth, glass or plastic.
Lettering must not exceed 20% of the total canopy area and is limited to
placement above windows and doors.
CLOSED SIGN — A sign in which more than 50% of the entire area is solid
or tightly enclosed or covered.
COPY, CHANGEABLE OR MESSAGE BOARD SIGN — A sign on which the
copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or through mechanical means,
such as electrical or electronic time-and-temperature units, or is changed
manually in the field in or upon the surface area of the sign.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign which directs or guides persons to an
establishment or to facilities intended to serve the public, including
entrances, exits, rest rooms, public telephones, walkways, parking areas,
full-service and self-service gasoline pumps, and similar facilities, but which
§ 18.80 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.82
1:539
does not identify the establishment itself or other goods or services
available at the establishment and does not contain other advertising
messages.
FLASHING SIGN — Any sign which contains an intermittent, strobe,
running or flashing light source, or which produces the illusion of an
intermittent, strobe, running or flashing light.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign, usually a pole sign, which is completely
supported by one or more posts physically attached to the ground. A
freestanding sign is a type of ground sign.
GROUND SIGN — A sign supported by uprights or braces in or upon the
ground surface.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the natural grade at the
base of the sign support to the highest point of the sign.
HOLOGRAM SIGN — A three-dimensional picture that is made on a
photographic film or plate without the use of a camera, that consists of a
pattern of interference produced by a split coherent beam of light and which
for viewing is illuminated with a coherent light from behind.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign which states the name of the business
or establishment, including either the national company or local proprietor,
and/or the address of a building.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which emanates light either by means
of exposed tubing or lamps on its surface or by means of illumination
transmitted through the sign faces.
INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which reflects light from a
source intentionally directed upon it; for example, by means of a flood light.
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached to or hung from a marquee, canopy or
other covered structure projecting from and supported by the building and
extending beyond the building wall.
NAMEPLATE — A sign which displays only the name and/or street address
of the occupant.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign which was lawfully erected and
maintained prior to the adoption and effective date of this article and any
amendments hereto, which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and
restrictions of this code, or a sign previously deemed to be nonconforming
for which a special permit has been issued.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN (OFF-SITE SIGN) — Any sign that identifies a
business, person, activity, goods, products, services or facilities or that
directs persons to a different location from where the sign is located.
ON-PREMISES SIGN (ON-SITE SIGN) — Any sign that identifies a business,
person, activity, goods, products, services or facilities that are located on
the same premises as the sign itself.
OPEN SIGN — A sign in which at least 50% of the enclosed area is
uncovered or open to the transmission of wind.
§ 18.82 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.82
1:540
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign, usually of a temporary nature, not securely
anchored to the ground or to a building or structure and which obtains
some or all of its structural stability with respect to wind or other normally
applied forces by means of its geometry or character.
PROJECTING SIGN — A display sign which is attached directly to the
building wall and which extends (usually perpendicular) from the face of the
wall more than 12 inches.
PUBLIC SIGN — A sign of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance
of a public duty, such as official signs and notices of any public or
governmental agency, or erected by or on the order of a court or public
officer, including official traffic signs authorized by the Illinois Compiled
Statutes or the Illinois Vehicle Code.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any dedicated street, alley or public property.194
ROOF SIGN — A sign which is erected on the roof of a building.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — The area of the corner lot closest to the intersection
which is kept free of visual impairment to allow full view of both pedestrian
and vehicular traffic. It is marked by a point at which the two curblines
intersect, measuring back 15 feet on each street front, and drawing a line
across the two back points to form a triangulated area. Only public signs,
sign poles less than 12 inches in diameter and signs higher than 10 feet may
be installed in this area.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, which is
used primarily to advertise, identify, display or direct or attract attention
to an object, person, establishment, product, service, event or location by
any means, including, without limitation, words, letters, figures, designs,
symbols, fixtures, colors, motion, illumination or projected images, visible
beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which they are situated or
visible from any public thoroughfare or right-of-way. This includes, but is
not limited to, wall signs, freestanding signs, ground signs, window signs,
awning or canopy signs, marquees, changeable-copy signs, message boards,
illuminated signs, moving signs, temporary signs, portable signs, pennants,
banners, streamers or any other attention-getting device, flag, or other
display, whether affixed to a building or erected elsewhere on the premises.
The term "sign" excludes those features of a building which are an integral
part of the building's design and structure.
SIGN AREA — The entire area of all sign faces, cumulatively, including sign
faces on which no copy is currently displayed.
SIGN FACE — That part of the sign which is or can be used to identify, to
advertise, to communicate information, or for visual representation which
attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. This shall include any
background material, panel, trim, color, and direct or self-illumination that
differentiates the sign from the building, structure, backdrop surface, or
194. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 18.82 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.82
1:541
object upon or against which it is placed. This shall not include any portion
of the support structure for the sign, provided that no message, symbol, or
any part of the aforementioned sign face criteria is placed on or designed
as part of the support structure.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign constructed of cloth, fabric or other
lightweight temporary material, with or without a structural frame,
intended for a limited period of display; including decoration displays for
holidays or public demonstrations.
WALL SIGN — A sign which is painted on or directly attached to the surface
of a building wall and which extends not more than 12 inches from the face
of the wall, the face of the sign being substantially parallel to the face of the
building wall.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign that is installed inside, painted upon or placed
against a window for purposes of viewing from outside the premises, not
including merchandise located in a window display.
§ 18.83. Standards.
§ 18.84. Permission of property owner.
No person shall erect, construct or maintain any sign upon any property,
structure or building without the prior written consent of the owner or
person entitled to possession of the property, structure or building, or his/
her authorized representative. The written consent must accompany the
application for a sign permit.
§ 18.85. Permit application; term; revocation.
(A) Physical standards such as sign height and area contained herein are to
be construed as maximum standards.
(B) No sign can be located or maintained in any required parking area or
parking aisle.
(C) It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move or
convert any sign in the City, or cause the same to be done, without first
obtaining any required sign permit from the Building Commissioner. No
new sign permit is required for signs which have previously been issued
valid permits and which conform with the requirements of this article
on March 1, 2004, unless the sign is hereafter permanently altered,
relocated, or reinstalled. Every sign permit issued shall become null
and void if installation is not commenced and completed within 180
days from the date of such permit.
(A) Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing on a form
furnished by the Building Commissioner, accompanied by the
applicable fee and the following information:
(1) A plat of survey showing the location of the sign.
§ 18.82 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.85
1:542
§ 18.86. Fees.
The permit fee for a sign shall be equal to 1% of the total cost of
construction of the sign plus any applicable electrical fees, but in no event
shall the permit fee be less than $15.
§ 18.87. Signs over public rights-of-way.
(2) Two sets of plans and specifications showing the method of
construction and attachment of the sign. Plans must be signed and
sealed by an Illinois licensed structural engineer or an Illinois
licensed architect.
(3) Written consent of the owner or lessee of the property and evidence
of ownership or leasehold interest.
(4) A current City contractor's license.
(5) An electrical permit if the sign is illuminated or uses electricity.
(6) Liability insurance with combined limits of not less than $500,000.
(B) Permits shall be issued for the life of the sign, or any shorter period as
stated on the approved permit application by the Building
Commissioner. However, any permit may be revoked at any time by the
Building Commissioner upon finding that the sign violates any provision
of this article or that the permittee made false representations in
securing the sign permit. No fee which the permittee paid for the
permit shall be refunded when a permit is revoked.
(A) Projecting signs. A projecting sign may be located over the public rightof-
way, provided that the bottom edge of the sign is at least 10 feet
above the ground level and that the sign does not extend beyond a
vertical plane which is two feet inside of the curbline. A projecting sign
extending over the public right-of-way must have a face which is
perpendicular to the building to which it is attached.
(B) Freestanding signs. A freestanding sign may be located over the public
right-of-way, provided that the bottom edge of the sign is at least 10 feet
above the ground level and that the sign does not extend beyond a
vertical plane which is two feet inside of the curbline. A freestanding
sign will not be allowed to extend over the public right-of-way where
there is adequate room on the property such that the freestanding sign
could be completely constructed on private property.
(C) Canopy signs or awning signs. A canopy or awning sign may be located
over the public right-of-way, provided that the bottom edge of the sign is
at least eight feet above the ground level and that the sign does not
extend beyond a vertical plane which is three feet from the face of the
building on which it is constructed.
(D) Wall signs. A wall sign may not extend over the public right-of-way.
§ 18.85 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.88
1:543
§ 18.88. General construction and maintenance standards.
All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the
following limitations and requirements:
§ 18.89. Appearance standards.
(A) International Building Code. All signs shall be constructed in
accordance with the minimum requirements of the International
Building Code in effect at the time of the permit application.
(B) Electrical Code. All signs which are illuminated or contain any electrical
parts shall be constructed in accordance with the electrical code of the
City.195
(C) Access to building and roof. No sign shall be erected so as to prevent
free ingress to or egress from any door or window, or any other point of
access into a building, nor shall any sign be erected so as to impair
access to the roof of a building.
(D) Glass. All glass that is part of a sign shall be safety glass.
(E) Maintenance. Each sign shall painted and maintained as necessary to
prevent rusting, rotting, illegibility, or other deterioration. All broken or
missing parts shall be promptly replaced. All seams between panels or
the components of the sign shall be maintained in a closed condition.
(F) External lighting. Any external lighting of signs shall be directed away
from the public right-of-way and from adjoining property.
(G) Identification. Every sign, other than a temporary sign, shall have
identification, by name and telephone number, of the company
constructing and maintaining such sign marked thereon.
(A) All sign designs and lettering shall be approved by the Building
Commissioner to meet the following standards:
(1) Every sign shall have appropriate scale and proportion in its design
and in its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.
(2) Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of
the building, structure, or site to which it principally relates.
(3) The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be
harmonious with the building, structure or site to which it
principally relates. Opaque backgrounds with illuminated lettering
shall be preferred for internally illuminated signs.
(4) The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the
minimum needed to convey the sign's major message and shall be
composed in proportion to the area of the sign face.
195. Editor's Note: See Ch. 21, Art. 13, Electrical Code.
§ 18.88 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.89
1:544
§ 18.90. Setback requirements.
The minimum setback requirements for all freestanding signs shall be as
follows:
§ 18.91. Prohibited signs.
Except as specifically provided otherwise in this article, the following signs
and displays shall be strictly prohibited throughout the City:
(5) Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining and
neighboring premises and shall not unreasonably obstruct the view
of existing signs.
(6) Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos
shall conform to the appearance criteria required for all other
signs.
(B) Once a sign design and lettering have been approved by the Building
Commissioner, that sign shall be deemed to meet the provisions of this
section unless its design and lettering are changed.
(A) The minimum setback for the pole or support of the sign from the rightof-
way property line shall be one foot.
(B) Signs shall not be permitted in parkways, public easements, or in the
public right-of-way.
(C) No signs may be permitted within a sight triangle, except for safetyrelated
signs.
(A) Portable signs, except for one period not to exceed 30 calendar days in
each calendar year.
(B) Signs which are painted directly onto any exterior wall of any building
or other structure.
(C) Signs in public rights-of-way which are not public signs or located on
permitted bus shelters or advertising benches, except banners where
permitted by the Mayor on special occasions for placement on City light
poles.
(D) Streamers, posters, ribbons, light strings, light bulbs, light bands,
spinners, attention-getting devices that move, blinking, electronic or
flashing signs, except time, temperature and date signs, signs which
exhibit changing natural or artificial light or color effects, and festoon
lighting, signs (other than neon signs) which contain bare, unshielded
light or tubes which are visible from a public street or a private
residence. Christmas lights and ornaments shall be permitted during
the period of November 15 to the following January 15.
§ 18.89 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.91
1:545
(E) Signs attached to trees, fences, public utility poles, standpipes, gutter
drains or fire escapes, other than warning signs issued by government
officials or public utilities.
(F) Abandoned or defunct signs, including the posts or other supports
thereof, that advertise or identify an activity, business, product or
service that is no longer conducted or available on the premises where
such sign is located. The property owner shall remove said sign within
30 days of notification by the Building Commissioner.
(G) Signs which move, rotate, change position, have moving parts, or
create the illusion of movement, whether the movement is caused by
the wind or mechanically, except for the rotation of barber poles and
permissible changeable-copy signs.
(H) Signs erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to
or access from any door, window, fire escape, driveway or utility lines.
(I) "A" frame, sandwich board, sidewalk or curb signs on the public rightof-
way.
(J) Marquee signs.
(K) Roof signs.
(L) Hologram signs.
(M) Signs which emit an audible sound, odor or visible matter.
(N) Signs which by reason of their size, location, movement, content,
coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with or construed
to be a traffic-control sign, signal or device, or the light of an
emergency or road equipment vehicle, except where such sign is
accessory to a parking area and gives directions or instructions to
drivers or pedestrians.
(O) Signs which hide or interfere with traffic flow or any street sign, signal
or device.
(P) Signs or any advertising device attached to or located on a parked
vehicle or trailer on a public right-of-way, public property or private
property for the basic purpose of providing advertising of products or
services or directing people to a business or activity located on the
same or nearby property or any other premises.
(Q) Off-premises (off-site) signs, such as billboards, but excluding public
directional signs.
(R) Signs which do not meet the standards of, or which otherwise violate,
the Illinois Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971 (225 ILCS 440/1 et
seq.), as amended.
(S) Signs which contain radio or microwave transmitters, or slots or boxes
for the distribution of pamphlets or similar materials.
§ 18.91 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.91
1:546
§ 18.92. Signs allowed in all zoning districts with permit.
The following signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts with a sign
permit, subject to any requirements in this article:
(T) Plywood wall signs or any other wall sign not mounted in a metal frame.
(A) Construction signs. One sign shall be permitted that lists the building
contractors, professional firms and lending institutions on sites under
construction. The sign shall be confined to the site of the construction,
construction shed, or trailer and shall be removed no later than 14 days
after the completion of the project. Construction signs for projects up to
10 acres shall not exceed 12 square feet per acre, or 40 square feet,
whichever is less. For construction projects exceeding 10 acres, the
sign shall not exceed 64 square feet. All construction signs shall be
subject to annual review.
(B) Real estate "for sale" or "for lease" signs over six square feet. One
temporary real estate "for sale" or "for lease" sign, located on the
commercial real estate to be sold or leased, shall be allowed for each lot
or parcel. For a tract of commercial real estate containing one acre or
more, signs shall not exceed 40 square feet. For a tract of commercial
real estate containing less than one acre, a sign shall not exceed six
square feet in area, except for tracts located on major or minor arterial
roads or major collector roads where signs up to 40 square feet are
permitted.
(C) Not-for-profit and religious signs. Name and informational signs, and
emblems of service clubs, places of worship and not-for-profit
identification signs shall be permitted, but shall not exceed one square
foot in area for each two feet of lot line and adjoining a street with a
maximum of 40 square feet. Such sign or signs on a corner lot may face
each street but the total area shall not exceed a maximum of 40 feet per
sign. Message boards are permitted to occupy up to 50% of the sign
face.
(D) Informational signs for public, charitable or religious events.
Temporary signs announcing any public, charitable, educational or
religious event, up to a sign area of 40 square feet, shall be permitted.
Such signs shall be allowed no more than 21 days prior to the event and
must be removed within seven days after the event.
(E) Integral signs. Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental
citations and commemorative tablets when carved into stone, concrete,
or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent
type construction and made an integral part of the structure shall be
permitted.
(F) Banners, pennants and hot-air balloons. Banners, pennants and hot-air
balloons are permitted for grand openings, sales, and other similar
§ 18.91 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.92
1:547
§ 18.93. Signs allowed in all zoning districts without permit.
The following signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts without a sign
permit, subject to any requirements in this article:
special events on a temporary basis, for no more than 14 days at a time,
and no more than one time per year.
(G) Directional signs. Directional signs shall be permitted, provided that no
such sign shall have a sign surface area larger than eight square feet.
The maximum height of such sign shall be 3 1/2 feet.
(H) Signs designating parking areas. Signs designating parking areas and
entrances and exits to parking areas, other than parking areas for
single-family dwellings, are permitted, provided that:
(1) No more than one such sign shall be permitted that identifies each
parking lot.
(2) No more than one sign shall be permitted for each exit or entrance.
(3) No such sign shall exceed a sign surface area of four square feet.
(A) Changing of the advertising copy or message on an existing approved
painted or printed sign, changeable-copy sign or similar approved sign,
whether electrical, illuminated or nonilluminated or painted message,
which is specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy.
(B) Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair
of a sign (but not involving any structural component or electrical work)
for which a permit has been previously issued, so long as the sign is not
otherwise modified in any way. Replacement of the plastic face will be
exempted from the permit requirement, provided that it is due to
breakage or deterioration of the face.
(C) Changes in the content of a window display, window signs and window
promotional signs.
(D) Changes in the content of permitted temporary signs.
(E) Public signs.
(F) Signs painted on or attached to a truck, bus, trailer, or other vehicle
which is used in the normal course of a business which is not primarily
the display of the sign on the vehicle, and which is not parked overnight
visible to a public right-of-way.
(G) Tablets, grave markers, headstones, memorial statuary and plaques, or
other remembrances of persons or events which are noncommercial in
nature.
(H) Any flag, emblem, or insignia of a government or noncommercial
enterprise, provided that it is not larger than 96 square feet and does
not amount to an attention-getting device for commercial purposes.
§ 18.92 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.93
1:548
§ 18.94. Signs allowed in residential zoning districts.
In addition to those signs allowed in §§ 18.92 and 18.93, the following signs
shall be allowed in the A Single-Family Dwelling District and B Two-Family
Duplex Dwelling District, subject to any requirements in this article:
(I) "No trespassing" signs, warning signs (such as "Beware of Dog"),
notification signs for emergency personnel, and other such signs,
provided that the sign does not exceed two square feet in sign surface
area and there are no more than two such signs on the lot.
(J) Temporary window, real estate, personal celebration, special event and
garage sale signs, subject to the following:
(1) No such sign shall exceed six square feet in sign surface area.
(2) No more than two temporary signs shall be placed on the property
at any one time, and no more than one temporary sign of a
particular type shall be placed on the property at any one time.
(3) No such sign shall be illuminated.
(4) The sign shall be erected and maintained in the interior of the
building on the property.
(5) The sign shall be erected no earlier than 30 days before and shall
be removed no later than seven days after the sale, rental or other
event to which it pertains.
(6) A temporary sign erected in connection with a personal or family
celebration shall in no case be erected for a period longer than one
week.
(K) Signs for candidates seeking public political office and for referendum
appearing on the ballot at any election shall be permitted up to a total
area of 16 square feet for each zoning lot and shall be located only on
private property. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 1-2011]
(L) Signs for a public event at a location in the City conducted by a unit of
government not exceeding eight square feet located on private property
(not on the public right-of-way and not on utility poles) for a period not
earlier than 10 days before the event nor later than two days after the
event.
(A) Single-family residential nameplates. Two single-family residential
name signs not exceeding two square feet in area each shall be
permitted per single-family dwelling. Such signs shall be allowed on
mailboxes, but shall otherwise be located at least six feet from the
nearest property line.
(B) Street address signs. Two street number signs not exceeding two
square feet in area shall be permitted in any residential district. Such
§ 18.93 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.94
1:549
§ 18.95. Signs allowed in commercial zoning districts.196
In addition to those signs allowed in §§ 18.92 and 18.93, the following signs
shall be allowed in the D Commercial District, subject to any requirements
in this article (including the regulations provided in § 18.96, which shall
apply to auto dealers and gas stations):
signs shall be allowed on mailboxes, and near doorways, but shall
otherwise be located at least six feet from the nearest property line.
(C) Multifamily building nameplate and identification signs. In any
multiple-family dwelling in which a rental office is permitted, one
nameplate sign and one identification sign shall be allowed at each
vehicular entrance from a public right-of-way and at each major public
entrance to the dwelling for all offices in the dwelling. The identification
sign shall not exceed 20 square feet. One residential nameplate sign not
exceeding two square feet in area shall be permitted per dwelling unit.
Identification signs shall be located at least six feet from any property
line, and the top of the sign shall not be over five feet above the ground,
whether freestanding or on a building or structure. The identification
sign shall indicate only the name, address, telephone number and
rental information.
(D) Identification signs for institutional and other nonresidential uses. No
more than two such signs per lot, parcel or tract shall be permitted, no
more than one of which shall be a changeable-copy sign. The combined
surface area of all such signs on the property shall not exceed 60 square
feet in sign surface area, with no single sign exceeding 30 square feet in
sign surface area. The sign shall be located no closer than 15 feet to any
other lot, parcel or tract.
(A) Freestanding identification signs. The maximum sign face area shall be
one square foot per 1.5 lineal feet of frontage, up to 40 square feet (for
each of two sides) for developments under 400,000 square feet, and up
to 100 square feet for developments of 400,000 square feet and greater.
One freestanding identification sign shall be allowed per lot, except for
lots with over 300 feet of frontage on a public right-of-way, which may
have up to two freestanding signs, and except for corner lots with over
300 feet of frontage on each public right-of-way or major privately
owned circulation road, which may have up to one freestanding sign per
frontage, and for developments over 400,000 square feet, which may
have one freestanding identification sign at each major entrance. The
maximum height of such sign shall be 10 feet for developments up to
400,000 square feet and 14 feet for developments over 400,000 square
feet. The maximum thickness of such sign shall be two feet. Listing of
tenants' names shall be permitted for office buildings, but shall occupy
no more than 60% of the freestanding sign face. Message boards shall
be permitted for commercial buildings, which may occupy no more than
196. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 18.94 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.95
1:550
§ 18.96. Signs allowed for automobile dealers and automobile
service stations.
In addition to those signs identified in §§ 18.92 and 18.93, only the following
signs shall be allowed for automobile dealers and automobile service
stations, subject to any requirements in this article:
25% of the freestanding identification sign face, provided that no
tenants' names are listed on the sign. No message boards shall be
permitted for office buildings. A freestanding sign is not permitted for
any premises with a projecting sign.
(B) Wall signs. The maximum sign area for wall signs shall be 500 square
feet. One wall sign shall be allowed per lot frontage on a public right-ofway
or major privately owned circulation road but not on a minor street
with residences across the street. However, where an establishment
has a rear entrance which is not visible from another sign for the
establishment, an additional sign which also directs persons to the rear
entrance may be posted above or to the side of the rear entrance,
provided that such sign does not exceed four square feet in sign surface
area. Commercial buildings may have an entrance identification sign on
a wall other than specified above, provided that the entrance
identification sign does not exceed 10 square feet and is located on the
wall within 10 feet of the primary public entrance which leads directly
into a lobby or waiting area. Wall signs may not cover any part of a
window or extend above the roof line. Movie theaters may have, as
additional signs, attraction board wall signs.
(C) Window signs. There shall be no limit to the number of window signs,
provided that the total area of all window signs shall not exceed 50% of
the window glass area for that side of the building. Neon lettering shall
be permitted on window signs.
(D) Banners. Banners affixed to parking lot light poles shall be allowed only
on light poles bordering or parallel to the street, with a maximum of one
banner per 30 lineal feet. Banners shall be permitted on interior
parking lot light poles.
(E) Projecting signs. A projecting sign shall not extend beyond a vertical
plane which is two feet inside of the curbline. The maximum height of a
projecting sign is eight feet. The bottom edge of a projecting sign must
be located at least 10 feet above ground level. A projecting sign is not
permitted for any premises with a freestanding sign.
(A) Window signs. There shall be no limit to the number of window signs.
(B) Service island canopy signs (automobile service stations only). Only one
canopy sign shall be permitted facing each frontage. The gross surface
area of such sign shall not exceed 20% of the gross surface area of the
face of the canopy to which such sign is to be affixed. Such sign shall
§ 18.95 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.96
1:551
§ 18.97. Nonconforming signs.
Any sign legally in existence on March 1, 2006, which violates or does
not conform to the provisions of this article shall be removed, altered, or
replaced so as to conform with the provisions of this article by March 1,
2020. An unlawful sign is not a nonconforming sign.
§ 18.98. Variations.197
The Building Commissioner shall have the right to grant a variation to or a
waiver of any provision of this article, provided that the public convenience
will be served and where literal enforcement of this article will cause undue
hardship. The City Council reserves to itself the right to grant a variation
to or waiver of any provision of this article by formal action at a public
meeting.
§ 18.99. Real estate signs.
In addition to any sign authorized in all zoning districts without a permit,
the owner of a zoning lot which is in the process of being sold or rented may
erect one freestanding ground sign, subject to the following:
not project higher than the top or below the bottom of the canopy to
which such sign is to be affixed.
(C) Service island identification signs (automobile service stations only).
Service island identification signs may be permitted to indicate the type
of service offered, the price of gasoline, and other relevant information
or direction to persons using the automobile service station. However,
no advertising material shall be allowed on such signs. There shall not
be more than one service island identification sign for each service or
pump island located on the premises. The gross surface area of such
sign shall not exceed six square feet for each exposed face nor exceed
an aggregate gross surface area of 12 square feet. Such signs may be
located adjacent to or within the service or pump island to which it
relates.
(A) One sign only (whether a lawn sign or a window sign) per zoning lot is
permitted, such sign to have no more than two faces of information.
(B) The sign must be located on the zoning lot which is for sale or rent.
(C) Each face of the sign shall not exceed six square feet in area. The
maximum size of ground support shall be a four-inch-by-four-inch pole.
(D) The maximum height of the top of the sign is five feet above ground
level.
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 18.96 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.99
1:552
(E) The sign shall be located no closer than 15 feet to any side lot line or
front lot line (if space permits), or the sign shall be erected inside of a
window of the building. No sign may be attached to any building, fence,
tree, or other structure unless the lack of a front yard restricts the
placement of a ground sign, in which event the sign may be attached to
the building.
(F) The sign shall be unilluminated and shall not contain any moving parts,
flags, banners, lights, streamers or balloons.
(G) The content of the sign shall be limited to an indication that the
property on which the sign is located is for sale or for rent, the name of
the owner or agent thereof (such as a real estate broker or real estate
agent), and a telephone number for inquiries. Signs indicating "Sold,"
"Rented" or other similar phrases are not permitted.
(H) A "For Rent" sign shall not be erected unless there is a vacancy in the
property or a lease in the property is being terminated within 31 days
thereof.
(I) The sign must be removed within 48 hours after the property has been
sold or the vacancy has been rented.
§ 18.99 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.99
1:553

ARTICLE 9
Discharge of Hazardous Materials
[Added 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3-2006]
§ 18.100. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CHARGE — Any expense for personnel and
equipment involved in responding to an occurrence. Emergency responses
include, but are not limited to, fire-fighting services, emergency rescue
services, emergency medical services, hazardous materials response teams,
civil defense services, technical rescue teams, public works services, police
services, and the services performed by a private contractor responding to
an occurrence at the request of the City of Hometown.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — A substance or material in a quantity and
form determined by the United States Department of Transportation to
be capable of posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety and property.
Hazardous materials include, but are not limited to, hazardous waste,
marine pollutants, elevated temperature materials, materials designated as
hazardous in the Hazardous Materials Table (49 CFR 172.101), petroleum,
including crude oil or any fraction thereof, natural gas, natural gas liquids,
liquefied natural gas or synthetic gas usable for fuel.
OCCURRENCE — Any discharge or threatened discharge of a hazardous
material.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any person or entity owning, controlling, leasing,
having custody over, or conducting any activity upon any land, facility,
equipment or vehicles, who or which causes or contributes to an
occurrence.
§ 18.101. Responsible party liability.
It shall be the duty of any responsible party to reimburse the City of
Hometown and any other unit of local government for all emergency
response charges relating to an occurrence. The liability of a responsible
party shall be joint and severable.
§ 18.102. Responsible party charges.
The City of Hometown shall be reimbursed for its emergency response
charges at the following hourly rates: $125 per hour, or any portion thereof,
for fire apparatus, equipment, ambulances or emergency response vehicles;
$75 per hour, or any portion thereof, for other motor vehicles, including
police squad cars, responding to the occurrence; and $35 per hour, or any
portion thereof, for personnel. All other charges shall be billed at their
reasonable and customary rate.
§ 18.100 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.103
1:555
§ 18.103. Fines.
In addition to the reimbursement of any emergency response charges, a
responsible party may be fined up to $750.
§ 18.104. through § 18.109. (Reserved)
§ 18.103 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.104
1:556
ARTICLE 10
Cable and Video Customer Protection
[Added 1-8-2008 by Ord. No. 2-2008]
§ 18.110. Applicability of state law; amendments.
§ 18.111. Enforcement.
The City does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the
customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within
the City.
§ 18.112. Customer credits.199
The City hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations as
provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/22-501(s) and applied on the
statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the
violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video
provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under
no obligation to request the credit.
(A) The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq. are hereby adopted by
reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers offering
services within the City boundaries.198
(B) Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that
becomes effective after the effective date of this article shall be
incorporated into this article by reference and shall be applicable to
cable or video providers offering services within the municipality's
boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into
this article by reference without formal action by the corporate
authorities of the City.
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
199. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 18.110 CITY GOVERNMENT § 18.112
1:557
Chapter 19
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
§ 18.112 HOMETOWN CODE § 18.112
1:558
ARTICLE 1
Curfew
[Amended by Ord. No. 2-2004200]
§ 19.01. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
within the context, words used in the present tense include the future,
words in the plural number include the singular and words in the singular
include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN —
MINOR — Any person 16 years of age or less (under 17 years of age).
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of
a corporation.
PARENT — A person who is:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, common
areas, shopping centers, private businesses, streets, and similar areas that
are open to the use of the public.
A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
(A)
A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
(B)
(A) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or
At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have
the care and custody of a minor.
(B)
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 19.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.02
1:559
§ 19.02. Curfew hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person 16 years of age or less (under 17) to be
or remain in or upon a public place within the City of Hometown during the
following times:
§ 19.03. Exceptions and affirmative defenses.
It shall not be a violation of this article and it shall otherwise be an
affirmative defense if a minor is:
(A) Between 11:30 p.m. Friday and 6:00 a.m. Saturday.
(B) Between 11:30 p.m. Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Sunday.
(C) Between 10:30 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m. on
the following day.
(A) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or other person in
custody or control of the minor;
(B) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without
any detour or stop;
(C) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(D) Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(E) Involved in an emergency;
(F) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to
the Police Department about the minor's presence;
(G) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental
agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from,
without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a
government or governmental agency, a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(H) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech,
and the right of assembly; or
(I) Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Minors Act (750 ILCS 30/1 et seq.).
§ 19.02 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.04
1:560
§ 19.04. Operator responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for any operator of an establishment to knowingly
permit a minor to remain at the establishment under circumstances not
constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this article.
The term "knowingly" includes knowledge that an operator should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the patrons of the
establishment. The standard for "knowingly" shall be applied through an
objective test: whether a reasonable person in the operator's position would
have known that the patron was a minor in violation of this article.
§ 19.05. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow the minor to remain in any
City public place under circumstances not constituting an exception to, or
otherwise beyond the scope of, this article. The term "knowingly" includes
knowledge that a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning
the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It shall be no
defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct
or whereabouts of such minor.
§ 19.06. Duties of police officers.
§ 19.07. through § 19.09. (Reserved)
(A) It shall be the duty of a police officer, upon discovering any minor,
unattended by an adult, to:
(1) Inquire of such minor his/her age, place of residence and telephone
number.
(2) Inquire as to why the minor is out past curfew.
(3) Assess whether the activity the minor is engaged in is/was
protected under this article.
(4) Assess whether such an exception or defense is reasonable given
the surrounding circumstances, such as time elapsed from the
beginning or end of said activity, allowing the minor a reasonable
amount of time to go to or return from such activity without
violating this article.
(B) After the above inquiries are made by the officer, and no exceptions or
defenses are applicable, it shall be the duty of the police officers to
promptly notify the parent or guardian of such minor that the minor has
been detained for violations of the provisions of this article and to
report to the police station for the return of said minor to his/her
custody. Whenever it is impractical to do so, the minor may be returned
forthwith to his home or to the person entitled to his custody.
§ 19.04 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.07
1:561

ARTICLE 2
Gambling
[Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 5-2012]
§ 19.10. Definitions.
The following words, terms, phrases and their derivations, when used in this
article, shall have the meanings ascribed herein, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
BOARD — The Illinois Gaming Board.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — As defined in Section 18b-101 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/18b-101).
GAMBLING —
The playing of a game of chance or skill for money or other thing
of value, including but not limited to baccarat, 21, poker, craps, slot
machines, a video game of chance, roulette, klondike, punchboard, faro,
keno, numbers ticket, push card, jar ticket, pull tab, bingo, lotteries,
and raffles;
(A)
Wagering on the result of any game, contest or any political nomination,
appointment or election;
(B)
The playing or use of any gambling device or the operation, keeping,
owning, use, purchase, exhibition, rental, sale, or bargain for the sale
or lease of any gambling device;
(C)
The ownership or possession of any books, instruments or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been recorded or registered;
(D)
Sale of pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or chance,
political nominations, appointments or elections;
(E)
The establishment or promotion of any lottery or the sale, or offering
for sale, or to knowingly posses or transfer any policy ticket or similar
device;
(F)
The knowing advertisement of any lottery or policy game, including the
drafting, printing or publishing of any lottery ticket, share, policy ticket
or similar device; and
(G)
The knowing transmittal of information as to wagers, betting odds or
chances by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar means, or
the knowing installation of equipment for the transmission or receipt
of such information, except that nothing herein shall prohibit the
transmission or receipt of such information for the use of news
reporting of sporting events or contests.
(H)
§ 19.10 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.10
1:563
GAMBLING DEVICE —
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT — Any licensed retail establishment where
alcoholic liquor is drawn, poured, mixed or otherwise served for
consumption on the premises and includes any such establishment that has
a contractual relationship with an inter-track wagering location licensee
under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975 (230 ILCS 5/1 et seq.), provided
any contractual relationship shall not include any transfer or offer of
revenue from the operation of video gaming under the Video Gaming Act
(230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.) to any licensee licensed under the Illinois Horse
Racing Act of 1975; provided, however, that the licensed establishment that
has such a contractual relationship with an inter-track wagering location
licensee may not, itself, be (i) an inter-track wagering location licensee, (ii)
the corporate parent or subsidiary of any licensee licensed under the Illinois
Horse Racing Act of 1975, or (iii) the corporate subsidiary of a corporation
that is also the corporate parent or subsidiary of any licensee licensed
under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975. "Licensed establishment" does
not include a facility operated by an organization licensee, an inter-track
wagering licensee, or an inter-track wagering location licensee licensed
under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975 or a riverboat licensed under
the Riverboat Gambling Act (230 ILCS 10/1 et seq.), except as provided in
this definition.
LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT — The location where a
qualified fraternal organization that derives its charter from a national
fraternal organization regularly meets.
LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT — A facility: (i) that is at least a
three-acre facility with a convenience store; (ii) with separate diesel islands
for fueling commercial motor vehicles; (iii) that sells at retail more than
10,000 gallons of diesel or biodiesel fuel per month; and (iv) with parking
spaces for commercial motor vehicles. The requirement of item (iii) of this
Any clock, tape machine, video machine, video gaming terminal, slot
machine, mechanism, table, furniture, fixture, equipment, instrument
or other thing used for the reception of money or other thing of value
on chance or skill or upon which the action of money or other thing of
value is staked, hazarded, bet, won or lost, or which is primarily for use
for gambling.
(A)
A gambling device shall not include:
A coin-operated mechanical device played for amusement which
awards the player with the right to replay such mechanical device
and is so constructed or devised as to make the result for the
operation thereof depend, in part, upon the skill of the player and
which does not return to the player money, property or right to
receive money or property; or
(1)
Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for
the money invested and there is no element of chance or hazard.
(2)
(B)
§ 19.10 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.10
1:564
definition may be met by showing that estimated future sales or past sales
average at least 10,000 gallons per month.
LICENSED VETERAN'S ESTABLISHMENT — The location where a qualified
veteran's organization that derives its charter from a national veteran's
organization regularly meets.
LOTTERY — Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are
distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised
consideration for a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or
procedure is called a lottery, raffle, gift, sale, or some other name.
POLICY GAME — Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or
guarantees by an instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other device
that any particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall, in the event
of any contingency in the nature of a lottery, entitle the purchaser or holder
to receive money, property or evidence of debt.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL — Any electronic video game machine that,
upon insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video
game, including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as
authorized by the Board, utilizing a video display and microprocessors in
which the play may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for
cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins,
cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
§ 19.11. Gambling prohibited.
Except as otherwise excepted in this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person to gamble within the City, or for any person or entity which owns,
occupies or controls an establishment within the City to knowingly permit
others to gamble on the premises.
§ 19.12. Exceptions.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit or make unlawful the
following activities or forms of gambling:
(A) The keeping, possession, ownership, use or playing of a video gaming
terminal in a licensed establishment, licensed truck stop establishment,
licensed fraternal establishment or licensed veteran's establishment,
which is licensed by the Board and the City of Hometown to conduct or
allow such specific activities under the Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/
1 et seq.) and this article;
(B) A licensee licensed by the City to conduct a raffle in accordance with
the Raffles Act (230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.);
(C) A licensee licensed by the Illinois Department of Revenue to conduct or
allow bingo play in accordance with the Bingo License and Tax Act (230
ILCS 25/1 et seq.); or a licensee licensed by the Illinois Department of
Revenue to conduct or allow gambling in accordance with the
Charitable Games Act (230 ILCS 30/1 et seq.).
§ 19.10 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.13
1:565
§ 19.13. Video gaming license fees.
The annual license fee for each licensed establishment, licensed fraternal
establishment, licensed veteran's establishment or licensed truck stop
establishment to operate video gaming terminals in the City shall be $100.
The annual license fee for a video gaming terminal shall be $25.
§ 19.14. Violations.
Any business, liquor or food licensee within the City that allows gambling to
occur on premises in violation of this article shall be subject to having his/
her/its license immediately revoked for a period of 60 days. Any business,
liquor or food licensee within the City that allows gambling to occur on
premises in violation of this article a second time shall have his/her/its
license permanently revoked and, thereafter, be barred from obtaining any
business, liquor or food license within the City.
§ 19.15. Seizure of unauthorized gambling devices and funds.
Any gambling device which is not authorized by this article shall be subject
to immediate seizure and confiscation by the City. Any money or other
thing of value intrinsically related to acts of gambling not authorized by
this article shall be seized and forfeited as contraband. Disposition of such
gambling devices and funds seized or confiscated shall be made in
accordance with the law.
§ 19.16. through § 19.19. (Reserved)
§ 19.13 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.16
1:566
ARTICLE 3
Prostitution
§ 19.20. Practice prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice prostitution in the City.
§ 19.21. Soliciting prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on any street or public place in
the City for the purpose of inducing any person to engage in prostitution or
any unlawful sexual intercourse of any kind.
§ 19.22. Houses of ill fame.
It shall be unlawful to maintain, frequent or patronize any house of ill fame,
call girl house or apartment, or house of prostitution in the City.
§ 19.23. through § 19.29. (Reserved)
§ 19.20 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.23
1:567

ARTICLE 4
Other Offenses
§ 19.30. Admission fee fraud.
It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without payment
of the proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other
place where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that nothing
herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission
of police officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place
of public entertainment or amusement.
§ 19.31. Advertising.
It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or article in the City,
and it shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful advertisement or
notice.
§ 19.32. (Reserved)201
§ 19.33. Contaminant matter; noxious gases and odors.202
§ 19.34. (Reserved)203
§ 19.35. Trapping of wild animals.
No person shall trap, snare, dig a hole, pit or use any other method or
device to capture animals which are ferae naturae in the City. The placing
of any such trap, snare, hole, pit or device is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and shall be summarily abated.
(A) Contaminant matter. The escape or emission into the open air of
noxious or nauseous or offensive contaminant matter, or any one or
more of them, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. No person shall
cause or allow the escape or emission into the open air of such noxious,
nauseous, or offensive contaminant matter.
(B) Noxious gases, nauseous gases and odors, and offensive smells. The
escape or emission into the open air of noxious gases or nauseous gases
or nauseous odors or offensive smells, or any one or more of them, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance. No person shall cause or allow the
escape or emission into the open air of any of such noxious gases,
nauseous gases, nauseous odors or offensive smells.
201. Editor's Note: Former § 19.32, Advertisements on residences, was repealed 3-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 1-2004.
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
203. Editor's Note: Former § 19.34, Amplifiers, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 19.30 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.36
1:569
§ 19.36. Assault.204
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit assault, which is hereby
defined as any conduct which knowingly places another in reasonable
apprehension of receiving a battery.
§ 19.37. (Reserved)205
§ 19.38. (Reserved)206
§ 19.39. Battery.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit battery. A person commits
battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal justification and by any
means causes bodily harm to an individual or makes physical contact of an
insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
§ 19.40. (Reserved)207
§ 19.41. Possession of burglar's tools.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any nippers of
any description such as burglar's nippers, a pick lock, skeleton key, any or
other burglar's instrument or tool of any description, unless it is shown that
the possession is innocent or for a lawful purpose.
§ 19.42. Cheating and fraud.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to obtain possession
of any goods, property or thing of value by any false proceedings or by
cheating or by fraud of any kind.
§ 19.43. (Reserved)208
§ 19.44. (Reserved)209
§ 19.45. (Reserved)210
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
205. Editor's Note: Former § 19.37, Assemblies, unlawful, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
206. Editor's Note: Former § 19.38, Barbed-wire and electric fences, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
207. Editor's Note: Former § 19.40, Birds, injury to, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
208. Editor's Note: Former § 19.43, Cigarettes or tobacco, sale of to minors, was repealed at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2). See Ch. 11, Licenses, Art.
36, Tobacco Dealers.
209. Editor's Note: Former § 19.44, Cohabitation, lewd, was repealed.
210. Editor's Note: Former § 19.45, Collecting crowds, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 19.36 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.46
1:570
§ 19.46. Combustible refuse; deposit of refuse on streets
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such a
manner as to create a fire hazard, or to store or throw any refuse of any
kind on any street or other public place.
§ 19.47. Concealing knowledge.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal knowledge of the commission
of any offense or to conceal knowledge of any unlawful act as defined in this
Code.
§ 19.48. Contraceptives, sale of.
§ 19.49. Cruelty.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cruelly or inhumanly whip, injure, beat
or mistreat one's own spouse, child, stepchild or apprentice, or other child
or person under one's care.
§ 19.50. Damaging property.
Any person who shall willfully or carelessly break, damage, deface or
destroy any sewer, cesspool, culvert, catch basin, manhole, water pipe or
hydrant laid or placed in, upon or under any street, sidewalk, highway,
thoroughfare or public place within the City shall be deemed guilty of an
offense.
§ 19.51. Defacing public property.
No person shall injure, destroy, deface or assist in injuring, destroying, or
defacing any bridge, fence, building, school house, depot, house, public
building, street sign, sidewalk, tree, lamp post or any kind of other public
property.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, sell, distribute or give away
in any manner whatsoever any article, drug, or medicinal preparation,
manufactured, produced or intended for use, or which may be used as a
contraceptive; provided, however, that the provisions hereof shall not
apply to regularly licensed practitioners of medicine, or drugstores
employing a registered pharmacist.
(B) It shall be unlawful to vend, sell, give away or distribute any such
articles, drugs, or medicines for use as, or possible for use as,
contraceptives, by means of machines, or peddling or canvassing within
the City. The proprietor of any premises wherein any such drugs,
medicines, or articles are kept, contrary to the provisions of this
section, shall be presumed to be the vendor or distributor of the
medicines, drugs or articles.
§ 19.46 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.52
1:571
§ 19.52. Encouraging delinquency; suspension of minor's driver's
license.
It shall be unlawful for any person, by any act of neglect, to encourage, aid
or cause a child to come within the purview of the juvenile authorities; and it
shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver's license
of any child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such child to operate
a motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended.
§ 19.53. Deposit of snow.
§ 19.54. Digging in streets or private property; removal of soil or
sod.
No person shall dig, cut or remove any soil, sod, gravel, sand or earth from
any street or other public place without a permit from the City, or from any
premises not his own, without the consent of the owner. No soil or sod shall
be removed from private property without a permit from the City.
§ 19.55. (Reserved)211
§ 19.56. Disorderly conduct.
The following persons committing any of the following acts shall be deemed
guilty of disorderly conduct:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, or any person who shall have
possession or control of any premises facing a public sidewalk, lane or
street, to deposit or cause to be deposited, through himself or others,
any snow and ice on or against a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, lane or
street pavement, or loading or unloading area of a public transportation
system.
(B) No person shall nor shall he cause or permit the shoveling, blowing,
dumping, throwing, or depositing of snow or ice from his property or
from the public right-of-way in front of his property onto the street
pavement, the public sidewalk, the public parkway in front of the
property of another, or the property of another.
(A) All persons who shall make, aid, countenance or assist in making any
improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of peace, or diversion tending
to the breach of peace within the City.
(B) All persons who shall use any abusive, threatening, insulting, indecent,
profane or obscene language, or language calculated to occasion a
breach of the peace.
(C) All persons who shall collect in bodies or crowds for unlawful purposes,
or for any purpose to the annoyance or disturbance of other persons.
211. Editor's Note: Former § 19.55, Discharge of firearms, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 19.52 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.56
1:572
§ 19.57. Disorderly houses.
Every person who shall keep or maintain any bawdy or disorderly house, or
any house, or other place where any person is permitted or suffered to make
(D) All persons who are idle and dissolute and go about begging.
(E) All persons who use or exercise any juggling or other unlawful games or
plays.
(F) All persons who shall willfully assault another or be engaged in, aid, or
abet in any fight, quarrel or other disturbance in the City.
(G) All persons who shall stand, loiter, or stroll about in any place in the
City, waiting or seeking to obtain money, or other valuable thing from
others by trick or fraud or to aid or assist therein.
(H) All persons who shall engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick
to obtain money or other valuable thing, or who shall aid, abet or in any
manner be concerned therein.
(I) All touts, ropers, steerers or cappers, so called, for any gambling room
or house, who shall ply or attempt to ply their calling on any public way
within the City.
(J) All persons found loitering about the public ways or parks, either by day
or night, without any known lawful means of support, or without being
able to give a satisfactory account of themselves.
(K) All persons who shall have or carry any pistol, knife, dirk, knuckles,
slingshot, or other dangerous weapon concealed on or about their
person.
(L) All persons who are known to be thieves, burglars, pickpockets, robbers
or confidence men, either by their own confession or otherwise, or by
having been convicted of larceny, burglary, or other crime against the
laws of the state, who are found lounging in or loitering around any
public way or public park and who are unable to give a reasonable
excuse for being so found.
(M) All persons who fail to disperse after being ordered to do so by a person
with police authority.
(N) All persons who make or create loud or boisterous noises, whether by
person, actions or by electronic or mechanical amplification.
(O) Any person who, without the consent of the owner or occupant, goes
upon the property of another:
(1) For the purpose of peeping, viewing, observing, or eavesdropping;
or
(2) For a lewd or unlawful purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on
the property through any window or opening in it.
§ 19.56 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.57
1:573
any improper noise or disturbance, or any house or other place where any
minor is permitted to drink intoxicating drinks of any kind, or play with dice,
dominoes, cards, balls, or other articles used in gambling, shall be deemed
guilty of an offense.
§ 19.58. Disturbing assemblies.
Any person who shall disturb any congregation or assembly met for
religious worship, by making a noise, or by rude and indecent behavior or
profane discourse, within a place of worship, or so near the same as to
disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense.
§ 19.59. Dumping grass or rubbish in public streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or company to dump or deposit, or
cause to be dumped or deposited, any grass, leaves, branches, or any other
things in the roadway or gutter of any public street in the City.
§ 19.60. Electric lights and lamps.
Any person who shall carelessly or maliciously break, deface, disturb,
interfere with, carry away or in any way injure or destroy any electric light,
lamp, globe or any part of or appurtenances to any lamp or light of any
kind used, in or upon or about any street, alley or public place, or who
shall carelessly or maliciously break, injure, destroy or in any way disturb
or interfere with any electric light, telephone or telegraph wire, or any
appurtenance thereto, at any place, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
§ 19.61. Escape, aid in.212
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly aid or assist any person to
escape from lawful confinement or to assist any person to escape from the
custody of any peace officer.
§ 19.62. Escape from custody.
It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful
custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody.
§ 19.63. Expectorating on sidewalk or in public buildings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk
or upon the floor of any public building or room used for public assemblies.
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 19.57 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.64
1:574
§ 19.64. False alarms.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start or spread any false
alarm of fire in the City.
§ 19.65. False pretenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares
or merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter any public place and call
for refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse to pay for same, or
depart without paying for or satisfying the person from whom he received
the food, goods, wares and merchandise.
§ 19.66. False representation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to represent falsely himself to be an
officer of the municipality or to attempt to impersonate any such officer or
to, without authority, perform any official act therein on behalf of an officer.
§ 19.67. Fighting.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or battery or to fight
in any public place in the City.
§ 19.68. Open burning.
No person shall burn any standing hay or grass, nor set fire to nor burn
any leaves or other combustible material in any park or public grounds. No
person shall burn leaves or other combustible material, or build any bonfire
upon any brick, asphalt or block pavement in any street or alley nor in or
upon any street or alley. No person shall burn or set fire to any combustible
material in any open fire on public or private property.
§ 19.69. (Reserved)213
§ 19.70. General state law offenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any
requirement which is prohibited or required by state law, insofar as such
laws are applicable to municipal government.
§ 19.71. Hunting.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or to engage in killing any animal
other than as prescribed by law or ordinance in the City.
213. Editor's Note: Former § 19.69, Fireworks, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2). See now Ch. 18, Art. 1, Explosives; Fireworks.
§ 19.64 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.72
1:575
§ 19.72. Hypnotists.
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice hypnotism or for any person
to be a subject for such hypnotist, provided that this shall not apply to
hypnotism as used in the treatment of patients by an accredited doctor
of medicine or doctor of dentistry nor shall it prohibit the teaching of
hypnotism in any state-accredited educational institution which maintains
an academic standard of the college level.
§ 19.73. through § 19.75. (Reserved)214
§ 19.76. Injuring public property.
Any person who shall in any way injure, damage or destroy any public
property, public lamp or lamp post, or street sign, or any sign, gate,
sidewalk or fence, or climb upon any public lamp post, or hang or place
any goods or merchandise thereon, or place any goods, boxes, wood or any
other heavy material upon or against the same, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense.
§ 19.77. Depositing injurious material on thoroughfares.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or
upon any public thoroughfare any material or substance injurious to person
or property.
§ 19.78. Junk storage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or
materials which may be classified as junk adjacent to or in close proximity to
any schoolhouse, church, public parks, public grounds, business buildings
or residences without first providing proper and tight buildings for the
storage of the same. The storing or accumulating of unsightly material
of any kind, including but not limited to garbage, metals, junk of every
kind and character, nonfunctioning motor vehicles, trash of every kind and
nature, on any property or lot within the City is hereby prohibited. The
storage or accumulation of any of the aforesaid which may or can become
breeding grounds or harborage for or attraction to insects, rodents, or other
possible disease-carrying life or growth on any property or lot within the
City is prohibited.
§ 19.78.1. Laser pointers.
For purposes of this section, a "laser pointer" is any device which contains
a small diode laser that emits an intense beam of light, including but not
limited to a Class 2 laser, Class 3a laser, Class 3b laser, and Class 4 lasers.
214. Editor's Note: Former §§ 19.73, Indecent exposure, 19.74, Indecent publications and
19.75, Indecent or immoral shows, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30,
General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 19.72 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.78.1
1:576
§ 19.79. Letting premises for unlawful purposes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use or allow to be used any
building or property owned by him for any purpose whereby riotous or
disorderly persons are gathered.
§ 19.80. Loudspeakers or sound trucks.
(A) Possession by minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
under the age of 18 to possess a laser pointer except in the residence of
that person.
(B) Sale to minor prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell a
laser pointer to any person under the age of 18.
(C) Use outside of buildings prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam illuminates
on any person, animal, object or place located outside of the building
where the person using the laser pointer is located.
(D) Illumination of persons prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam illuminates on
any person.
(E) Illumination of vehicle operators prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the laser beam
illuminates the operator of a motor vehicle.
(F) Illumination of law enforcement personnel prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner that the
laser beam illuminates a uniformed law enforcement officer.
(G) Use in public places prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
located on a public right-of-way, street, alley, public park, or private
parking lot accessible to the public to use a laser pointer.
(A) Amplification of sound. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain,
operate, use or employ any loudspeaker, electronically or mechanically
operated, producing sound, which sound is amplified and heard over
any public street, public place or private property other than the
property of the person so maintaining, operating, using or employing
the same, without first having obtained a permit.
(B) Standards for issuing permit. Any permit shall be issued only for
parades authorized by the City Council, political speeches, and matters
of public issue. The permit shall be issued without fee and subject to the
following restrictions:
(1) No such amplification device shall be employed on or after 8:00
p.m. on any prevailing day and 8:00 a.m. the next day.
§ 19.78.1 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.80
1:577
§ 19.81. Medical advertisements.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, by himself, or his
or its agents or servants, to distribute, cast, throw or place, cause to be
distributed, cast, thrown or placed, in, upon or along any of the streets or
public places of the City, or upon the porches or yards of private residences
therein or within any dwelling or building in the City any samples of
merchandise or medicinal preparations for the purpose or with the intent
of advertising or marking known in a general or promiscuous manner
any business, occupation, proposition, medical treatment, medicine, or any
other article whatsoever.
§ 19.82. Mendicants or vagrants.
§ 19.83. Removal of metal plates or identification tags.
Every person who shall, without the consent of the owner or licensee, take,
carry away, detach or mutilate any metal plate, tag, badge or license worn
by or attached to any person, animal or vehicle or attached to any articles,
substance or thing whatsoever as a mark of identification or otherwise in
compliance with the requirements of any provision of this code, shall be
deemed guilty of an offense.
§ 19.84. Missiles; sharp objects on streets and sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful to cast, throw, or propel any missile on any street or
public place, and it shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any glass, nails,
tacks or other similar articles on any street or sidewalk in the City.
(2) No permittee shall use, operate, or employ such device within a
radius of two blocks from any hospital or rest home, or within a
radius of two blocks of a church when such church is in session.
(3) No permittee shall allow any lewd, obscene, profane, indecent
language or sounds, advertisement or false representation of any
matter to emanate from said device.
(4) No such permittee shall allow the noise from said sound device to
be amplified greater than is tolerable to the human ear by an
ordinary person within hearing distance and, in any event, no
greater than 85 decibels as measured at the source of such sound
or noise on a sound level meter according to standards prepared by
the American Standard Association.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any mendicant or vagrant to frequent any depot,
store, theater, street, sidewalk, park or other public place frequented
by the public in this City.
(B) Any person found sleeping in any such place, and who has no
established domicile or residence, shall be considered a vagrant.
§ 19.80 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.85
1:578
§ 19.85. Musical instruments in streets.
No person shall use or perform any hand organ or other musical instrument,
for pay, or in expectation of payment, in any of the streets or public places
before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. of each day. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any hand music or organized musical society engaged in
serenading, or civic or military parades. No person shall play any musical
instrument on Sunday in any street, highway, alley, thoroughfare, public or
unoccupied ground, garden or grove, whereby the peace and good order of
society or the peace of any private family shall be disturbed.
§ 19.86. Nuisances; dead or diseased trees or vegetation.
§ 19.87. Obscene conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any place open
to the public view, or to be guilty of any lewd, lascivious or obscene conduct
or language or to sing any lewd or obscene song, ballad or other words in
any public place or any other place where other persons are present.
§ 19.88. Obscenity.
(A) It shall be unlawful to commit any offense which is a nuisance according
to the common law of the land, or made such by City ordinances, or by
the statutes of the state. Whenever any nuisance exists or shall be
found on any premises within the City, whether such nuisance is one
specifically recognized by statute, by this Code, or by ordinance, or not,
the Mayor is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to direct the Police
Chief and Director of Public Health and Safety to abate the nuisance in
such manner as he may direct, and at the expense of the party
permitting or maintaining said nuisance.215
(B) Any tree or vegetation which is dead or in such condition that it may
cause injury to or endanger the lives or health of persons and animals
or property is hereby declared a nuisance.
(A) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DISTRIBUTE — To transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
EXHIBIT — To show or display, offer or present for inspection or
produce in public so that it may be taken into possession or viewed by
persons.
HARMFUL TO MINORS — That quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 19.85 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.88
1:579
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a
belief or ground for belief which warrants further inquiry of both:
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.218
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing
of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
OBSCENE — That quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, or nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or
sadomasochistic abuse.
PATRON OF A PLACE OF OBSCENITY — Any person who shall
patronize, frequent, be found in, or be an inmate of any premises used
for the unlawful purposes set forth in this section.
Predominantly appeals to the prurient interest in sex of minors;
and216
(1)
Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community
an a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and
(2)
Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for
minors.217
(3)
The character and content of any material described herein which
is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant.
(1)
(2) Being aware of the character of the matter or live conduct.
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake
shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant
made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of
such minor.
(3)
When taken as a whole to the average person applying
contemporary community standards in a patently offensive way:
Predominantly appeals to the prurient shameful or morbid
interest of adults or special audiences; and
(a)
(b) Is offensive with respect to what is suitable material.
(1)
When taken as a whole lacks serious artistic, literary, scientific,
political, educational or other merits, or the absence thereof.
(2)
216. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 19.88 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.88
1:580
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on
the part of one so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of masturbation, excretory functions,
homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's
clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be
a female, breast, normal or perverted, actual or simulated.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female
genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
THEATER — The phrase "theater, concert hall, or other similar
establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances"
shall mean a building, playhouse, room, hall or other place having
permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of spectators can
have an unobstructed view of the stage, upon which theatrical or
vaudeville performances or similar forms of artistic expression are
presented, and where such performances are not incidental to the
promoting of the sale of food, drink or other merchandise, for which
a City license for a theater is in full force and effect, and which
performance, when taken as a whole, does not lack serious, artistic,
literary, scientific, political, or educational value.
(B) Sale, loan, distribution or exhibition of literature, films. It shall be
unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, loan, distribute or exhibit for
monetary consideration:
(1) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture film,
or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of
the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse and which is obscene; or
(2) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however
reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter
enumerated in Subsection (B)(1), or explicit and detailed verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual
conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is
obscene.
(3) Any material which is harmful to minors.
(C) Admission tickets and passes. It shall be unlawful for any person
knowingly to exhibit for a monetary consideration or knowingly to sell
to any person an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a
person for a monetary consideration to premises whereon there is
exhibited a motion picture, show, live or other presentation which, in
whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic
abuse and which is obscene.
(D) Knowing admission. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to
admit any person to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion
§ 19.88 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.88
1:581
picture, show, live or other presentation which, in whole or in part,
depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is
obscene.
(E) Employing or having on premises person exhibiting nudity. It shall be
unlawful for any person in a commercial establishment, place of public
accommodation or private club to employ or have on his premises any
person who exhibits nudity to its patrons.
(F) Person exhibiting nudity. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit
nudity in any commercial establishment, place of public
accommodation or private club, to the patrons thereof.
(G) Waiters, waitresses, entertainers.
(1) It is unlawful for any person, while acting as a waiter, waitress or
entertainer in an establishment which serves food, beverages, or
food and beverages, including, but not limited to, alcoholic
beverages, for consumption on the premises of such establishment
to:
(a) Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
(b) Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks,
natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
(c) Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof.
(2) A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress or entertainer if
such person acts in that capacity, without regard to whether or not
such person is paid any compensation by the management of the
establishment in which the activity is performed.
(H) Exposure by performance in public. It shall be unlawful for any person,
while participating in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in any
public place, place open to the public, or place open to public view, to:
(1) Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region, or pubic hair region; or
(2) Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal
cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or
(3) Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof.
(I) Counseling or assisting violations. It is unlawful for a person to cause,
permit, procure, counsel or assist any person to expose or simulate
exposure prohibited in Subsections (G) and (H).
§ 19.88 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.88
1:582
(J) Minors. It shall be unlawful to any person:
(1) To knowingly sell or loan, for a monetary consideration, distribute
or exhibit to a minor any of the prohibited materials described in
Subsection (B);
(2) To knowingly, for a monetary consideration, exhibit, sell, or admit a
minor to a premises whereon the prohibited acts in Subsection (C)
are performed;
(3) To knowingly admit a minor to the premises whereon the
prohibited acts in Subsection (D) are depicted;
(4) To knowingly exhibit, for or without monetary consideration, or to
knowingly sell to any person an admission ticket or pass or
knowingly to admit a person, for or without monetary
consideration, to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion
picture, show, live or other presentation which, in whole or in part,
depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which
is harmful to minors;
(5) Under 17 years of age to state falsely, either orally or in writing,
that he is not under the age of 17 years, or to present and offer to
any person any evidence of age and identity which is false or not
actually his own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining, viewing or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any of the
prohibited materials and unlawful acts set forth in Subsections (B),
(C), (D), (E), (F), (G) and (H);
(6) Under 17 years of age to be present on any premises where any of
the unlawful acts described in Subsections (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G)
and (H) are being committed;
(7) In a commercial establishment, place of public accommodation, or
private club, to employ or have on his premises a minor who
exhibits nudity to its patrons;
(8) For any minor to exhibit nudity in any commercial establishment,
place of accommodation, or private club, to the patrons thereof.
(K) Exceptions.
(1) Nothing in Subsections (B) through (D), inclusive, shall prohibit
any public library or any library operated by an accredited
institution of higher education from circulating material to any
person, provided such circulation is in aid of a legitimate scientific
or educational purpose, and it shall be an affirmative defense in any
prosecution for a violation of this section that the act charged was
committed in aid of legitimate scientific or educational purposes.
(2) Provisions of Subsections (E) to (H), inclusive, shall not apply to a
theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily
devoted to theatrical performance.
§ 19.88 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.88
1:583
§ 19.89. Obstructing stairways or exits.
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway,
aisle, corridor, or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school, church,
theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any building used by
two or more tenants or families, in such a manner as to interfere with the
free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor or exit.
§ 19.90. Aiding and abetting offenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet,
counsel, advise or encourage any other person in the commission of any of
the acts mentioned herein or in any manner encourage the commission of
such offense hereby defined.
§ 19.91. Nuisance trades or activities.
Any factory, yard, building, or structure of any kind, or any tallow chandler's
shop, soap factory, tannery, distillery, livery stable, cattle yard or shed,
barn, packing house, slaughterhouse or rendering establishment which
shall become nauseous, foul, or offensive is hereby declared a nuisance;
and the person owning, maintaining, or in possession or control of any such
factory, shop, yard, house, building, or structure aforesaid shall be deemed
guilty of an offense.
§ 19.91.5. Parental responsibility.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prohibit any parent from distributing
to his child any of the unlawful materials described in Subsection
(B)(1) and (2).
(L) Revocation of license. The license of any such person or employee
thereof directly involved in a violation of this § 19.88 may be revoked by
the Mayor. No such license so revoked shall be reinstated until the
lapse of a period of one year after such revocation. Such revocation may
be in addition to any fine imposed.
(A) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LEGAL GUARDIAN — A person appointed guardian, or given custody,
of a minor by a Circuit Court of the state, but does not include a person
appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile
Court Act (705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.).
MINOR — A person who has not yet reached 17 years of age.
PERSON — Includes any person, partnership, corporation, association,
or any unincorporated religious, educational or charitable organization.
It shall also include any municipal corporation, city, fire protection
district, school district, or any other political subdivision or department
of the State of Illinois.
§ 19.88 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.91.5
1:584
PROPERTY — Includes any real or personal property, including
improvements thereon belonging to or under the control of any person,
as defined above, within the City of Hometown.
(B) Liability. The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who
resides with such parent or legal guardian is liable for actual damages
for any injury, vandalism or destruction to a person or person's property
caused by said minor if the minor:
(1) Acted negligently, willfully, recklessly, maliciously, or intentionally
in causing such injury or destruction to a person or his property; or
(2) Acted in violation of any ordinance, statute or law in causing such
injury or destruction to a person or his property.
(C) Enforcement. Any person, as described in Subsection (A) herein, is
entitled to enforce the liability imposed by this section, and a recovery
under this section shall neither preclude nor affect the liability of the
parent or legal guardian as predicated on a common-law basis.
(D) Penalty and presumptions.
(1) Offense. It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of any
unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian
to fail to exercise proper parental responsibility by allowing or
permitting said minor to commit any violation of a City ordinance
or state statute concerning vandalism, battery, curfew, disorderly
conduct, fireworks, obscene conduct, indecent exposure, trespass
or possession of alcoholic liquor, cannabis or controlled substance,
or any other offense of willful or malicious acts to persons or
property.
(2) Presumption. A parent or legal guardian shall be presumed to have
allowed or permitted said minor to have committed a violation of a
City ordinance or state statute under all of the following conditions:
(a) Said minor has been either adjudicated to be in violation of any
ordinance or state statute as described in Subsection D(1)
above, or has been charged with the violation of any ordinance
or state statute as described in Subsection D(1) above (except
if found to be not guilty), or has incurred nonjudicial sanctions
from any peace officer, police officer, or conservator of the
peace resulting from an admission of guilt to an offense of an
ordinance or state statute as described in Subsection D(1)
above; and
(b) Said parent or legal guardian has received a written notice by
certified mail (return receipt requested) or by personal service
in substantially the following form:
§ 19.91.5 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.91.5
1:585
LEGAL NOTICE
TO: (parents' names)
FROM: City of Hometown
You are hereby notified that (minor's name) has been involved
in a violation of an ordinance or state statute concerning
vandalism, battery, curfew, disorderly conduct, fireworks,
obscene conduct, indecent exposure, trespass, or possession
of alcoholic liquors or any other offense of willful or malicious
acts to persons or property.
If said minor is again involved in a violation of one of the
above type ordinances or state statutes, you may be found
guilty of the offense of Parental Irresponsibility. Conviction for
said offense can result in a fine of not less than $10 nor more
than $750. You are hereby notified that you must exercise
proper parental responsibility over said minor by controlling
his unlawful conduct.
(c) Said minor, within two years of the receipt of said notice by the
parent or legal guardian, has been either adjudicated to have
committed, has been charged with the violation (except if
found to be not guilty), or has admitted to have committed any
violation of any ordinance or state statute as described in
Subsection (A) above.
(3) Supervision. It is the policy of the City of Hometown to permit the
City Prosecutor to use the provisions of the Unified Code of
Corrections (730 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.), as amended, of the State of
Illinois pertaining to supervision in order to further the ends of
justice, restitution, and purposes of this section.
(4) Court appearance of parents.
(a) It is the policy of the City of Hometown that a parent or legal
guardian of a minor be notified and required to appear in court
whenever that minor is charged with a violation of an
ordinance or state statute which requires the minor's
appearance in court. To this end, it is hereby directed that a
notice in substantially the following form be sent to the parents
or legal guardians of the minor:
§ 19.91.5 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.91.5
1:586
§ 19.92. Petit theft.219
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit petit theft, which is hereby
defined as a theft when the property taken is of a value of $500 or less.
§ 19.93. Public picnics.
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use or allow to be used, any yard,
ground or grove or other real estate within the City for public picnics or
open air dances, to be conducted in such manner as to be an annoyance or
injury to the public.
§ 19.94. Playing ball or games on streets prohibited.220
It shall be unlawful for any person to play or throw any ball or other object
to and fro upon any public thoroughfare in the municipality when such
conduct impedes traffic or constitutes a hazard to any person or property.
§ 19.95. Police officers, assistance to.221
It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of 18 years to refuse or
neglect to render assistance to any police officer when called upon for such
assistance or aid in the suppression of riot or other unlawful assemblage or
in the arrest of any person who has committed an offense.
LEGAL NOTICE
TO: (Parents' names)
FROM: City of Hometown
You are hereby notified that (minor's name) has been charged
with an offense which is a violation of a City ordinance or state
statute and which requires the appearance of said minor in
court. You are further notified that one of the parents of said
minor must appear in court before the case will be tried or be
disposed.
If you fail to appear, the City Prosecutor has been directed
to have issued a subpoena to bring you into court. Failure to
obey a subpoena can result in contempt of court, with a fine
or imprisonment as the penalty.
(b) The City prosecutor is hereby directed to have subpoenas
issued whenever a parent or legal guardian of a minor does not
appear in court after the first two times said case has been
before the court.
219. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
221. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 19.91.5 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.96
1:587
§ 19.96. (Reserved)222
§ 19.97. Profanity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use profanity in any street or public
place in the City.
§ 19.98. Property damage.
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully and maliciously to injure, deface,
mutilate, remove, pull down, break or in any manner interfere with or
molest or secrete or destroy any real or personal property belonging to or
under the control of any person.
§ 19.99. Public park operating hours.
§ 19.100. Refrigerators, abandoned.
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any refrigerator, ice box or
freezer in any place accessible to the public without having first removed
the doors of such refrigerator, ice box or freezer.
§ 19.101. Resisting officers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere willfully with, resist, delay,
obstruct, molest or threaten to molest any officer of the municipality in the
exercise of his official duties.
§ 19.102. Riots.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse immediately to disperse
upon an order to do so by a police officer, when two or more persons are
assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of
committing any unlawful act.
§ 19.103. Scaffolds.
Any scaffolds or ladders placed in such a position that they overhang or can
fall onto any public street or other public way in the City shall be firmly and
properly constructed and safeguarded; and it shall be unlawful to place or
leave any tools or article on any such place in such a manner that the same
(A) All public parks within the City shall be opened to the public, for its use
and recreation, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(B) Except for special permit applied for and granted by the City Council,
no individual or groups shall be permitted in any public park except
during the above set hours.
222. Editor's Note: Former § 19.96, Posting bills, was repealed 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004.
§ 19.96 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.103
1:588
can fall onto such street, sidewalk or other public way from a greater height
than four feet.
§ 19.104. Shooting at birds.
Every person who shall kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, by the
use of firearms, slingshot, bow and arrow, pelting with stones or otherwise,
any song, plumage or game bird within any private grounds or public parks,
squares, streets or grounds (such bird, not being the property of the person
so offending), or taking the eggs or young of any such song, plumage or
game bird, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
§ 19.105. (Reserved)223
§ 19.106. Spirit mediumship and fortunetelling; fraud.
§ 19.107. (Reserved)224
§ 19.108. (Reserved)225
§ 19.109. Theft of telephone service.
It shall be unlawful for any person to insert or attempt to insert into the
coin box or money receptacle of any telephone, any slug, button or other
substance or to manipulate or operate, or attempt to manipulate or operate,
in any manner whatever, any telephone instrument or any mechanism, or
device connected or commonly used therewith, with the intent to obtain
telephone service without paying therefor.
§ 19.110. Throwing stones.
No person shall throw any stone or other missile upon or at any building,
railroad car, tree or other public or private property, or upon or at any
(A) Any person or persons who shall obtain any money or property from
another by fraudulent devices and practices in the name of, or by means
of spirit mediumship, palmistry, card reading, astrology, seership, or
like crafty science, or fortune telling of any kind, shall be deemed guilty
of an offense.
(B) Any person or persons who shall hold or give any public or private
meetings, gatherings, circle or seance of any kind in the name of
spiritualism or of any other religious body, society or denomination, and
therein practice or permit to be practiced fraud or deception of any
kind, shall be deemed guilty of an offense.
223. Editor's Note: Former § 19.105, Smoking prohibited on public conveyances, was repealed
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
224. Editor's Note: Former § 19.107, Sunday games, was repealed.
225. Editor's Note: Former § 19.108, Swindling, was repealed.
§ 19.103 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.110
1:589
person in any street, avenue, alley, lane, public place or enclosed or
unenclosed ground, or aid or abet in the same.
§ 19.111. Transporting rails.
All rails, pillars and columns of iron, steel or other metal which are being
transported over and along the streets in any manner shall be so loaded
as to avoid causing loud noises and disturbing the peace and quiet of such
streets.
§ 19.112. Trespassing.
(A) Trespasses prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to commit a trespass within this municipality upon either
public or private property.
(B) Specifically enumerated trespasses; suppression. Without constituting
any limitation upon the provisions of Subsection (A) hereof, any of the
following acts by any person, firm or corporation shall be deemed
included among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the
provisions of said Subsection (A), and appropriate action may be taken
hereunder at any time to prevent or suppress any violation or violations
of this section, the aforesaid enumerated acts so included, being as
follows:
(1) An entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another,
including any public property, in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any point of
approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest
given orally or in writing, by any owner or occupant thereof.
(2) The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the
making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice
posted or exhibited at the main entrance to said premises or at any
point of approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or
protest given orally or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof.
(3) A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case
of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any
owner or occupant thereof.
(4) An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made
without the consent of the person having the right to the possession
or control thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle,
aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person
having such right.
(5) To take down any fence or to let down any bars or to open any gate
in or on the property of another without the consent of the owner,
occupant or person in charge thereof.
§ 19.110 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.113
1:590
§ 19.113. Unlawful assemblages.
It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a member of any disorderly
crowd, or any crowd gathered for any unlawful purpose.
§ 19.114. (Reserved)226
§ 19.115. Water flowing upon streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon
any public thoroughfare.
§ 19.116. Weapons and contraband.
(A) Owner's identification required. No persons, except those exempt by
law, may acquire or possess any firearm or firearm ammunition within
the City without having a firearm owner's identification card previously
issued in his name, according to the laws of the State of Illinois or the
ordinances of this City.
(B) Furnishing to prisoners. It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or
attempt to furnish or take into jail or to deliver or attempt to deliver to
any prisoner therein confined, or in the custody of any officer, any
weapon, tool, intoxicating liquors, drug or other article without the
consent of the officer in charge.
(C) Carrying and displaying weapons. No person in this City shall wear or
carry concealed about his person any pistol, revolver, slingshot,
metallic knuckles, bowie knife, dirk, razor, chemical mace or like
substance, or other dangerous or deadly weapons, or display or flourish
any such weapon in a boisterous or threatening manner; provided that
the provisions of this subsection shall not be held to apply to any peace
officer while in the discharge of his duty, nor to any person summoned
by an officer to aid him in making any arrest or preserving the peace.
(D) Discharging firearms; setting bonfires. No person shall fire or
discharge, within the City, any cannon, anvil, gun, pistol, air rifle, or
firearm, or shall make or kindle any bonfire; provided that the
discharge of firearms, the making of bonfires upon national holidays
and in the celebration of other public and general events, or the
discharge of blank cartridges by a military company when on parade
and in command of the commanding officer, or the discharge of firearms
by any City officer or other person in the discharge of any legal duty,
when the same is done in such manner as not to endanger the safety of
any person or injure any property, shall not be deemed a violation of this
subsection, nor shall the discharge of firearms in duly licensed shooting
galleries.
226. Editor's Note: Former § 19.114, Vagabonds; vagrants, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 19.113 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.117
1:591
§ 19.117. (Reserved)227
§ 19.118. Whistles.
It shall be unlawful to blow or cause to be sounded any steam whistle of any
stationary engine or steam engine in the City except as a signal for starting
or stopping work or in emergencies to avoid or prevent injury to persons or
property.
§ 19.119. Wind-blown refuse and littering.
§ 19.120. Window sill and porch maintenance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any window sill,
porch or other projection above the first story of any building abutting on
any sidewalk any article which might do injury by falling upon any person
on the sidewalk in front of such building, unless said articles are securely
fastened or protected by screens.
§ 19.121. Paraphernalia associated with controlled substances or
cannabis. [Added 4-12-2005 by Ord. No. 2-2005]
(A) It shall be unlawful to deposit or leave any refuse or material in such a
place or condition that it can be blown by the wind so as to be scattered
or cause clouds of dust or particles; and it shall be unlawful to permit
the escape of soot, ashes or other solid products or results of
combustion so as to be wind-blown or scattered.
(B) It shall be unlawful to throw, dump, or otherwise place rubbish upon
any street, sidewalk, alley, highway, parkway, parking lot, public
grounds, or any improved or unimproved property in the City.
(C) For the purpose of this subsection, the term "rubbish" shall mean and
include ashes, garbage, refuse of any kind, tins, bottles, glass
containers, unused food parcels, papers or any other inert material
commonly known as "litter."
(A) It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to exhibit, sell,
display for sale, offer to sell, give away, offer to give away, or have in his
possession, with or without intent to give away, any paraphernalia,
articles or equipment, as further defined in Subsection (B), commonly
used in aiding the consumption or ingestion of cannabis or a controlled
substance as defined by 720 ILCS 570/102(f) of the Controlled
Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.), except where such articles
or equipment are prescribed for strictly medical purposes and are used
as such.
(B) The term "paraphernalia, articles or equipment commonly used in
aiding the consumption or ingestion of controlled substances or
227. Editor's Note: Former § 19.117, Weeds, was repealed 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3-2009..
§ 19.117 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.121
1:592
§ 19.122. Possession of cannabis. [Added 4-12-2005 by Ord. No.
2-2005]
cannabis" shall include, but is not limited to, the following enumerated
articles: cocaine spoons, pot pipes, water pipes, hypodermic needles,
syringes and miscellaneous literature describing the consumption or
ingestion of a controlled substance or cannabis which tends to promote
the use of a controlled substance or cannabis.
(C) Penalties. [Added 1-9-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
(1) A police officer may, in lieu of filing a criminal complaint, issue a
violation notice to a person in violation of this section, which shall
be administered through Chapter 19, Miscellaneous Offenses,
Article 6, Administrative Adjudication of Nonvehicular Code
Violations, of the Municipal Code of Hometown. Any person found
to have violated this section shall be fined no less than $200.
(2) Any person issued the citation for a violation of this section shall
appear at the scheduled administrative hearing written on the
citation; provided, however, no appearance is necessary at the
administrative hearing if the person cited delivers t the City
payment in the fine amount specified above no later than 10 days
prior to the scheduled administrative hearing date. In the event the
person cited contests the violation and is found liable, or fails to
appear at the administrative hearing, the violator shall pay the fine
amount assessed by the hearing officer no later than the date the
finding of liability is entered. Failure to pay the fine amount in the
time prescribed in the preceding sentence shall result in the fine
being doubled, but in no event in an amount to exceed $750.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess cannabis.228
(B) "Cannabis" includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of
such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture
or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives,
including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced ingredients,
whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently
by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction and
chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such
plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such
plant which is incapable of germination.
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 19.121 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.122
1:593
§ 19.123. Synthetic cannabinoids and synthetic stimulants. [Added
7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
(C) Penalties. [Amended 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 3-2009; 1-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 1-2018]
(1) A police officer may, in lieu of filing a criminal complaint, issue a
violation notice to a person in violation of this section, which shall
be administered through Chapter 19, Miscellaneous Offenses,
Article 6, Administrative Adjudication of Nonvehicular Code
Violations, of the Municipal Code of Hometown, provided the
amount of cannabis in the person's possession does not exceed 30
grams. Any person found to have violated this section shall be fined
no less than the amounts set forth below, which shall be graduated
based upon the amount of cannabis found to be in that person's
possession:
(a) Ten grams or less: $100.
(b) More than 10 grams and not more than 20 grams: $200.
(c) More than 20 grams and not more than 30 grams: $300.
(2) Any person issued the citation for a violation of this section shall
appear at the scheduled administrative hearing written on the
citation; provided, however, no appearance is necessary at the
administrative hearing if the person cited delivers to the City
payment in the fine amount specified above no later than 10 days
prior to the scheduled administrative hearing date. In the event the
person cited contests the violation and is found liable, or fails to
appear at the administrative hearing, the violator shall pay the fine
amount assessed by the hearing officer no later than the date the
finding of liability is entered. Failure to pay the fine amount in the
time prescribed in the preceding sentence shall result in the fine
being doubled, but in no event in an amount to exceed $750.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID OR
SYNTHETIC STIMULANT or PRODUCT(S) — Any product containing
a synthetic cannabinoid or a synthetic stimulant, as those terms are
defined herein, such as, but not limited to, the following brand names or
identifiers: Spice, Chronic Spice, Spice Gold, Spice Silver, K2, K2 Sky,
K2 Solid Sex, K2 Orisha, K2 Amazonian Shelter, K2 Thai Dream, K3,
K3 Legal, Stinger, Red X Dawn, Spike 99, Spicylicious, Zohai, Serenity,
Genie, Yucatan Fire, Earthquake, Mystery, Black Mamba, Mr. Nice Guy,
Skunk, Pulse, Ivory Wave, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Vanilla Sky, Bliss,
Meow Meow, Zoom, Sextacy, Molly's Plant Food, Purple Monkey Plant
Food, Buzz Grow, 4MMC, m-Cat and Energy 1.
§ 19.122 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.123
1:594
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID — Any laboratory-created compound that
functions similar to the active ingredient in marijuana,
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), including, but not limited to, any quantity
of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation,
substance and their analog (including isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and
salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor agonist, such as:
JWH-007 [1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole]
JWH-015 [(2-methyl-1-propyl-1Hindol-
3-yl)-1-naphthalenylmethanone]
JWH-018 [1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole]
JWH-019 [1-hexyl-3-(naphthalen-1-oyl) indole]
JWH-073 [naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl) methanone]
JWH-081 [4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl) methanone]
JWH-098 [4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2-methylindol-3-yl)
methanone]
JWH-122 [1-pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl) indole]
JWH-164 [7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl) methanone]
JWH-200 [1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)-
naphthalen-1-ylmethanone]
JWH-203 [2-(2-chlorophenyl)-1-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)ethanone]
JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone
JWH-250 [1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl) indole]
JWH-251 [1-pentyl-3-(2-methylphenylacetyl) indole]
JWH-398 [1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl) indole]
HU-210 [6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,
6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo
[c]chromen-1-ol]
HU-211 ([(6aS,
10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,
7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol]
HU-308 ([(1R, 2R, 5R)-2-[2,
6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenyl]-7, 7-dimethyl-4-bicyclo
[3.1.1]hept-3-enyl] methanol)
HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(1R,
6R)-3-methyl-6-(1-methylethenyl)-2-cyclohexen-1-yl]-5- pentyl-2,
5-cyclohexadiene-1, 4-dione)
CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyl)
cyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyl- octan-2-yl)phenol)
CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5-
(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and its homologues
§ 19.123 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.123
1:595
WIN 55,212-2 [(R)-(+)-
[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo [1, 2, 3-de)-1,
4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-nepthalenylmethanone]
RCS-4 [(4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl) methanone]
RCS-8 (1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl)-2-(2-methoxyphenyl)
ethanone)
SYNTHETIC STIMULANT — Any compound that mimics the effects
of any federally controlled Schedule I substance such as cathinone,
methcathinone, MDMA and MDEA, including, but not limited to, any
quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture,
preparation, substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, and
salts of isomers) containing substances which have a stimulant effect
on the central nervous system, such as:
3-Fluoromethcathinone
4-Fluoromethcathinone
3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC)
3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV)
4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC)
4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA,
PMMC)
4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC)
Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names:
butylone, bk-MBDB)
Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1)
Any compound that is structurally derived from
2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone by modification or substitution in any
of the following ways:
— In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy,
haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further
substituted in the phenyl ring by 1 or more other univalent
substituents;
— At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent;
— At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or
methoxybenzyl groups; or by inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a
cyclic structure.
(B) Sale or delivery. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale
or deliver any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid or a synthetic
stimulant.
(C) Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess a
product containing a synthetic cannabinoid or a synthetic stimulant
with the intent of using the product for ingestion, consumption,
inhaling, or intravenous use. In determining intent under this
§ 19.123 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.123
1:596
§ 19.124. through § 19.129. (Reserved)
subsection, a trier of fact may take into consideration, among other
things: the proximity of the product to drug paraphernalia; the
presence of the product on or within drug paraphernalia; the proximity
of the product to a different controlled substance; and whether or not
the individual in possession of the product is exhibiting physical effects
commonly associated with being under the influence of a controlled
substance.
(D) Use. It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of a
synthetic cannabinoid or a synthetic stimulant.
§ 19.123 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.124
1:597

ARTICLE 5
Penalties
§ 19.130. Fines; multiple violations.229
Unless another penalty is provided for violation of specific provisions of
this chapter, any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, permits
or allows, or refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any
provision of this chapter, unless a different fine is provided for under a
section of this code, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10 nor more
than $750 for each offense. Nothing in this section shall prevent the City
from prosecuting for several violations of the same section on the same day
or for each day of said violations, although the same may continue, and each
of said violations shall be separate and distinct violations and subject to the
penalties of this section.
§ 19.131. Responsibility of corporation, firm or person; joint
liability.
A corporation, firm or person may be prosecuted for the commission of
an offense performed by any officer, agent, or employee where the offense
is committed while said person is acting within the scope of his office,
employment or agency, or the commission of said offense is authorized,
requested, commanded, performed, permitted, allowed, or by neglect of
said corporation, firm or person. An officer or any other person or agent
who has a position of comparable authority for the formulation of policy or
the supervision of subordinate employees in a managerial capacity is legally
accountable for any offense committed in the name of or in behalf of the
corporation, firm or person, to the same extent as if it were performed in his
own name and behalf and may be prosecuted for violations of this chapter.
Prosecutions for violations of this chapter may be jointly, severally or in the
alternative against any of the above-named persons and the officer, agent,
or employee. Persons jointly liable for any violations may be prosecuted
under one complaint.
§ 19.132. Cumulative remedies.
The remedies or penalties enumerated herein are cumulative and the City
may prosecute in the alternative and, in the case of a nuisance, subject the
person committing said nuisance to an immediate arrest without the notice
to abate or other procedure and may, in addition, proceed for any other
violation of any other section of this chapter or to enforce its remedy under
any other ordinance, federal and Illinois statutes, or the common law.
§ 19.133. Imprisonment.
The City may, as an alternative remedy, elect to proceed to prosecute any
violation under any section of this chapter punishable by incarceration in
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 19.130 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.133
1:599
a penal institution other than the penitentiary, for a period not to exceed
six months. If the City so elects, the complaint shall state that a conviction
may result by incarceration in a penal institution other than the penitentiary
for a period not to exceed six months. All prosecutions under this section
shall be in the Circuit Court by information or complaint sworn to charging
said offense, and the prosecution shall conform to the rules of criminal
procedure and a conviction shall require the City to establish the guilt
of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt. The court may, in lieu of
imprisonment, assess a fine as set forth in this chapter.
§ 19.134. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall be held
invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any of the other provisions of
this chapter.
§ 19.135. Notice to appear and pay fines.
(A) When any person has violated the terms of this chapter, the officer
making the arrest may, in lieu of an arrest and bond or in lieu of filing a
quasi-criminal complaint and warrant or summons, issue a notice to
appear at the police station of the City of Hometown within 10 days
after said arrest to pay the fines as provided for herein. Every person
issued a notification of such violation, after consenting to a waiver of
court hearing and trial, within 10 days after notification is issued, may
pay the sums for the violation at the office of the police. If a second
notice is given, a failure to pay the fine herein provided within said time
shall subject the person to whom the notification was given to an
issuance of a warrant for his arrest, and the police officer issuing said
notification shall swear out a complaint for the arrest.
(1) All said violations shall be payable as follows:
(a) First offense: $25.
(b) Second offense: $50.
(c) Third offense: $75.
(2) For each and every offense thereafter, an additional sum of $25
shall be paid; provided, further, however, that fines for the
additional offenses shall be assessable only if the violations have
been committed within the same calendar year. Any person who
fails to appear after notification thereof and for whom a complaint
and warrant is issued shall pay the fines provided for in Subsection
(B) of this section. If a second notice to appear is issued, an
additional sum of double the amount shall be added to the fines
herein provided.
(B) Unless another penalty is expressly provided for in this chapter, every
person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine set forth in § 19.135.
§ 19.133 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.136
1:600
§ 19.136. through § 19.139. (Reserved)
§ 19.136 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.136
1:601

ARTICLE 6
Administrative Adjudication of Nonvehicular Code Violations
[Added 9-9-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003]
§ 19.140. Establishment of Code Hearing Department; definitions.
§ 19.141. Hearing procedures not exclusive.
The remedies provided for by this article are not exclusive and the City has
the option of prosecuting code violations in any manner provided by law.
(A) The City of Hometown, pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1
et seq., hereby establishes a code hearing department to expedite the
prosecution and correction of any violation of a municipal ordinance
except for Building Code violations that must be adjudicated pursuant
to the provisions of Chapter 21, Article 20A, of the Hometown
Municipal Code; any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or similar
offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles;
and except for any reportable offenses under Section 6-204 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
(B) For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:
CODE — Any municipal ordinance except for:
CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT — The employee(s) of the Building
Department or Police Department who processes and maintains all
records relating to the prosecution and correction of Code violations as
provided for in this article.
HEARING OFFICER — A City employee or an officer or agent of a
municipality, other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
Building Code violations that must be adjudicated pursuant to
Chapter 21, Article 20A, of the City Code; and
(1)
Any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense
that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and
except for any reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code.
(2)
Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether
or not a code violation exists;
(1)
Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a code violation;
(2)
Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing
and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
(3)
Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating
whether a code violation exists.
(4)
§ 19.140 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.142
1:603
§ 19.142. Violation notice and report.
§ 19.143. Subpoenas; defaults.
At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear
the case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear
and give testimony at the hearing. If on the date set for the hearing the
defendant or his or her attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may
find the defendant in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept
evidence relevant to the existence of a Code violation.
(A) When a Building Inspector, police officer or other individual authorized
to issue Code violations finds a Code violation to exist, he or she shall
note the violation on a multiple-copy violation notice and report form
that indicates:
(1) The name and address of property owner;
(2) The type and nature of the violation;
(3) The date and time and the violation was observed;
(4) The names of the witnesses of the violation; and
(5) The address of the property or structure where the violation is
observed.
(B) The violation report form shall be forwarded to the Code Hearing
Department, where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of
the report and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces
provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be
less than 30 days nor more than 40 days after the violation is reported.
However, if the code violation involves a municipal ordinance
regulating truants, the hearing date shall not be less than seven days
nor more than 40 days after the violation is reported.230
(C) One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of
the Code Hearing Department and shall be part of the record of
hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual
representing the City in the case so that he or she may prepare
evidence of the Code violation for presentation at the hearing on the
date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first
class mail to the property owner along with a summons commanding
the property owner to appear at the hearing. If the violation report form
requires the respondent to answer within a certain amount of time, the
City must reply to the answer within the same amount of time afforded
to the respondent.231
230. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
231. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 19.142 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.144
1:604
§ 19.144. Continuances; representation at hearings.
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings
under this article except in cases where a continuance is absolutely
necessary to protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of preparation shall
not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing
officer under this section shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the City
may be presented by an attorney designated by the City or by any other
City employee, except that the case for the City shall not be presented by
an employee of the Code Hearing Department. The case for the defendant
may be presented by the defendant, his or her attorney, or any other agent
or representative of the defendant.
§ 19.145. Hearing officer to preside; evidence.
At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and
shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of
a Code violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial
proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this article.
§ 19.146. Qualifications of hearing officers.
§ 19.147. Findings, decision and order.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a Code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing
and shall be designated as "findings, decision and order." The findings,
decision and order shall include the hearing officer's findings of fact; a
decision whether or not a Code violation exists based upon the findings of
fact; and an order that states the sanction or dismisses the case if a violation
is not proved. A monetary sanction for a violation under this section shall
not exceed the amount provided for in 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1. A copy of the
findings, decision, and order shall be served on the owner within five days
(A) Prior to conducting proceedings under this article, the hearing officer
shall successfully complete a formal training program that includes the
following:
(1) Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that he or she
will conduct;
(2) Orientation to each subject area of the Code violations that he or
she will administer;
(3) Observation of administrative hearings; and
(4) Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and
issuing final orders.
(B) In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to
practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three years.
§ 19.144 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.147
1:605
after it is issued. Service shall be in the same manner that the report form
and summons are served under 65 ILCS 5/1-2.-20. Payment of any penalty
or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as
provided by law.
§ 19.148. Review under Administrative Review Law.232
The findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject
to review in the Circuit Court of the county in which the municipality is
located. The provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and the rules
adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the
judicial review of the findings, decision, and order of a hearing officer under
this article.
§ 19.149. Judgment on findings.
(A) A fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or
the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the
Administrative Review Law shall be a debt due and owing the City and,
as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
(B) After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of
the Code violation, the City may command a proceeding in the Circuit
Court of the county in which the City is located for purpose of obtaining
a judgment on findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this section
shall prevent the City from consolidating multiple findings, decisions,
and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon
commencement of the action, the City shall file a certified copy of the
findings, decision, and order, which shall be accompanied by a
certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings,
decision, and order was issued in accordance with this article and the
applicable City ordinances. Service of the summons and a copy of the
petition may be by any method, provided that the total amount of fines,
other sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order
does not exceed $2,500. If the court is satisfied that the findings,
decision, and order was entered in accordance with the requirements of
this article and the applicable municipal ordinance and that the
defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this section and for
judicial review as provided in this section:
(1) The court shall render judgment in favor of the City and against the
defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may
be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the
recovery of money.
232. Editor's Note: See 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
§ 19.147 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.149
1:606
(2) The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are
requested by the City to enforce the order of the hearing officer to
correct a code violation.
§ 19.149 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.149
1:607

ARTICLE 7
(Reserved)233
§ 19.150. through § 19.169. (Reserved)
233. Editor's Note: Former Art. 7, Administrative Adjudication of Code Violations, was moved to
Ch. 21 as Art. 20A at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 19.150 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.150
1:609

ARTICLE 8
Seizure and Impoundment of Motor Vehicles
[Added 3-25-2008 by Ord. No. 5-2008]
§ 19.170. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Any substance as defined and included in
the schedules contained in Article II of the Illinois Controlled Substance Act
(720 ILCS 570/101 et seq.), as amended from time to time, and cannabis as
defined in § 3 of the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/3), as amended
from time to time.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — Any equipment, product, and/or materials as
defined in § 2 of the Drug Paraphernalia Act (720 ILCS 600/2), as amended
from time to time.
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE — Any violation as defined in § 11-501
of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501), as amended from time to
time.
DRIVING WHILE LICENSE, PERMIT OR PRIVILEGE TO OPERATE A
MOTOR VEHICLE IS SUSPENDED OR REVOKED — Any violation as
defined in § 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-303), as
amended from time to time.
HEARING OFFICER — The individual appointed to preside over
administrative hearings as established in § 19.140 of the Municipal Code of
the City of Hometown.
OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT A VALID DRIVER'S
LICENSE — A violation of § 6-101 and/or § 6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
(625 ILCS 5/6-101 and/or 625 ILCS 5/6-303), as amended from time to
time, where the driver's license or driving privileges have been suspended,
revoked, canceled, never obtained, or previously had been obtained and
have been expired for not less than six months.
OWNER OF RECORD — The record title holder to a motor vehicle.
UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS — A violation of § 24-1 of the Criminal
Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/24-1), as amended from time to time.
§ 19.171. Violations.
It is hereby declared unlawful for an owner of a vehicle to permit his/her
vehicle to be borrowed or used, and the use thereof results in a violation of
law as stated below:
(A) The possession or delivery of a controlled substance or drug
paraphernalia.
(B) Driving under the influence.
§ 19.170 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.171
1:611
§ 19.172. Authority to seize and impound.
§ 19.173. Posting bond. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 7-2016;
3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 02-2019]
If a bond in the amount of $500 is posted with the City, the impounded
vehicle will be released to the owner of record, upon the payment by the
owner of record of the towing and storage costs. If a penalty is imposed for
a violation of this article, the bond will be forfeited to the City; provided,
(C) Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is
suspended or revoked.
(D) Operation of a motor vehicle without a valid driver's license.
(E) Unlawful use of weapons.
(A) A motor vehicle used in the manner described in § 19.171 shall be
subject to seizure and impoundment. Whenever a police officer has
probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to this article, the police officer shall cause the
motor vehicle to be towed to a facility controlled by the City or its
agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify any
person identifying himself or herself as the owner of the vehicle or any
person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure and
of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing as
provided in this article.
(B) Any police officer who has probable cause to believe that the vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment under this article shall first
ascertain whether the impoundment is necessary and reasonable under
the circumstances. If the vehicle is capable of being removed from the
scene by an individual who is present on the scene, and who has
permission from the owner of the vehicle to drive the vehicle, and the
individual is otherwise capable of lawfully operating a motor vehicle in
the State of Illinois, the police officer shall allow that individual to
remove the vehicle without being subject to seizure and impoundment.
Similarly, if the vehicle is parked legally, and/or will not present a
hazard to the public safety or otherwise jeopardize the efficient
movement of vehicular traffic at its location, the officer shall permit the
vehicle to remain at its location without being seized or impounded
pursuant to this article. This determination shall not apply when the
vehicle is required to be seized or impounded due to investigative
measures or when a vehicle is seized or impounded pursuant to another
lawful purpose.
(C) When a vehicle is not seized or impounded pursuant to this section, the
owner shall not be required to post the requisite bond of $500 as
referenced in § 19.173. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 7-2016;
3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 02-2019]
§ 19.171 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.173
1:612
however, in the event that a violation of this article is not proven, the bond
will be returned to the person posting the bond. All bond money posted
pursuant to this article will be held by the City until the hearing officer
issues a decision, or, if there is a judicial review, until a reviewing court
issues a final decision.
§ 19.174. Preliminary hearing.
§ 19.175. Final hearing.
(A) Where the owner of a motor vehicle seized under the provisions of this
article requests a preliminary hearing within 12 hours after the seizure
of the motor vehicle, the Watch Commander or any supervising officer
must conduct a preliminary hearing within 24 hours after the request
for preliminary hearing is received by the City; provided, however, that
if the date for the hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday,
the preliminary hearing will be held on the next business day following
the Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. No preliminary hearing shall be
required or granted to an owner whose vehicle was not seized or
impounded pursuant to this article.
(B) For purposes of this section, the following shall apply:
(1) All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the preliminary hearing.
(2) The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay testimony will be allowed and will be admissible.
(3) If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the Watch Commander or
supervising officer determines that there is probable cause to
believe that the vehicle was used as hereinabove provided in
§ 19.171, he/she shall order the continued impoundment of the
vehicle, unless the owner of the vehicle posts a cash bond with the
City in the amount of $500, plus the towing and storage costs.
[Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 7-2016; 3-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 02-2019]
(4) If the Watch Commander or supervising officer determines that
there is not probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used as
hereinabove provided in § 19.171, the motor vehicle will be
returned to the owner of record of the vehicle without any penalty
or other costs.
(A) Notice of hearing. Within 45 days after a vehicle is seized and
impounded pursuant to this article, the City shall notify the owner of
record of the motor vehicle of the date, time and location of a hearing.
Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the owner of record, as shown on the records of the Illinois Secretary
of State.
§ 19.173 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.175
1:613
§ 19.176. Unclaimed and abandoned vehicles.
(B) Hearing. All hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in
Article 6 of this chapter. However, to the extent of differentiation, the
following shall apply:
(1) Unless continued by order of the hearing officer, the hearing shall
be held within 45 days after the motor vehicle was seized.
(2) All interested persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the final hearing.
(3) If, after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer
determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle
was used as hereinabove provided in § 19.171, the hearing officer
shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle until the
owner of the vehicle pays to the City a penalty in the amount of
$500, plus the towing and storage costs. In the event the vehicle
was not impounded, an order shall be entered wherein the owner of
record shall be liable to the City in the amount of $500. The penalty
and costs shall be a debt due to the City. [Amended 11-22-2016
by Ord. No. 7-2016; 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 02-2019]
(4) If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing
officer shall enter an order of default in favor of the City, which
order shall require the payment to the City of an administrative
penalty of $500. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 7-2016;
3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 02-2019]
(5) If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was not used as
hereinabove provided in § 19.171, the motor vehicle will be
returned to the owner of record of the vehicle without any penalty
or other costs, or, if a cash bond had previously been posted, the
cash bond shall be returned.
(A) Any motor vehicle that is not claimed within 30 days after the expiration
of the time in which the owner of record may seek judicial review of the
action of the City under this article, or the time at which a final
judgment is rendered in favor of the City by a court, or the time at
which a final administrative decision is rendered against an owner of
record who is in default, may be disposed of as an abandoned or
unclaimed vehicle, as otherwise provided by law.
(B) If the penalty and towing and storage costs are not paid within 80 days
after a penalty is imposed pursuant to this article, the vehicle shall be
deemed to be abandoned and may be disposed of in the manner
provided by law for the disposition of abandoned or unclaimed vehicles,
unless a petition for judicial review is filed with a court of proper
jurisdiction. Where a petition for judicial review of the hearing officer's
determination is filed and pending in a court of proper jurisdiction, the
vehicle shall not be deemed to be abandoned and shall not be sold. If
§ 19.175 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.176
1:614
§ 19.177. Liability for penalties and costs.
the petition for judicial review is resolved in favor of the City, the
vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and may be disposed of by the City
if the penalty and towing and storage costs are not paid within 30 days
after the date of the court's order.
(A) The owner of record of a motor vehicle who is found to be in violation of
this article shall be liable to the City for a penalty of $500 in addition to
any fees for the towing and storage of the motor vehicle, if applicable.
[Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 7-2016; 3-12-2019 by Ord. No.
02-2019]
(B) Fees for towing and storage are established by the towing company, not
by the City.
(C) A vehicle impounded pursuant to this article shall remain impounded
until the earlier of the following occurs:
(1) The penalty is paid to the City and all towing and storage costs are
paid to the towing company; and
(2) A bond in amount equal to the liability of the owner as herein
provided in Subsection (A) is posted with the City and all applicable
towing and storage costs are paid to the towing company; and
(3) The vehicle is deemed abandoned, in which case the vehicle shall
be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
abandoned or unclaimed vehicles.
(D) Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lien holder,
or any other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a
motor vehicle impounded under this article until the penalty and all
towing and storage costs applicable under this article have been paid in
full.
§ 19.176 CITY GOVERNMENT § 19.177
1:615
Chapter 21
BUILDING CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 5.
Health regulations — See Ch. 15.
Plants and weeds — See Ch. 18, Art. 3.
Signs — See Ch. 18, Art. 8.
Zoning — See Ch. 22.
§ 19.177 HOMETOWN CODE § 19.177
1:616
ARTICLE 1
Adoption of Building Codes
[Amended 6-2004 by Ord. No. 10-2004; 2-13-2007 by Ord. No.
2-2007; 7-26-2016 by Ord. No. 4-2016]
§ 21.01. Adoption of Building Code.
The 2015 International Building Code, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City with
the following changes, additions or insertions:
(A) Section 101.1, insert "City of Hometown."
(B) Section 101.4.3, change the words "International Plumbing Code" to
"Illinois Plumbing Code." Change the last sentence to read: "Private
sewage disposal systems are prohibited." Add the following sentence:
"Whenever the International Plumbing Code is referenced, the
reference shall be to the Illinois Plumbing Code."
(C) Section 102.4, change the last sentence to read: "In the event of conflict
between this code and any referenced code or other ordinance of the
City, the most stringent provisions shall be applied unless the Building
Official otherwise determines."
(D) Section 103.1, delete in full.
(E) Section 103.2, change first sentence to read: "The building official shall
be the Building Commissioner."
(F) Section 105.2, delete paragraphs 1, 2, 4 and 6 under "Building."
(G) Section 109.4, add the following: "The additional fee for commencing
work without obtaining the necessary permits shall be $50 per day,
measured from the time that work began until the required permits are
obtained. This fee shall be paid at the time that the permits are issued."
(H) Section 113.1, delete the last two sentences and add: "The Board of
Appeals shall be the City Council."
(I) Section 113.2, change the last sentence to read: "The Board shall have
the authority to waive the requirements of this code for due cause in
hardship situations, which decision to waive shall not be subject to
further appeal."
(J) Section 114.4, add the following: "A penalty of not less than $100 nor
more than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation of this code."
(K) Section 903.2, add the following: "Automatic sprinkler systems are
required to be installed in residential structures only as provided in the
Hometown Municipal Code."
§ 21.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.01
1:617
(L) Section 1209.1, add the following: "The minimum height for a crawl
space shall be three feet. All crawl spaces shall have a minimum twoinch
concrete cement floor with vapor barrier."
(M) Section 1209.3, add the following: "Where a furnace is located in an
attic, the furnace shall be located in an enclosed insulation room of not
less than 64 square feet of flat area with a walkway of a minimum 24
inches wide to the furnace from the access opening."
(N) Section 1612.3, change the second sentence to read: "The flood hazard
map shall be the most recent Flood Insurance Rate Map issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, as amended from time to
time."
(O) Section 1807.1, add the following: "All foundations and foundation
walls shall be concrete foundations and no other materials may be
used."
(P) Section 1807.1.3, delete in full.
(Q) Section 1807.1.4, delete in full.
(R) Section 1807.1.5, add the following: "Masonry foundation walls are not
permitted."
(S) Section 1809.9, delete in full.
(T) Section 1809.12, delete in full.
(U) 234The following Appendixes are hereby declared to be mandatory:
Appendix D, Appendix F, Appendix G, Appendix I, Appendix J, Appendix
K.
(V) Appendix D, Fire Districts, Section D101.1, change first sentence to
read: "The fire district shall include all territory within the City."
(W) Appendix F, Rodentproofing, Section F101.6, delete in full.
(X) Appendix H, Signs, is hereby adopted, but nothing therein shall permit
the erection or maintenance of any sign unless permitted by the Zoning
Ordinance.235
(Y) Appendix K, Administrative Provisions, Section K101.1, is changed by
adding a sentence to read: "The Chicago Electrical Code shall apply
within the City and shall be the electrical code and govern all electrical
installation and maintenance."
234. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (U), amending Section 3412.2, which no longer exists
in the 2015 International Building Code, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
235. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 18, Art. 8, Signs.
§ 21.01 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.02
1:618
§ 21.02. Adoption of Residential Code.
The 2015 International Residential Code, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Residential Code (for One- and
Two- Family Dwellings) of the City with the following changes, additions or
insertions:
(A) Section R101.1, insert "City of Hometown."
(B) Section R102.4, change the last sentence to read: "In the event of
conflict between this code and any referenced code or other ordinance
of the City, the most stringent provisions shall be applied unless the
building official otherwise determines."
(C) Section R103.1, delete in full.
(D) Section R103.2, change first sentence to read: "The building official
shall be the Building Commissioner."
(E) Section R105.2, delete Paragraphs 1, 2, 3, and 5 under "Building."
(F) Section R108.6, add the following to read: "The additional fee for
commencing work without obtaining the necessary permits shall be $50
per day, measured from the time that work began until the required
permits are obtained. This fee shall be paid at the time that the permits
are issued."
(G) Section R112, delete in full. All appeals shall be taken as provided in the
Building Code.
(H) Section R113.4, add the following: "A penalty of not less than $100 nor
more than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation of this code."
(I) Table R301.2, insert: "The building official shall determine the
applicable criteria from the referenced tables and figures."
(J) Section R401.2, insert: "All foundations and foundation walls shall be
poured concrete and no other materials may be used."
(K) Section R402.1, delete in full.
(L) Section R402.3, delete in full.
(M) Section R403.1, add the following: "All footings shall be poured
concrete footings and no other materials may be used."
(N) Section R404.1, add the following: "All foundation walls and retaining
walls shall be poured concrete and no other materials may be used."
(O) Section R404.1.1, delete in full.
(P) Section R404.1.2, delete in full.
(Q) Section R404.1.8, delete in full.
§ 21.02 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.02
1:619
§ 21.03. Adoption of Mechanical Code.
The 2015 International Mechanical Code, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City
with the following changes, additions or insertions:
(R) Section R404.2, delete in full.
(S) Section R404.5, delete in full.
(T) Section R408.4, add the following: "The minimum height for a crawl
space shall be three feet. All crawl spaces shall have a minimum twoinch
concrete cement floor with vapor barrier."
(U) Section R807.1, add the following: "Where a furnace is located in an
attic, the furnace shall be located in an enclosed insulation room of not
less than 64 square feet of flat area with a walkway of a minimum 24
inches wide to the furnace from the access opening."
(V) Section P2603.5.1, delete in full as private sewage disposal systems are
not permitted.236
(W) Section P2904.1, add the following: "Automatic sprinkler systems are
required to be installed in residential structures only as provided in the
Hometown Municipal Code."
(X) Part VII, Plumbing. Only methods, materials, construction and systems
allowed by the Illinois Plumbing Code are permitted.
(Y) Part VIII, Electrical. Only wiring methods, materials, construction and
systems allowed under the Chicago Electrical Code are permitted.
(Z) The following Appendixes are hereby declared to be mandatory:
Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix G,
Appendix H, Appendix J, Appendix K, Appendix M, Appendix N and
Appendix P.
(A) Section 101.1, insert "City of Hometown."
(B) Section 103.1, delete in full.
(C) Section 103.2, change first sentence to read: "The building official shall
be the Building Commissioner."
(D) Section 106.5.2, change to read: "The building official shall establish a
schedule of permit fees and plan review fees."
(E) Section 106.5.3, change to read: "The building official may authorize a
refund of fees."
236. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.02 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.03
1:620
§ 21.04. Adoption of Energy Conservation Code.
The Illinois Energy Conservation Code, as published by the Capital
Development Board of the State of Illinois (Section 600.110 of Title 71 of the
Illinois Administrative Code), is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation
Code of the City.
§ 21.05. through § 21.09. (Reserved)
(F) Section 108.4, change the first sentence to read: "A penalty of not less
than $100 nor more than $750 is hereby imposed for each violation of
this code."
(G) Section 108.5, delete the last sentence.
(H) Section 109, delete in full. All appeals shall be taken as provided in the
Building Code.
§ 21.03 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.05
1:621

ARTICLE 2
Additions to International Building Code
§ 21.10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The City Attorney for the City of Hometown.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Hometown.
§ 21.11. Residential buildings defined.
"Residential buildings," as used in this Code, shall mean and include:
§ 21.12. Insulation.
§ 21.13. Concrete pour heat ducts.
All heat ducts to be laid in concrete shall be raised above concrete before
pour to allow concrete to flow under ducts.
§ 21.14. "A" frame houses.
"A" frame houses are not permitted.
§ 21.15. Roofs.
A third roof covering on any roof in the City is prohibited. Roofs requiring
such recovering shall be stripped one layer or to the sheathing and boards
and all such roofs shall be recovered as if it were a new roof or a roof first
to be covered.
(A) Single-family residences, not over two stories and an attic in height.
(B) Duplex houses (two units, side by side), and two-, three-, and fourfamily
apartments or flats, not over two stories in height.
(C) Buildings customarily accessory to the foregoing.
(D) Any residential portions of offices, stores, and other business buildings,
not higher than the second floor, subject to such additional
requirements as may apply to such buildings.
(A) Insulation shall be required in all residential structures as follows:
(1) Ceilings: six-inch batt insulation.
(2) Crawl spaces: six-inch batt insulation.
(3) Side walls: four-inch batt insulation.
(B) Blown-in insulation of the same thickness will be allowed.
§ 21.10 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.16
1:623
§ 21.16. New or replacement furnaces.
All new or replacement furnaces shall be subject to the following additional
requirements:
§ 21.16.1. New or replacement hot water heaters. [Added 5-26-2009
by Ord. No. 6-2009]
(A) All furnaces must be on a coil box, a minimum of 12 inches off the floor.
(B) All furnace room doors must have fixed (permanent or nonadjustable)
vents or louvers.
(C) The furnace must have a minimum of four inches of clearance from the
door to the furnace.
(D) Installation of chimney restraints such as flue dampers must have at
least eight inches of clearance from the door to the furnace room.
(E) New louvered doors should be installed and moved out into and open
into a hall.
(F) A new flue (smoke pipes) must be installed when the furnace is
installed; i.e., the old flue must be removed.
(A) All replacement hot water heaters installed in an existing structure
shall be subject to the following installation requirements:
(1) All new or replacement hot waters heaters must be ANSI certified.
(2) The safety relief valve must have an attached 3/4 inch copper or
galvanized pipe, a minimum of three feet in length.
(3) A new flue (smoke pipes) must be installed when the hot water
heater is installed (i.e., the old flue must be removed); the flue pipe
must be pitched upward, the high hat must be screwed to the top
and each flue section must be screwed together (any tape on flue
sections is prohibited).
(4) The gas line installed must be solid black gas piping, have an
appropriate gas shutoff valve and be installed directly to the gas
burner control module.
(5) Water lines installed directly to the hot water heater must be metal
piping; a shut-off valve for the cold water supply must also be
installed. (The use of flexible copper piping is allowed; however, the
shut-off valve must be installed before any connection is made to
this flexible piping.)
(B) For all new hot water heaters being installed in a new/remodeled
structure, the above-noted specifications apply, in addition to the
following requirement:
§ 21.16 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.16.1
1:624
§ 21.17. Smoke detectors and heat-sensing devices. [Amended
6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 4-2005; 7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-2010]
The following additional requirements shall be adhered to by the owners
and occupants of any premises within the City of Hometown for the
installation and maintenance of smoke detectors and heat-sensing devices:
(1) A floor drain must be properly installed within the structure that is
housing the new water heater in order to properly handle any
discharge by the relief valve or any leakage by the hot water heater.
The floor drain will not be allowed to empty into a crawl space or
other open area but must be properly connected into the
household's wastewater connection and vented properly. This
provision also includes any 90% or higher furnaces, air
conditioners or humidifiers (except where a slab foundation exists
and installation of a pump is required).
(C) In a case of an emergency, involving after-hours or weekend
installation, the application for a permit must be received by the City
Clerk's office within the first business day following the installation of
the hot water heater.
(A) Each owner/occupant shall install and maintain smoke detectors and
heat-sensing devices in compliance with the Fire Codes adopted by the
City of Hometown.
(B) Smoke detectors or heat-sensing devices shall be required in every
building containing one or more dwelling units.
(C) Smoke detectors and heat-sensing devices shall be required in every
commercial store and building and shall be located and installed
according to manufacturer specifications.
(D) Smoke detectors and heat-sensing devices shall be required in any
building containing places of assembly of 50 or more persons.
(E) Smoke detectors and heat-sensing devices shall be required in all of the
buildings where a fire safety hazard exists as determined by the
Hometown Fire Department (which shall mean the Hometown Fire
Protection District) after investigation and recommendation.
(F) The location of panels and pull stations shall be determined by the
Hometown Fire Department and Hometown Building Department.
(G) There shall be a smoke detector or heat-sensing device in every closet,
storage area, electrical closet and furnace room in every commercial
store.
(H) In new constructions and major remodeling in dwelling-type
occupancies, the requirement for smoke detectors shall be (1) 120 volts
on its own circuit and shall be equipped with a battery back-up; and (2)
installed outside sleeping quarters and furnace rooms. If more than one
§ 21.16.1 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.17
1:625
§ 21.18. False alarms. [Amended 7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 11-2010]
smoke detector or heat-sensing device is required to be installed and
maintained in the same building or structure, and the devices are not
located in close proximity or are located on different stories, they shall
be wired together so that if one detector is activated, all are activated.
(I) In every commercial store or building, buildings containing places of
assembly of 50 or more persons, or in any other location the Fire
Department deems appropriate, the smoke detectors and heat-sensing
devices shall be installed, connected to and monitored by a U.L.-
certified central monitoring company of the owner's/occupant's choice.
All existing buildings required to be connected to and monitored by a
U.L.-certified central monitoring company shall be so connected by
October 1, 2010.
(J) Any person or entity found to be in violation of any provision of this
section shall be fined not less than $250 or more than $750, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day a violation occurs
or is permitted to continue.
(A) A fee of $25 per false alarm shall be charged to the owner or occupant
of any premises for each false alarm transmitted to the City in excess of
two per calendar year. A fee of $50 shall be charged to the owner or
occupant for each false alarm in excess of five per calendar year. For
the purposes of this section, "false alarm" shall mean any emergency
alarm signal, either audible outside or transmitted to the Police or Fire
Department, that requires a response of emergency fire or police
equipment and personnel, where no emergency exists, due to the
improper installation, maintenance or operation of an alarm system or
the result of human error in transmitting the alarm signal. False alarms
shall not include those situations where the false signal was caused by
an act of God, a power outage, a malfunction attributable to the
telephone company, or similar unanticipated extraordinary
circumstances. The burden of proving the nonchargeability of the false
transmission shall be on the owner or occupant of the premises.
(B) The failure to pay fines for excessive false alarms shall also be deemed
just cause to disconnect the alarm service to the premises. A written
notice of the City's intent to disconnect the service shall be sent by
certified mail to the business licensee or occupant of the premises as
well as the alarm company monitoring the premises. The notice shall
inform the recipient of the reason for disconnection and shall allow the
recipient a predisconnection opportunity to be heard before the City
Council. If a party fails to request a hearing, or if a hearing is held and
the party fails to demonstrate the nonchargeability of the false
transmissions to the City Council, the service shall be disconnected.
(C) Notwithstanding the above, the City Council may order the
disconnection of an alarm service to any premises which has
transmitted 10 or more false alarms in a calendar year. A written notice
§ 21.17 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.18
1:626
§ 21.19. Front porches and decks.237
of the City's intent to disconnect the service shall be sent by certified
mail to the business licensee or occupant of the premises as well as
the alarm company monitoring the premises to be disconnected. The
notice shall include the nature of the charge and allow the recipient a
predisconnection opportunity to be heard before the City Council. If a
party fails to request a hearing, or if a hearing is held and the party fails
to demonstrate good cause as to why the alarm service should not be
disconnected, the City Council shall authorize the disconnection of the
alarm service.
(A) Front porches and decks shall be allowed 100 square feet maximum,
with the exception of U-shaped original three-bedroom Hometown
houses, which will be allowed 132 square feet for a front porch or deck,
which cannot extend beyond the front corner of the house.
(B) Height. Decks shall be no higher than the front door sill.
(C) Railings shall be no higher than four feet from the deck.
(D) Footings must be at least eight square and 42 inches below grade.
(E) A deck must be attached to the house.
(F) Screened or enclosed porches, decks, gazebos, etc. are not allowed in
front yards. In addition, no deck or porch attached to the front of the
home shall include a roof, eave, awning, or similar covering. On interior
lots, any porch or deck constructed on the front of the home must be
attached to the residence. On corner lots, any front porch or deck must
be attached to that side of the residence containing the front entrance
to the home.
(G) The setback requirements provided for in Chapter 22, Zoning, must
also be met.
237. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.18 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.19
1:627

ARTICLE 3
Fire Prevention
§ 21.20. Fire limits; exceptions.
The fire limits of the City of Hometown are established as the limits of
the City. Beginning at the center point of the intersection of 87th Street
and Pulaski Road, running south on Pulaski Road to the center of the
intersection of Pulaski Road and 91st Street. Running West from the center
point of 91st Street and Pulaski Road to the center point of the intersection
of 91st Street and Kilpatrick Avenue. Running north from that point to the
center point of the intersection of Kilpatrick Avenue and 90th Street. From
that point west on 90th Street to the center point of the intersection of 90th
Street and Cicero Avenue. Running north on Cicero Avenue to the center
point of the intersection of 87th Street and Cicero Avenue. Running east
from that point to the point of beginning. Except that in the areas shown
on the Zoning Map as A Single-Family, B Two-Family and C Multiple-Family
Dwelling Districts where buildings have already been constructed of frame
construction on a lot or parcel of land, said lot or parcel may continue to be
used for buildings of frame construction.
§ 21.21. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code. [Amended 6-2004 by
Ord. No. 10-2004; 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2-2007; 7-26-2016 by Ord.
No. 4-2016]
(A) The 2015 International Fire Code, as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the
City with the following changes, additions or insertions:
(1) Section 101.1, insert "City of Hometown."
(2) Section 103.2, change to read: "The code official is the Fire
Inspector."
(3) Section 105.1.1, add the following: "The code official shall establish
a schedule of permit fees which are required to be paid in
conjunction with the issuance of any required permit."
(4) Section 108, delete in full. All appeals shall be taken as provided in
the Building Code.
(5) Section 109.4, change the first sentence to read: "A penalty of not
less than $100 nor more than $750 is hereby imposed for each
violation of this code."
(6) Section 111.4, insert "$100" and "$750."
(7) Section 903.1, add the following: "Automatic sprinkler systems are
required to be installed in residential structures only as provided in
the Hometown Municipal Code."
§ 21.20 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.21
1:629
§ 21.22. Carbon monoxide alarms and detectors. [Added 2-13-2007
by Ord. No. 3-2007]
(8) Section 5704.2.9.6.1, add the following: "The code official shall
establish the limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II
liquids and above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited."
(9) Section 5706.2.4.4, add the following: "The code official shall
establish the limits in which the storage of Class I and Class II
liquids and above-ground tanks is prohibited."
(10) Section 5806.2, add the following: "The code official shall establish
the limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in
stationary containers is prohibited."
(11) Section 6104.2, add the following: "The code official shall establish
the limits in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested
areas."
(12) Appendix B, Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings, is hereby
adopted.
(13) Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution, is hereby
adopted.
(14) Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads, is hereby adopted.
(15) Appendix E, Hazard Categories, is hereby adopted.
(16) Appendix F, Hazard Ranking, is hereby adopted.
(17) Appendix G, Cryogenic Fluids — Weight and Volume Equivalents, is
hereby adopted.
(18) Appendix H, Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and
Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) Instructions, is
hereby adopted.
(19) Appendix I, Fire Protection Systems — Noncompliant Conditions, is
hereby adopted.
(20) Appendix J, Building Information Sign, is hereby adopted.
(B) In the event that the 2015 International Fire Code does not contain
provisions on an issue, then the provisions of the Life Safety Code, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association, shall govern
unless waived by the code official for due cause in hardship situations.
(A) Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth in
this section:
APPROVED CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM — A carbon monoxide alarm
that complies with all the requirements of the rules and regulations
§ 21.21 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.22
1:630
of the Illinois State Fire Marshal, bears the label of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, and complies with the most recent
standards of the Underwriters Laboratories or the Canadian Standards
Association.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or suite of rooms used for human
habitation, and includes a single-family residence as well as each living
unit of a multifamily residence and each living unit in a mixed-use
building.
(B) Carbon monoxide detectors.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved
carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within 15 feet of
every room used for sleeping purposes. The carbon monoxide
alarm may be combined with smoke-detecting devices, provided
that the combined unit is an approved carbon monoxide alarm and
provided that the combined unit emits a warning in a manner that
clearly differentiates the hazard.
(2) Every structure that contains more than one dwelling unit shall
contain at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating
condition within 15 feet of every room used for sleeping purposes.
(3) It is the responsibility of the owner of a structure to supply and
install all required carbon monoxide alarms. It is the responsibility
of a tenant to test and to provide general maintenance for the
carbon monoxide alarms within the tenant's dwelling unit or
rooming unit, and to notify the owner or the authorized agent of the
owner in writing of any deficiencies that the tenant cannot correct.
The owner is responsible for providing one tenant per dwelling unit
with written information regarding carbon monoxide alarm testing
and maintenance.
(4) The tenant is responsible for replacement of any required batteries
in the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant's dwelling unit, except
that the owner shall ensure that the batteries are in operating
condition at the time the tenant takes possession of the dwelling
unit. The tenant shall provide the owner or the authorized agent of
the owner with access to the dwelling unit to correct any
deficiencies in the carbon monoxide alarm that have been reported
in writing to the owner or the authorized agent of the owner.
(5) The carbon monoxide alarms required under this section may be
either battery-powered, plug-in with battery back-up, or wired into
the structure's AC power line with secondary battery backup.
(C) Prohibitions.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to install or maintain a
carbon monoxide alarm as required by this section.
§ 21.22 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.22
1:631
§ 21.23. through § 21.29. (Reserved)
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, remove, destroy
or disconnect any installed carbon monoxide alarm.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove batteries from an
installed carbon monoxide alarm except for the purpose of
contemporaneously replacing such batteries.
(D) Exemptions. The following residential units shall not require carbon
monoxide detectors:
(1) A residential unit in a building that:
(a) Does not rely on combustion of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation,
or hot water;
(b) Is not connected in any way to a garage; and
(c) Is not sufficiently close to any ventilated source of carbon
monoxide, as determined by the Building Commissioner, to
receive carbon monoxide from that source.
(2) A residential unit that is not sufficiently close to any source of
carbon monoxide so as to be at risk of receiving carbon monoxide
from that source, as determined by the Building Commissioner.
§ 21.22 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.23
1:632
ARTICLE 4
Permits and Fees
§ 21.30. Permit required; minimum fee.
§ 21.31. Fees.
(A) No work or construction shall be done without a permit and no permit
shall be issued without plans, including, but not limited to, fences,
replacement siding, roofing, concrete work (front and rear), window
changes or replacement, tool sheds, screened-in patios, garages, solar
panels, additions, repairs, satellite dishes, swimming pools, fireplaces,
wood-burning stoves, and other construction, installation or
replacement of a similar nature. When practicable hardships obviate
the necessity of accompanying plans, like prefabricated installation,
appliances, and similar devices with manufacturer's specifications, the
Building Commissioner may waive plans.238
(B) No permit as required by said code shall be issued until the fee
prescribed in this Code shall have been paid; nor shall an amendment to
a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase
in the estimated cost of the construction of the building or structure
shall have been paid. The minimum fee, unless otherwise specifically
stated in this Code, for all permits shall be $15. A permit shall be
required for every type of construction and structure; "structure" is to
be used in its broadest and widest sense and shall include, among other
things but not limited thereto, fences, garages, solar panels, satellite
dishes, tool sheds, roofing, sidewalks, pavements and any artificial
construction or repair in which all the component parts are intended to
be and remain in equilibrium and at rest relatively to each other.
(A) For a permit for the construction, replacement, repair, or renovation of
a building, a structure or garage, the fee shall be at the rate of 2% of the
total costs of completed structure; and the minimum cost of the permit
be $15.
(B) For a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one lot to
another, the fee shall be at the rate of $15 per $1,000 of the estimated
value of the building or structure in its completed condition after
removal.
(C) For a permit for the removal of a building or structure to a new location
within the same lot, the fee shall be at the rate of $15 per $1,000 of the
estimated cost of moving, or new foundations and of work necessary to
put the building or structure in usable condition in its new location.
(D) For a permit for the demolition of a building or structure, the fee shall
be at the rate of $100 for each 10 feet in height of such building or
238. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.30 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.31
1:633
§ 21.32. Costs included in estimate.
The term "estimated cost" as used in this article means the reasonable
value of all services, architect, engineering, labor, materials, and use of
scaffolding and other appliances or devices entering into and necessary to
the prosecution and completion of the work ready for occupancy.
§ 21.33. Final determination of cost.
In the event the Building Commissioner, after review of the plans and
application, or at any time during the progress of the work, or after
completion, determines that the cost of construction was more or less than
the amount estimated in the application, he shall increase or decrease the
permit fee accordingly and notify the City Clerk of the change for the
County Assessor's records. Every applicant, upon demand by the Building
Commissioner, shall submit a sworn contractor's statement showing the
cost of construction.
§ 21.34. Certificates of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the Building
Commissioner has been satisfied that the proper fees required by this
article have been paid and the Assessor of Cook County has received the
necessary copy of the building permit. The fee for an occupancy permit
is $15 for each original certificate and $2 for each copy. (See § 21.196,
Occupancy permits.)
§ 21.35. Reinspections.
Where reinspections are required because of faulty work, failure to comply
with specifications, plans, or the Building Code, inaccurate or incorrect
information, failure to send a card to the Building Commissioner requiring
inspection, failure to secure a permit or reinspection, a fee of $15 for each
such reinspection visit in addition to the regular inspection fee shall be
paid.239
§ 21.36. through § 21.39. (Reserved)
structure, plus 2% additional for each foot of street frontage of the
building or structure in excess of 50 feet.
239. Editor's Note: Original § 21.30(i), Sample fees, and (j), Other required fees, which
immediately followed this section, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30,
General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 21.31 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.36
1:634
ARTICLE 5
Saving Clause
§ 21.40. Effect on other actions and provisions.
Nothing in this code or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or any rights
acquired, or liability incurred, nor any cause or causes of action accrued or
existing under any act or ordinance repealed hereby; nor shall any right or
remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 21.41. through § 21.49. (Reserved)
§ 21.40 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.41
1:635

ARTICLE 6
Administration and Enforcement
§ 21.50. Scope.
(A) 240Scope. This code provides for matters concerning, affecting or
relating to the construction, alteration, removal, demolition,
equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings
or structures, erected or to be erected in the municipality, except
insofar as such matters are otherwise provided for in the charter, in
other statutes or ordinances consistent herewith, or in rules duly
promulgated under the provisions of this code.
(B) Ordinance remedial. This code is hereby declared to be remedial and
shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes
thereof, which are public safety, health and welfare, through structural
strength and stability, means of egress, adequate light and ventilation
and safety to life and property from fire and hazards incident to the
design, construction, alteration, removal or demolition of buildings or
structures.
(C) All new work to conform.
(1) No building or structure shall hereafter be constructed, altered, or
removed, nor shall the equipment for the operation of a building,
structure, or premises be constructed, installed, altered or
removed, except in conformity with the provisions of this code.
(2) No building or structure shall be altered in any manner that would
be in violation of the provisions of this code or of any authorized
rule or approval of the Building Official made and issued
thereunder.
(3) Nothing in this code shall prohibit the raising or lowering of a
building to meet a change of grade in the street on which it is
located, provided that the building is not otherwise altered.
(D) Use and maintenance.
(1) It shall be unlawful to maintain, occupy or use a building or
structure, or part thereof, that has been erected or altered in
violation of the provisions of this code.
(2) No building or structure shall be occupied unless it is in a safe and
habitable condition as prescribed in this Code; rainwater shall be
so drained and conveyed therefrom as to prevent dampness in
walls and ceilings.
(E) Buildings affected.
240. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (A), Short title, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 21.50 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.50
1:637
§ 21.51. Building official.
§ 21.52. Duties of Building Commissioner.
§ 21.53. Deputy Building Commissioners.
The Building Commissioner may appoint one or more Deputy Building
Commissioners with the consent and approval of the Mayor. They shall hold
office for such periods as may be designated in their appointment. They
shall receive such compensation as may be approved by the Mayor and with
the consent of the City Council. They shall assist the Building Commissioner
in the performance of his duties.
§ 21.54. Short title for building officers.
The title or phrase "building officers," when used in the Building
Ordinances, shall mean and include the Building Commissioner and the
(1) The provisions of this code apply to buildings or structures and
their equipment on land and to construction, such as areas or
street encroachments, however placed, that are appurtenant to
such buildings or structures.
(2) These provisions shall also apply to municipal, county or state
buildings, as they do to private buildings, except as may be
otherwise specifically provided for by statute or ordinance.
(A) The Office of Building Commissioner is hereby created and the
executive official in charge shall be known as the "Building
Commissioner."
(B) The Building Commissioner shall be appointed as required by law. His
appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory
service. He shall not be removed from office except for cause after full
opportunity has been given him to be heard on specific charges.
(C) During a temporary absence or disability of the Building Commissioner,
the appointing authority shall designate an Acting Building
Commissioner.
(A) The Building Commissioner shall have general charge and supervision
of the erection, construction, alteration, repair, removal and inspection
of all buildings, structures, or portions thereof and accessories thereto,
within the City, and to enforce all ordinances relating thereto.
(B) The Building Commissioner shall examine all plans for building permit
purposes. He shall have charge of building inspections on all buildings,
structures, or portions thereof in connection with work that has been
authorized by a permit.
(C) The Building Commissioner shall perform such further duties as the
Building Ordinance requires.
§ 21.50 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.54
1:638
Deputy Building Commissioners as fully and effectually as if each and all of
said officers were specifically designated and named in lieu of the title or
phrase.
§ 21.55. Authority to enter premises.
Building officers are hereby empowered to lawfully enter upon any premises
or into any building or structure or portion thereof (upon showing their
badge of office) when necessary to do so in the performance of any duty
imposed upon them by the Building Ordinance; and it is hereby made
unlawful for any person or persons to hinder or prevent or to attempt to
hinder or prevent building officers from so doing. Any person or persons
hindering or attempting to hinder, resisting or attempting to resist any
building officer in the performance of duty shall be charged with resisting
an officer; and the person or persons convicted of such offense shall be
subject to the general penalty provided for violations of the Building
Ordinance.
§ 21.56. Personal liability of building officers.
In all cases where any action is taken by the building officers, or any other
officers of the said City, to enforce the provisions of any of the sections
in the Building Ordinance, or to enforce the provisions of any of the laws
of said City (whether such action is taken in pursuance of the express
provisions of such selections or laws, or in a case where discretionary power
is given by the Building Ordinance or said laws), such acts shall be done
in the name of, and on behalf of, the City of Hometown and the officers, in
so acting for said City, do not thereby render themselves liable personally,
and they are hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that
may accrue to persons or property as a result of any such act committed
or permitted (in good faith) in the discharge of their duty; and any suit
brought against the officers by reason thereof shall be defended by the law
department of said City until final termination of the proceedings therein.
§ 21.57. Building permit required.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any persons, firm or corporation to
commence or to perform or engage in any work in connection with the
construction, erection, enlargement, remodeling, altering, repairing,
raising, lowering, underpinning, moving or wrecking of any building,
structure or portion thereof without having first made application to and
secured the necessary permit therefor, and any person, firm or corporation
so doing shall be subject to the general penalty for violation of the Building
Ordinance. The building permit shall carry with it the right to install any
crane, derrick, material elevator, heating or lighting apparatus, inside the
lot line, which may be required for temporary use during the progress of the
work.
§ 21.54 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.58
1:639
§ 21.58. Permit waived for ordinary repairs.
A permit will not be demanded for ordinary repair work incidental to the
upkeep of a building or structure; provided there is not contemplated, or
involved, any change in the classification or any increase in fire hazard
thereof; nor the removal of any supporting wall, column, post, truss, girder
or beam; nor installing, closing or changing any stair, stairwell, fire escape,
scuttle, skylight, door, window, or other means of communication, ingress,
egress, ventilation or for the admission of sunlight; nor changing the
number, location or connections of the fixtures, traps, vents, waste, soil,
or drain pipes of the plumbing system; nor changing the number, location
or connections of the fixtures of the lighting system; nor changing to a
different system of heating, lighting, or ventilating; nor reshingling or
recovering of roofs or the renewing of the exterior woodwork of any frame
building, structure, or portion thereof. Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted or construed to allow any work included in the permit
exemptions thereof, to be done in any manner contrary to the requirements
of the Building Ordinance and other laws or ordinances. Violations of this
chapter in any work not required to be done under a permit shall be subject
to the general penalty of this chapter the same as if a permit had been
required.
§ 21.59. Duration of building permits.
Any building permit issued pursuant to this chapter under which no work
shall have been commenced within six months from the date of issuance
thereof shall expire automatically by limitation and may not be extended or
renewed; and unless such permit is surrendered to the City Clerk within
two months after its expiration for such cause, the fees paid therefor shall
be forfeited to the City. Any building permit issued hereunder shall expire
automatically upon a cessation of work for more than two months.
§ 21.60. Issuance of permits.
Permits authorized to be issued and required to be obtained under the
Building Ordinance shall be issued by the Mayor and Building
Commissioner when the application therefor and the plans submitted
therewith shall have been approved by the Building Commissioner and the
Board of Building Appeals (where required), but this section shall not be
construed to require the issuance of any permit in violation of the laws and
ordinances of the City.
§ 21.61. Application for permit.
When any person, firm, or corporation shall be desirous of constructing,
erecting, enlarging, remodeling, repairing, raising, underpinning, moving,
or wrecking any building, structure, or portion thereof, he, they or it shall
make a written application therefor upon the blank forms furnished for such
purpose. This application shall be filed in duplicate with the City Clerk, and
shall set forth the following:
§ 21.58 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.61
1:640
(A) Requirements.
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the real estate, the
permanent index number, and the volume and item on the general
tax roll upon which the proposed work is to be performed.
(3) The names and addresses of the general contractors and
subcontractors to whom contracts have been let.
(4) The location of the proposed work, that is, the house number
assigned by the City to the site upon which the building, structure
or portion thereof is to be constructed, erected, enlarged,
remodeled, repaired, raised, underpinned, moved or wrecked, as
the case may be; the distance in feet of the nearest building on the
same street and the distance in feet of the nearest building in any
direction.
(5) The purpose for which the structure is to be used.
(6) The length, width and height thereof.
(7) Whether a basement or attic are contained therein.
(8) The estimated cost of the work to be done under the permit sought,
including architectural fees and reasonable contractor's margin of
profit.
(9) Permission to allow the Building Commissioner or his deputy to
enter upon the premises for inspection.
(B) The following will be submitted with the application if requested by the
Building Commissioner:
(1) The name and address of the architect, structural engineer or other
persons permitted by law of the state to make plans, who has
prepared the plans and specifications accompanying the
application.
(2) The number of rooms and the length, width, height and floor area
thereof.
(3) The number of plumbing fixtures specified.
(4) Method or system by which the building or structure is to be heated
and ventilated.
(5) The materials required as follows:
(a) Number of cubic feet of stone.
(b) Number of thousand bricks.
(c) Cubic yards of concrete.
§ 21.61 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.61
1:641
§ 21.62. Plans and specifications not required.
The Building Commissioner may issue permits for the erection in the
application and not accompanied by drawings, and this shall apply also
to alterations and repairs of buildings, whenever, in the judgment of the
Building Commissioner, drawings and specifications are not necessary to
show the full character of the work to be done.
§ 21.63. Plans and specifications to be filed in duplicate.
The number of drawings and specifications required to be submitted shall
be duplicate sets of the architect's general drawings and duplicate sets
of the complete specifications. Each set of drawings shall consist of a
foundation and footing plan, basement or cellar plan, the plans of all floors
and roofs, a transverse and a longitudinal section, at least two elevations
and the necessary framing plans to show the complete framing of the
building or structure. Such other plans shall be filed as may be required,
(d) Square yards of plastering.
(e) Square feet of concrete flooring, walks, and driveways.
(f) Board feet of lumber.
(6) The application shall be accompanied by a correct plat in duplicate,
drawn to scale, of the lot or lots composing the site, showing the
exact location of the proposed building and any building already
located on the lot or lots involved; as well as the building adjacent
to the lot lines of the lots involved. The application shall also be
accompanied by plans and specifications certified in the manner
hereinafter required.
(7) An agreement by the owner, his duly authorized agent, architect, or
structural engineer that he will, if granted the permit applied for,
construct the work in accordance with the descriptions set forth in
the application and plans and specifications accompanying such
application; and that the general and detailed work connected with
such construction, erection, enlargement, remodeling, repair,
raising, underpinning, moving or wrecking of any such building,
structure or portion thereof, as the case may be, shall be done in
strict compliance with the ordinances of the City and the provisions
of the permit.
(8) A provision that contractor or homeowner, at his own expense,
shall provide a dumpster of sufficient capacity to contain debris
during construction, the removal of said debris and other waste
material from the site.
(9) In case only a shall building is being constructed by contractor,
proof of financial ability of owner to complete construction of the
building according to plans.
§ 21.61 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.63
1:642
in the opinion of the Building Commissioner, to illustrate the features of
construction and equipment of the building, structure referred to.
§ 21.64. Plan and specification requirements.
All plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 1/4
of an inch to the foot. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately
figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the front and
side lot lines and the lines and the entire sewerage and drain pipes and
the location of all plumbing fixtures within such building. The dimensions of
the structural members shall be given on the drawings, whether shown in
the specifications or not. The specifications shall describe all the materials
to be used in the proposed building. Each set of plans presented shall be
approved by the Building Commissioner before a permit will be granted. No
permit shall be granted or plans approved unless such plans are prepared
and sealed by such persons as are permitted, by law, to make plans for
buildings.
§ 21.65. Professional certification of plans.
It shall be unlawful for any architect, structural engineer or other person
permitted under the laws of the state to make plans to prepare or submit to
the Building Commissioner for his approval any final plans for any building
or structure which do not comply with all laws and ordinances. It shall be
the duty of the Building Commissioner to require that all plans submitted
to him for approval for any building or structure shall be accompanied by
a certificate of such architect, structural engineer or such other person
preparing such plans that the plans submitted comply with all laws and
ordinances. The architect's seal shall be affixed.
§ 21.66. Alteration of stamped plans prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to erase, alter or modify any lines, figures or coloring
contained upon such drawings so stamped by the Building Commissioner or
filed with him for reference. If, during the progress of the work authorized,
it is desired to deviate from the terms of the application or drawings in
any manner affecting the construction or other essentials of the building,
notice of such intention to alter or deviate shall be given to the Building
Commissioner, and his written assent shall first be obtained before such
alteration or deviation may be made.
§ 21.67. Permit, plans and specifications on job site.
The permit issued for any work to which the Building Ordinance is
applicable, together with a set of the approved plans and specifications, if
any, must be kept on the job while the work is in progress; and must be
shown for inspection on request of any building officer. Inability or refusal
to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute sufficient cause
for stopping either all or such portion of the work as may be involved in the
violation.
§ 21.63 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.68
1:643
§ 21.68. Plans and specifications to remain on file.
One or more copies, as may be required by the Building Commissioner, of
the plans and specifications as finally stamped and approved shall be left on
file in the office of said Commissioner. Complete plans and specifications of
buildings of a public character for which permits are granted shall remain
on file permanently in said Commissioner's office. It shall not be obligatory
upon said Commissioner to retain plans and specifications for buildings or
structures, except those of a public character, for more than six months
after the completion or occupation of any such building or structure.
§ 21.69. Payment of fees required for permit validity.
No permit issued for constructing, erecting, enlarging, remodeling,
altering, repairing, raising, lowering, underpinning, moving or wrecking
buildings, structures or portions thereof, or any permit for which a fee is
prescribed by the City ordinances, shall be in force until the fees prescribed
therefor shall have been paid to the City Clerk and such Clerk's receipt
thereof shall have been stamped on such permit.
§ 21.70. Construction in compliance with approved plans required;
authority to stop work.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or architect or for any
contractor or builder engaged in constructing, erecting, enlarging,
remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering, underpinning,
moving or wrecking any building, structure or portion thereof to make
any departure from the plans as approved by the Building
Commissioner without first obtaining the written consent of the Mayor
and the Building Commissioner to such changes. Any such departure
from the approved plans involving a violation of the requirements of any
law or ordinance or any such change in the plans or construction
without the consent of the Mayor and the Building Commissioner being
obtained, as required herein, shall operate to annul the permit which
has been issued for such work and shall render the same void.
(B) In case any work is done under a permit authorizing the erection,
alteration or repair of a building or structure, which work is contrary to
the approved plans, or to any law or ordinance, any one of the Building
Commissioner and his deputies, the Mayor and City Attorney shall have
the power to at once stop such work and to order all persons engaged
therein to stop and desist therefrom. Such work shall not be resumed
until satisfactory assurance has been given the Building Commissioner
that it will be done lawfully and according to the approved plans or until
said Building Commissioner has consented, in writing, to the changes
made in such approved plans, in either of which cases a new permit
must be issued before work proceeds, for which permit the usual fee
shall be paid by the contractor doing such work.
(C) No contractor or builder shall begin any work on any building or
structure for which a permit is required until such permit shall have
§ 21.68 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.70
1:644
§ 21.71. Revocation of permit; conditions for reissuance.
If the work in, upon or about any building or structure shall be conducted
in violation of any law or ordinance, it shall be the duty of the Building
Commissioner to revoke the permit for the building or wrecking operations
in connection with which such violation shall have taken place. It shall
be unlawful, after the revocation of such permit, to proceed with such
building or wrecking operations unless such permit shall first have been
reinstated or reissued by the Mayor. Before a permit so revoked may be
lawfully reissued, the entire building and building site shall first be put into
condition corresponding with the requirements of all laws and ordinances,
and any work or material applied to the same in violation of any of the
provisions of any law or ordinance shall first be removed from such building,
and for such permit as reissued the fee required shall be paid.
§ 21.72. through § 21.79. (Reserved)
been issued. In case any work is begun on the erection, alteration,
repair or removal of any building or structure without a permit
authorizing the same being issued therefor, the Building Commissioner
and his deputies, the Mayor and City Attorney shall have power to at
once stop such work and to order any and all persons engaged therein
to stop and desist therefrom until the proper permit is issued.
§ 21.70 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.72
1:645

ARTICLE 7
Board of Building Appeals
§ 21.80. Purpose and creation.
A Board of Building Appeals is hereby established to protect public health,
and promote public safety, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity,
aesthetic values and general welfare, and to prevent exterior design of
buildings that would have an adverse effect on adjacent and neighboring
areas; to prevent building design that would be architecturally unsuitable;
to encourage the aesthetic development of the community, protect the value
of existing development and preserve the tax base of the City and also
to grant the right of appeal to any person aggrieved by an order of a
City officer in the enforcement of the Building Code and minimum housing
standards or the issuance or denial of a permit or other justifiable cause.
§ 21.81. Members; term of office; meetings; rules of procedure.
§ 21.82. Filing of appeals; fee. [Amended 4-25-2006 by Ord. No.
5-2006]
(A) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall act as the Board of Building Appeals
and shall hear all appeals under Article 16 of Chapter 22, Zoning, of the
City Code.
(B) One of the members of said Board shall be designated by the Mayor,
with the consent of the City Council of the City of Hometown, as
Chairman of said Board and shall hold said office as Chairman until a
successor is appointed.
(C) Regular meetings of the Board of Building Appeals shall be held once a
month, special meetings may be held at the call of the Chairman and at
such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman of the
Building Committee of the City Council shall be notified of the time and
place of all meetings of the Board. All meetings of the Board shall be
open to the public.
(D) The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure with the advice and
consent of the City Council, a copy of which and all recommendations
thereto shall be filed in the office of the Building Commissioner.
(E) Board actions shall be by the affirmative vote of three Board members,
and the Board shall keep minutes of all official meetings. The minutes of
the Board shall be open to public examination during the business
hours of the City. Copies of all findings, orders, and decisions of the
Board shall be transmitted to the City Council for its information and
records.
(A) An order of the Building Commissioner specifying a violation or
violations will clearly indicate thereon the avenue of appeal open the
violators. Appeals may be taken to the Board of Building Appeals by any
§ 21.80 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.82
1:647
§ 21.83. Hearings.
The Board of Building Appeals shall fix a time and place for the hearing of
appeals, not to exceed 30 days from the date of filing an appeal. Notice of
the time and place of the hearing shall be sent by mail to the appellant or to
his attorney of record and such hearing shall not be less than 10 days after
the mailing of the notice.
§ 21.84. Powers.
person aggrieved by any decision of the Building Commissioner or
other officers in the enforcement of the Building Code or minimum
housing standards. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the
decision is rendered by filing with the City Clerk a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds therefor, and by depositing with such
Commissioner the sum of $25 as docket fee. If a decision appealed
is affirmed, the docket fee previously deposited by the appellant shall
be forfeited and the money shall be paid into the City treasury. If the
decision appealed shall be reversed or modified, then said docket fee
shall be refunded to the appellant.
(B) The City Clerk shall forthwith submit to the Board and Building
Commissioner a copy of this notice of appeal, together with all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is
taken.
(A) The Board of Building Appeals shall have jurisdiction under this code to
hear appeals against any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Building Commissioner or other City officers in the
enforcement of the Building Code and the minimum housing standards.
The Board may recommend to reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may
recommend to modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from and may recommend such order or
requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made.
(B) The Board, on request, is empowered to review and approve or
disapprove any specific plan for buildings and structures to be erected,
moved into the City, remodeled or structurally altered in the City of
Hometown, subject to final approval of the City Council.
(C) All applications for building permits that are a departure in appearance
or structural principal from plans previously approved by the Board
shall be referred to the Board and the City Council for approval before a
permit is issued. It shall be the duty of the Board to examine all such
plans for conformance with the Building Code and minimum housing
standards.
(D) The action or recommendation of the Board shall be sent to the City
Council within 10 days.
§ 21.82 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.84
1:648
§ 21.85. Effect of appeal.
§ 21.86. through § 21.89. (Reserved)
(E) The Board of Appeals shall act as a Building Committee under Article
11 of this chapter where no Building Committee is functioning under
Article 11 filed in the Torrens office.
(F) No action of the Board shall become effective until approved by the City
Council.
(G) The powers granted by this code to the Board shall be in addition to
those conferred upon it by other ordinances. Any decision or action
under this code shall be subject to review in any court of competent
jurisdiction. In no case shall the appellant be liable for any expense or
costs of surveys, investigations or hearings of the Board.
(A) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Building Commissioner shall certify to the
Board subsequent to the filing of any notice of appeal that by reason of
the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to
life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
(B) It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner to furnish the Board of
Building Appeals with copies of reports of any or all inspections made
by such officer in the matter on appeal and to furnish such other
information as may be available to him and requested by this Board.
§ 21.84 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.86
1:649

ARTICLE 8
Eaves and Second Story Additions
[Amended 10-11-2016 by Ord. No. 6-2016]
§ 21.90. Requirements.241
All roofs will have an eave (excluding gutters) extending a minimum of 20
inches beyond the outside wall. An eave is that portion of a roof projection
beyond the wall which casts off water falling on the roof. Eaves that are an
extension of an existing eave will match the existing eave. Eaves (excluding
gutters) along the party wall line will remain a minimum of 16 inches
from the party wall line. For room additions only, all eaves shall extend a
minimum of 12 inches and no more than 24 inches beyond the outside wall.
§ 21.91. Second floor additions; construction standards.
In addition to the relevant provisions in Chapter 21, the following
regulations shall apply to the construction of all second floor additions:
§ 21.92. through § 21.99. (Reserved)
(A) A second story addition may extend from the original building's front
wall to the rear wall.
(B) The second story addition should have a roof pitch of not less than a
three-inch rise for each twelve-inch horizontal measurement.
(C) The second floor addition cannot cantilever beyond the front wall. The
existing eaves on the original first floor at the front wall, including any
gables that are extending with the existing eaves, must remain as an
architectural enhancement to help preserve the appearance of the
duplex neighbor. This requirement also applies to the U-shaped original
three-bedroom homes. The front wall for this type of duplex shall be the
courtyard wall and not the protruding third bedroom on the front of the
home.
(D) Architectural drawings showing front elevations for review and
approval by the Building Department will be required without
exception.
(E) With L-shaped corner houses, the address will determine the front of
the house, not which way the front door faces. This allows a corner
house to cantilever or extend beyond the side wall facing the street. The
lot width will determine the distance it can extend on this side.
(F) All second floor roof gutters must be pitched to drain to the front of the
house. Corner house second floor addition gutters can drain to either
the front or side of the house facing either street.
241. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.90 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.92
1:651

ARTICLE 9
Garages
§ 21.100. Attached and built-in garages.
§ 21.101. One-story detached garages.
One-story detached garages shall comply with construction requirements
for one-story dwellings, with the following exceptions:
§ 21.102. Heaters in detached garages.
Separate heating units of the hanging type and approved space heaters may
be installed in detached garages. All such units must meet the following
requirements:
(A) Construction of attached and built-in garages shall be same as that
required for the dwelling.
(B) If door opening occurs between the garage and dwelling, a six-inch curb
at the door shall be provided or the garage floor shall be constructed six
inches lower than the adjoining floor.
(C) Installation of a house heating unit or other fuel-burning appliance in a
garage space is permitted. A partition shall be installed between the
space containing the house heating unit and the garage space [see
Subsection (C)].
(D) Wood frame walls and doors common to dwelling and garage shall be
finished on the garage side to be one-hour fire-resistive construction.
Where rooms occur over a garage, the ceiling and all walls shall be onehour
fire-resistive construction.
(A) The bottom of concrete footings of frame garages, unless supported on
a slab, shall be not less than 18 inches below natural grade.
(B) Studs shall have maximum spacing 16 inches o.c. Doubling of studs is
not required on jambs of openings less than 36 inches wide.242
(A) All heaters shall be equipped with a positive off action device.
(B) All heaters shall comply with other requirements of this Building Code
and the Fire Code pertaining to their construction and installation.
(C) Heaters with chimneys shall be installed through the roof and extend
upward at least one foot above the ridge line. Such chimneys shall be
glass-lined or equivalent material.
(D) Heaters shall be installed so that there is dry wallboard of at least 5/8
inch thickness which extends at least four feet beyond the sides of the
242. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2). Former Subsection (c), Two-and-a-half and two-car detached garages, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 9-2004.
§ 21.100 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.102
1:653
§ 21.103. Roof pitch.
All garage roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 4/2 inches and a maximum
pitch of 5/12 inches.
§ 21.104. Fences.
No fences shall be placed between garages on adjoining lots.
§ 21.105. through § 21.109. (Reserved)
heater or around it, in back thereof, and four feet by eight feet above
the heater. Such drywall shall be made of material with fire resistance
of at least one hour.
(E) The requirements of this section shall apply to all existing heaters.
(F) No heaters shall be installed without a permit.
(G) The permit fee for each heater installed shall be $25. [Amended
4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
(H) The use of house heating units, wood-burning heaters, or heaters using
propane gas is not permitted.
(I) Natural gas heaters, electric, gas space heaters or oil heaters will be
allowed.
(J) Where gas is used, there shall be a shut-off valve at the unit.
(K) Where an electric heater is used, a separate circuit shall be installed,
with the proper size fuse or circuit breaker. A disconnecting means
shall be provided at the unit.
(L) Where oil is used, storage of oil shall conform to § 21.150.
§ 21.102 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.105
1:654
ARTICLE 10
Tool Sheds
§ 21.110. Size, construction and location.
Tool sheds shall not be less than seven feet by five feet nor exceed 10 feet by
12 feet in area nor nine feet in height; shall be of metal or wood frame and
siding bolted to a concrete slab; shall have a minimum of a four-inch poured
concrete floor on undisturbed solid or solid compact fill with the top slab
three inches above grade, are not to be attached to any existing building
or structure, and are to be located on the premises or lot not less than five
feet from the rear lot line and not less than two feet from the duplex side lot
lines. Tool sheds are permitted to be erected where a garage is constructed
on the premises or where a garage is subsequently erected thereon.
§ 21.111. Roof and color.
The roof type, the apron or walk, and the piers are optional. Color is
optional except where it is located on a garage site, in which case color shall
correspond to the house color.
§ 21.112. Electrical requirements.
Electrical work shall comply with requirements set forth for garages.
§ 21.113. through § 21.119. (Reserved)
§ 21.110 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.113
1:655

ARTICLE 11
Property Development
§ 21.120. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure the most appropriate development
and improvement of each building site within the City and to protect the
owners of the buildings erected thereon against such improper use of
surrounding building sites as will depreciate the value of their property,
to guard against the erection thereon of poorly designed or proportioned
structures and structures built of improper or unsuitable materials; to
obtain harmonious color schemes; to ensure the highest and best
development of said property; to prevent haphazard and inharmonious
improvement of building sites; to secure and maintain proper setbacks from
streets, and adequate free spaces between structures; and in general to
provide adequately for a high type and quality of improvement in said
property and thereby to enhance the values of investments made by
purchasers of building sites therein and buildings erected thereon.
§ 21.121. Garages. [Amended 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 9-2004]
A garage may be erected upon each building site, not exceeding 18 feet in
width and 22 feet in length. In no event shall the dimensions of the garage
exceed 396 square feet. The garage should be located at least two feet
from the driveway side lot line and five feet from the rear lot line, except
when deemed impractical or an undue hardship by the Building Committee.
Under no circumstances shall a garage be erected that extends beyond
the building line of the adjoining property. No shed, shack or lean-to may
be erected against the garage or residential unit or on any other portion
of the building site, except that tool sheds may be permitted. The plan
and location of any structure to be erected is first to be submitted to the
Building Commissioner for a written permit before construction is started.
The plan shall be required to show the location of the garage upon the lot
and to show that the material used shall conform to the color, type, size and
design of all similar materials used in the construction of the residential
unit of said lot. No garage shall be erected which violates the maximum lot
coverage requirements contained in Chapter 22, Zoning, of the City Code.
§ 21.122. Side drives.
A side drive may be installed and constructed of concrete, or asphalt, solid
type, and shall conform to the grade of the existing ground. No vehicles
are to be parked on any part of the lots except that part designated for
driveways and/or garages; that part of the lots designated for driveways
and garages shall not be used for parking of any vehicles until and unless
finished with concrete or asphalt as hereinbefore stated. A concrete curb
may be installed down the middle of the driveway, of the following
dimensions: four inches in height by four inches wide. Curb shall be formed
and poured as one unit, and shall be feathered from four inches to zero at a
point where it reaches the front of the house. The curb shall be secured by
§ 21.120 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.122
1:657
steel bars driven into the ground at least one foot at a reasonable distance
between iron rods to ensure no side motion of the curb. If the curb is
installed on one side of the driveway only, it shall be installed wholly on
that owner's property; if the curb is simultaneously installed by both owners
on the property line, then each shall give the other written consent and
approval.
§ 21.123. Vestibules.
A vestibule, not more than one story in height, which shall not extend
beyond the confines of the present front or rear stoop, may be erected by
any owner of any residential unit, only if the owner of the attached, adjacent
dwelling unit shall simultaneously erect a similar vestibule of the same
design and construction; provided, however, that no such vestibule may be
erected unless and until the plans therefor shall have first been approved in
writing by the Building Committee. This shall not apply to duplex units not
symmetrical in front appearance.
§ 21.124. Trailers and outbuildings.
No trailer, tent, shack, barn or other outbuilding may be erected or
maintained on a building site, other than a garage.
§ 21.125. Easement over lot line.
A perpetual easement over the lot line on which a party wall is built is
hereby granted for the purpose of repair and maintenance of the front
and rear exterior walls, together with any existing or future roof overhang,
eaves, gutters, etc., and for the right to maintain any roof, overhang, eaves
and gutter which may encroach beyond the lot line on which the party wall
is built. Where two-story additions occur, each owner shall have the right to
place a ladder in the adjoining back yard to maintain the building along the
party lot line.
§ 21.126. Fences.
(A) Residential. Fences may be erected to a maximum height of six feet and
a minimum height of not less than three feet. No fence or wall shall be
permitted to extend nearer to any street than the minimum building
setback line, and in the case of a corner building, setback lines on both
streets must be observed; provided, however, that a hedge or mass
planting shall be permitted within the lot lines of each building site,
provided that said hedge or planting shall not exceed 36 inches in width
or 30 inches in height; and provided, further, that a fence may be
erected from the front of the house or minimum setback line to the front
of the garage.
(1) Fences from the rear of the original constructed home to the front
of the original constructed home may not exceed four feet in
height, and fences from the rear of the original constructed home
to the front of the garage in the rear of the original constructed
§ 21.122 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.126
1:658
home may not exceed six feet in height. Fences from the rear of
the garage to the rear lot line may not exceed six feet in height.
Fences from the rear lot line along the property line to the rear of
the home shall not exceed six feet in height. Fences across the rear
property line may not exceed six feet in height. All fences shall be
on a common property line when such fence borders on separately
owned or divided parcels. All gates in fences shall be the same
height as the fence.243
(2) Rear lot line fences abutting the Wabash Railroad right-of-way may
be erected to a maximum height of eight feet and a minimum
height of not less than three feet.
(3) Where there exists a fence along rear lot lines or party lines in a
rear yard, a second fence shall not be installed parallel to an
existing fence. [See Subsection (C) for further exceptions in the
case of patio fences.]
(B) Other exceptions to height. Residential lots with rear lot lines or side lot
lines adjacent to playgrounds, public or parochial school grounds,
major highways that border or pass through the City, or developed
districts other than residential may have fences erected on such lot
lines to a maximum height of six feet of the type indicated herein,
except that fences along railroad rights-of-way may not exceed eight
feet in height.
(C) Patio fences.
(1) Patio fences may be erected in rear yards only to a height of six feet
(or average of six feet for stepped fencing) extending a maximum of
10 feet from the rear wall of the original building parallel to and
along the party lot line of duplex houses. Such fence may be of
wood materials, pierced masonry or ornamental iron with optional
openings. In the case of a stepped fence, no portion shall be higher
than the bottom of the facia board of the original construction, and
the highest point shall be placed adjacent to the building.
(2) The fence may be located on the party lot line if agreed to and
erected by the mutual owners; each to give the other a letter of
consent and approval.
(D) Swimming pool fences. All private residential swimming pools shall be
completely enclosed by a fence for the protection of the public. All fence
openings or points of entry into the pool area shall be equipped with
gates. The fence and gates shall be a minimum of 48 inches in height.
All gates shall be equipped with self-locking and self-latching devices
placed at the top of the gate and made inaccessible to small children.
Said gates shall also be capable of being securely locked when the pool
is not in use for extended periods.244
243. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.126 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.126
1:659
§ 21.127. Uniformity of colors and exterior. [Amended 3-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 1-2002; 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. 6-2002; 8-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 9-2006; 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 13-2010; 11-22-2011 by Ord.
No. 6-2011; 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 5-2014]
(E) Materials; construction; spikes.
(1) Fences may be of steel chain-link fencing of standard manufacture,
wood fence of an approved type, wood pickets or vinyl. All pickets,
planks, or boards may be separated by optional size openings.
Decorative slats may be inserted in chain-link fencing for
privacy.245
(2) Electric fences, barbed-wire fences, any fence which has spikes,
barbs, sharply pointed pickets, sharp projections, or sharp
protrusions are prohibited, except that barbed wire is permitted on
top of fencing around high-voltage or high-tension wires
maintained by a public utility or the top of fencing on any property
owned or occupied by a unit of government; provided that the
lower edge of the barbed wire is not less than eight feet above the
ground level.
(3) No fence, wall, or any other material, except herbage, shall be
allowed on property lines between the house as originally
constructed and the street.
(F) Design. All fence designs are subject to the approval of the Building
Commissioner.
(G) Division fence rights. The cost of construction, installation, and making
repairs and rights over a division fence shall be governed by 765 ILCS
130/0.01 et seq.
(H) Permit. All fences replaced or newly installed shall have a permit prior
to installation. The permit fee shall be $25. [Amended 4-25-2006 by
Ord. No. 5-2006]
(I) Applicability. The provisions of this section govern fences in commercial
districts, nonconforming uses, and special uses where applicable.
(A) The exterior of all duplex residential structures, including windows,
casements, treatments, awnings, doors, roofs, siding, trim, and any
other component visible from the exterior of the structure, shall be
uniform in color, appearance and shall require joint and simultaneous
treatment by the owners of both residential units comprising the
structure. The intent and purpose of the foregoing restrictions is to
244. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
245. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.126 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.127
1:660
§ 21.128. Storage pods. [Added 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 12-2006]
Upon application and payment of $15, an applicant is permitted to have
on his property a storage pod, or any similar temporary structure used for
the storage of articles by persons residing or moving into the property, for
a period not to exceed 30 days. No extensions, above and beyond the 30
days provided for in this section, shall be permitted. No storage pod, or any
portion of that structure, shall be placed within 15 feet of the front yard
property line. For purposes of this section, the front yard property line shall
mean the curbline separating the street and the property.
§ 21.129. (Reserved)
establish and maintain an outward appearance of one home unit under
single ownership.246
(B) Notwithstanding the foregoing, new roofs shall have reasonable
similarity as determined by the Building Commissioner. Architectural
shingles may be used on the same duplex as three-tab shingles,
provided the color of the architectural shingles matches the color of the
three-tab shingles.
(C) The color of the windows must be identical. A window may be three
inches higher or wider than the window it is replacing.
(D) In the event two owners cannot agree on the color or appearance of the
exterior, the Building Committee shall act as arbitrator for the two
owners. The owners shall abide by the Building Committee's decision,
or alternatively, the owners may return to the original color
combination.
(E) Replacement siding is allowed on the driveway side and rear of any
duplex, but such siding must match existing colors of the owner and
house neighbor.247
(F) Only duplexes are allowed to install replacement siding on the owner's
part of the whole house, without the owner of the other part of the
single structure doing the same, but such siding must match the color
of the owner of the other half.248
246. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
247. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
248. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.127 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.129
1:661

ARTICLE 12
Plumbing Code
§ 21.130. Adoption of Plumbing Code. [Amended 6-2004 by Ord. No.
10-2004; 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2-2007; 7-26-2016 by Ord. No.
4-2016]
§ 21.131. Licensed plumber required.249
No person shall contract for plumbing and no plumbing contractor shall
do plumbing work in the City of Hometown unless he shall be currently
certified as a "certified plumbing contractor" by the State of Illinois under
the Illinois Plumbing License Law (225 ILCS 320/0.01 et seq.). No person
and no employee of a certified plumbing contractor shall engage in
plumbing work in the City unless he shall be licensed as a plumber or
apprentice in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing License Law.
§ 21.132. Plumbing inspection.
All plans for the installation, removal, alteration or repair of plumbing
work in the City shall be inspected by a certified plumbing contractor or
licensed plumber licensed by the State of Illinois under the jurisdiction and
supervision of the Building Commissioner.
§ 21.133. Inspection fees; permit required.
(A) The Illinois Plumbing Code, as promulgated by the Illinois Department
of Public Health at 77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 890, is hereby adopted as the
Plumbing Code of the City with the following changes, additions or
insertions:
(1) Appendix A, Table A:
(a) Approved Materials for Water Service Pipe shall be as
permitted by Table 29 (18-29-605.4) of the Chicago Plumbing
Code.
(b) Approved Materials for Water Distribution Pipe shall be as
permitted by Table 29 (18-29-605.5) of the Chicago Plumbing
Code.
(c) Approved Standards for Fittings shall be as permitted by Table
29 (18-29-605.6) of the Chicago Plumbing Code.
(B) Any amendments to the Illinois Plumbing Code or the Chicago
Plumbing Code after July 1, 2016, shall be effective in the City upon
their effective date.
249. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.130 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.133
1:663
§ 21.134. Reinspection fee. [Amended 4-25-2006 by Ord. No.
5-2006]
Where extra inspections are made because of inaccurate or incorrect
information, failure to make necessary repairs or faulty construction, a
charge of $25 shall be made for each such inspection.
§ 21.135. Misuse of plumber's name.
All applications shall be in the name of a certified plumbing contractor and
his PCC number shall be stated on the application. It shall be unlawful for
any such certified plumbing contractor to allow his name to be used by any
other person, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining a permit or
to do plumbing work. It shall be unlawful for any person to represent that
he is doing plumbing work for a certified plumbing contractor when he has
not been authorized by a certified plumbing contractor to do so.
§ 21.136. Adoption of manual of procedures for processing sewer
permits.
The Manual of Procedures for the Administration of the Sewer Permit
Ordinance as adopted by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, and
the whole thereof, of which not less than three copies have been and now
are on file in the office of the Clerk, is hereby adopted as an integral part of
the procedures for the administration of sanitary sewer permits.
§ 21.137. Overhead sewers.
All new buildings with basements, floors, rooms or occupancy areas below
ground level at the building site, and served by a public or private sewer
system, shall have overhead plumbing. No building permit application will
be accepted nor any permits issued for construction of any structure unless
plans and specifications therefor provide for such overhead plumbing.
(A) In addition to the building permit fees provided by § 21.30 of this
Building Code and other charges required under this code, the certified
plumbing contractor shall, at the time the permit is issued for the
plumbing work, pay a minimum fee of $75 for up to three fixtures,
including, but not limited to, hot water tanks, washer and dryer drains,
whirlpools, hot tubs and double vanities (which count as two fixtures)
for residential units for the approval of plans, inspection, and testing of
plumbing work. An additional fee of $25 per fixture shall be paid for
every fixture over the minimum. In commercial buildings, there will be
a minimum fee of $150 for up to three fixtures, with a fee of $50 for
each additional fixture. [Amended 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
(B) No person shall do any work without a permit and no permit shall be
issued unless the applicant is qualified under this code to receive and
the permit fees paid.
§ 21.133 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.138
1:664
§ 21.138. Prohibited connections to sanitary drains.
Roof drains, foundation footing drains, parking and paved lot or area drains,
groundwater drains or surface water connections to the sanitary sewer
system are strictly forbidden in all areas. Footing drains shall be connected
to sump pumps for further discharge into the storm sewer or drainage
ditches.
§ 21.139. Compensatory fill.
No filling shall be done without a permit and no filling shall be permitted
which may adversely affect the efficiency or the capacity of the floodway
or increase flood heights. All filling shall be compensated for by at least an
equal volume of excavation in or contiguous to the floodplain so that the
volume available for storing and moving floodwaters below the high water
elevation shall not be reduced. The term "filling" as used here shall mean
structures, temporary or permanent, fill, including fills for roads and levies,
deposits, obstructions, storage of material, or other floodplain areas.
§ 21.140. Water saving regulations. [Amended 9-8-2015 by Ord. No.
10-2015]
The Plumbing Code referred to in § 21.130 is hereby amended to include
the following modifications or additions, which shall supersede all similar
regulations in the case of conflicting provisions:
(A) All new water services shall be metered. All new and replacement
plumbing fixtures shall be labeled as a WaterSense® product, as
specified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA).
(B) No potable water shall be used for the flushing of main-line sanitary
sewers.
(C) Water-saving plumbing fixtures shall be installed as follows:
(1) In all new construction and in all repair and replacement of fixtures
or trim, only fixtures and trim not exceeding the following flow
rates and water usage shall be installed. These ratings are based on
a pressure at the fixture of 40 psi to 50 psi.
(a) Water closets, tank type: 3.5 gallons per flush.
(b) Water closets, flushometer type: 3.0 gallons per flush.
(c) Urinals, tank type: 3.0 gallons per flush.
(d) Urinals, flushometer type: 3.0 gallons per flush.
(e) Shower heads: 3.0 gallons per minute.
(f) Lavatory, sink faucets: 3.0 gallons per minute.
§ 21.138 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.140
1:665
§ 21.141. Cross-connection control; backflow prevention.
(2) Lavatories for public use. In addition to the requirements of
Subsection (A) above, in all new construction and replacement of
fixtures, faucets of lavatories located in rest rooms, intended for
public use, shall be of a metering or self-closing type.
(3) Car wash installation. In all new construction and replacement of
fixtures, car-wash installations shall be equipped with a water
recycling system.
(4) Air-conditioning systems. Closed air-conditioning systems shall be
installed on all new construction or new remodeling.
(A) General policy.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
(a) To protect the public water supply system from contamination
or pollution by isolating within the customer's water system
contaminants or pollutants which could backflow through the
service connection into the public water supply system.
(b) To promote the elimination or control of existing crossconnections,
actual or potential, between the public or
consumer's potable water system and nonpotable water
systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety.
(c) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of
cross-connection control which will prevent the contamination
or pollution of the public and consumer's potable water
systems.
(2) Application. These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises
served by the public potable water supply system of the City.
(3) Policy. The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination
due to backflow or backsiphonage of contaminants through the
customer's water service connection. If, in the judgment of the
Director of Public Works (hereinafter referred to as "Director") or
his authorized representative, the City's Plumbing Inspector, an
approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of
the public water supply system, the Director shall give notice to the
customer to install such approved backflow prevention device at
each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall
immediately install such approved device or devices at his own
expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to
install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds
for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or
devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of
§ 21.140 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.141
1:666
installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in
Subsection (E)(4)(d) below for a period of at least five years. The
Director may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection
inspection report to the City's Department of Public Works to assist
in determining whether or not service line protection will be
required. All cross-connection inspections shall be conducted by a
Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector certified by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
(B) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of these regulations:
AGENCY — The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVED — Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by
the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Impacts
of the University of Southern California Association of State Sanitary
Engineers, American Water Works Association, American National
Standards Institute or certified by NSF International.250
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM — Any water source or system on or
available to the premises other than the public water supply system
and includes the water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters
may include water from another purveyor's public water supply system;
or water from a source such as wells, lakes, or streams, or process
fluids; or used water. These waters may be polluted or contaminated
or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the
water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or
substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water system from
any source other than the intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — Any device, method, or type of
construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system.
All devices used for backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the
standards of the Hometown Plumbing Code and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.251
CONSUMER or CUSTOMER — The owner, official custodian or person
in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a
public water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM — Any water system located on the
consumer's premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a
customer's water system.
CONTAMINATION — An impairment of the quality of the water by
entrance of any substance to a degree which could create a health
hazard.
250. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
251. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.141 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.141
1:667
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical connection or arrangement
between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains
potable water and the other a substance of unknown or questionable
safety or quality, whereby there may be a flow from one system into the
other.
DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION — A cross-connection formed when a
water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe
substance.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly composed of
single, independently acting check valves approved under ASSE
Standard 1015. A double check valve assembly must include tight
shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable
connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP — The unobstructed vertical distance through
the free atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood
level rim of the receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD — Any condition, device or practice in a water
system or its operation resulting from a real or potential danger to
the health and well-being of consumers. The word "severe" as used
to qualify "health hazard" means a hazard to the health of the user
that could be expected to result in death or significant reduction in the
quality of life.
INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION — A cross-connection through which
an unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise
introduced into a safe potable water system.
INSPECTION — A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and
critically all materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances
and installations of a plumbing system for compliance with
requirements of the Hometown Plumbing Code.
NONPOTABLE WATER — Water not safe for drinking, personal, or
culinary use as determined by the requirements of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.252
PLUMBING — The actual installations repair, maintenance, alteration
or extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes
all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water
for all purposes, including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems,
from the source of a private water supply on the premises or from
the main in the street, alley or at the curb to within and about any
building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble.
Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to and
including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes
all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain
and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building
252. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.141 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.141
1:668
or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble, from
the point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or
private sewage disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION — The presence of any foreign substance (organic,
inorganic, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade
its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the
water.
POTABLE WATER — Water which meets the requirements of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency for drinking, culinary, and domestic
purposes.253
POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION — A fixture or appurtenance with
threaded hose connection, tapered spout, or other connection which
would facilitate extension of the water supply line beyond its legal
termination point.
PROCESS FLUID(S) — Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentration such as would constitute a health, pollutional, or system
hazard if introduced into the public or a consumer's potable water
system. This includes, but is not limited to:
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — All mains, pipes and structures through
which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells
and well structures, intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment
plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or
severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing
water for drinking or general domestic use and which serve at least
15 service connections or which regularly serve at least 25 persons at
least 60 days a year. A public water supply is either a "community water
supply" or a "non-community water supply."
(1) Polluted or contaminated waters;
(2) Process waters;
Used waters originating from the public water supply system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
(3)
(4) Cooling waters;
Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
(5)
(6) Chemicals in solution or suspension;
Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used
in industrial or other processes or for fire-fighting purposes.
(7)
253. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.141 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.141
1:669
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE
— A device containing a minimum of two independently acting check
valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential
relief valve located between the two check valves and approved under
ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the cessation of
normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less than
the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate
to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the
supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves
located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with
properly located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The opening, including all fittings and
appurtenances at the water main through which water is supplied to
the user.
SURVEY — The collection of information pertaining to a customer's
piping system regarding the location of all connections to the public
water supply system and must include the location, type and most
recent inspection and testing date of all cross-connection control
devices and methods located within that customer's piping system. The
survey must be in written form and should not be an actual plumbing
inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD — A condition through which an aesthetically
objectionable or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter
the public water supply system or a customer's potable water system.
USED WATER — Any water supplied by a public water supply system
to a customer's water system after it has passed through the service
connection and is no longer under the control of the water supply
official custodian.
WATER PURVEYOR — The owner or official custodian of a public water
system.
(C) Water system.
(1) The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
(2) The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of
the potable water system under the control of the Director up to the
point where the consumer's water system begins.254
(3) The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the
public water supply distribution system.
254. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.141 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.141
1:670
(4) The public water supply distribution system shall include the
network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the
consumer's water system.
(5) The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the
public water supply distribution system to points of use.
(D) Cross-connection prohibited.
(1) Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or
questionable quality are prohibited except when and where
approved cross-connection control devices or methods are
installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper operation on a
continuing basis.
(2) No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or
better bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by
inspection and analysis by the Agency.
(3) There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.
(E) Survey and investigations.
(1) The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to
the approved cross-connection control device inspector for the
inspection of the presence or absence of cross-connections within
the consumer's premises, and testing, repair and maintenance of
cross-connection control devices within the consumer's premises.
(2) On request by the Director or his authorized representative, the
consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or
systems or water use within the customer's premises. The
consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
Director for the verification of information submitted by the
inspection consumer to the public water supply custodian
regarding cross-connection inspection results.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to
determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections
to his water system through which contaminants or pollutants
could backflow into his or the public potable water system. All
cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must be
conducted in accordance with all relevant statutes and regulations.
(4) It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
§ 21.141 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.141
1:671
(a) All cross-connections are removed; or approved crossconnection
control devices are installed for control of backflow
and backsiphonage.
(b) Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instruction.
(c) Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time
of installation and at least annually by a person approved by
the Agency as a cross-connection control device inspector
(CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include
physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
(d) Testing and records.
(i) Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and
at least annually or more frequently if recommended by
the manufacturer.
(ii) Records submitted to the community public water supply
shall be available for inspection by Agency personnel in
accordance with all relevant statutes and regulations.
(iii) Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of
most recent test, name of CCCDI (cross-connection control
device inspector), and type and date of repairs.255
(iv) A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
1. Date of each test;
2. Name and approval number of person performing the
test;
3. Test results;
4. Repairs or servicing required;
5. Repairs and date completed; and
6. Servicing performed and date completed.
(F) Where protection is required.
(1) An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections
to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890, and the Agency's regulations, 35 Ill. Adm. Code
681. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving
255. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.141 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.141
1:672
premises where, in the judgment of the Director, actual or potential
hazards to the public water supply system exist.256
(2) An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where
the following conditions exist:
(a) Premises having an auxiliary water supply unless such
auxiliary supply is accepted as an additional source by the
Director and the source is approved by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
(b) Premises on which any substance is handled which can create
an actual or potential hazard to the public water supply
system. This shall include premises having sources or systems
containing process fluids or waters originating from the public
water supply system which are no longer under the sanitary
control of the Director.
(c) Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the
judgment of the Director and/or the cross-connection control
device inspector, are not correctable or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether
or not cross-connectors exist.
(d) Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to
make a complete cross-connection survey.
(e) Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or reestablished.
(3) An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections
to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890, and the Agency's regulations, 35 Ill. Adm. Code
653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be
installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving,
but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless
the Director determines that no actual or potential hazard to the
public water supply system exists:
(a) Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
(b) Laboratories.
(c) Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
(d) Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or
stormwater pumping stations.
256. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.141 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.141
1:673
(e) Food or beverage processing plants.
(f) Chemical plants.
(g) Metal plating industries.
(h) Petroleum processing or storage plants.
(i) Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
(j) Car washes.
(k) Pesticide, herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
(l) Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
(G) Type of protection required.
(1) The type of protection required under Subsection (F)(2)(a), (b) or
(c) of this section shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists
as follows:
(a) An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated
with substances that could cause a severe health hazard.
(b) An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall
be installed where the public water supply system may be
contaminated with a substance that could cause a system or
health hazard.
(c) An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a
double check valve assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be polluted with substances
that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
(2) The type of protection required under Subsection F(2)(d) and (e) of
this section shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or
an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
device.
(3) Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used
for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow
preventers shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the
public water supply when:
(a) The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or
other chemicals;
(b) Water is pumped into the system from another source;
§ 21.141 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.141
1:674
(c) Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can
be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;
or
(d) There is a connection whereby another source can be
introduced into the fire safety system.
(4) All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered
service lines and a double detector check valve assembly on
unmetered service lines.
(H) Backflow prevention devices.
(1) All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules
and regulations shall be approved by the Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control and Hydraulic Impacts of the University of
Southern California, American Water Works Association, American
Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National Standards
Institute or certified by the NSF International to be in compliance
with applicable industry specifications.257
(2) Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by
the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. A
manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on-site.
(I) Inspection and maintenance.
(1) It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
installed to have inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in
accordance with the following schedule or more often where
inspections indicate a need or are specified in manufacturer's
instructions:
(a) Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to
document that a proper vertical distance is maintained
between the discharge point of the service line and the flood
level rim of the receptacle at the time of installation and at
least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or bypassed
air gaps shall be made within 24 hours.
(b) Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at
the time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and
required service performed within five days.
(c) Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies
shall be tested at the time of installation and at least annually
257. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.141 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.141
1:675
or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer, and
required service performed within five days.
(2) Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by
the Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval
shall be in writing.
(3) Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test or visual inspection, name of tester and type and date of
repairs.
(4) A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
(a) Date of each test or visual inspection;
(b) Name and approval number of person performing the test or
visual inspection;
(c) Test results;
(d) Repairs or servicing required;
(e) Repairs and date completed; and
(f) Servicing performed and date completed.
(5) Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these
regulations are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or
replaced at the expense of the consumer without delay as required
by Subsection (I)(1).
(6) Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made
inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without
specific authorization by the Director.
(J) Booster pumps.
(1) Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a lowpressure
cut-off device designed to shut off the booster pump when
the pressure in the service line on the suction side of the pump
drops to 20 psi or less.
(2) It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the lowpressure
cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the
Director, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
(K) Violations.258
(1) The Director shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to
the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein
any backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not
258. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.141 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.141
1:676
installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable
to the Director, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device
has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected crossconnection
exists on the premises, or if a low-pressure cut-off
required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in
working order.
(2) Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in
conformance with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the
Director.
(3) Neither the City of Hometown, the Director, or its agents or assigns
shall be liable to any customers of the City of Hometown for any
injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination
of said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of
this section, whether or not said termination of the water supply
was with or without notice.
(4) The consumer responsible for backsiphoned material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable
water supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or
an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device
which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of clean-up of the
potable water supply system.
(5) Any person found to be violating any provision of this section shall
be served with written notice stating the notice of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit (not to exceed 30 days) for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violation.
(6) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, in
addition to the fine provided by § 21.200, shall become liable to the
City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the City by
reason of such violation, whether the same was caused before or
after notice.
§ 21.141 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.141
1:677

ARTICLE 13
Electrical Code
§ 21.142. Adoption of Electrical Code. [Amended 6-2004 by Ord. No.
10-2004; 2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 2-2007; 7-26-2016 by Ord. No.
4-2016]
The Chicago Electrical Code (Group 27, Electrical Systems, of the Chicago
Building Code as amended to June 1, 2016) is hereby adopted as the
Electrical Code of the City with the following changes, additions or
insertions: "City of Hometown" shall be substituted for "City of Chicago."
Any amendments to the Chicago Electrical Code after July 1, 2016, shall be
effective in the City upon the date of applicability in the City of Chicago.
(A) Service entrance cable shall not be permitted. The use of aluminum
cable for electrical service is prohibited; only copper shall be used. The
cable for all grounds for new services shall go directly to the water
meter and not the nearest water pipe.
(B) The following exceptions or modifications to the Electrical Code of
Chicago concerning the installation of amateur radio or CB transmitters
and repairs and antennas are hereby adopted:
(1) No antenna shall be less than 25 feet nor more than 50 feet in
height from the ground level. No telescopic antenna shall exceed
these height limitations.
(2) All guy wires supporting antennas or components thereof shall be
of the resistor type. Guy wires may be stranded steel with propersize
resister or polypropylene wire.
(3) All low-voltage wire shall be in metal conduit.
(4) All antennas shall meet the provisions of the Electrical Code for
mounting.
(a) Roof-mounted towers and antennas shall be bolted through the
roof to a two-inch-by-four-inch cleat or better spanning at least
two roof rafters for each set of bolts at least 3/8 inch in
diameter, using flat and lock washers. Lag bolts and wood
screws shall not be used.
(b) Wand-type CB antennas mounted on the gable end of a house
or garage shall follow the same specifications for roof-mounted
towers and antennas.
(c) All antennas (including TV) shall be erected on the rear portion
of the house. No antenna shall extend toward an existing front
wall of the house more than 50% of the depth of the building
when originally constructed.
(5) No more than two antennas shall be permitted at any one address.
§ 21.142 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.142
1:679
(6) All radio transmitters shall have a filter attached to the set to
prevent transmission from interfering with adjacent TV or radio
reception.
(7) All CB transmitters shall not exceed five watts in power, and no
transmitter shall be equipped with a power booster; all said sets
shall comply with FCC regulations regarding amateur or CB radio
transmitters and receivers.
(8) No antenna, amateur or CB transmitter radio shall be installed
without first securing a permit from the Building Commissioner to
do so. Application forms shall be prepared by the Building
Commissioner and request all information necessary to ensure
compliance with this code. The installation fee for the installation
of one transmitter antenna shall be the sum of $5 plus electrical
fees.
(C) The following exceptions or modifications of the Electrical Code of
Chicago concerning the ground of new service cable are hereby
adopted:
(1) Change "Installation," Subparagraph a, to read:
(a) All grounding conductors shall be installed in rigid
metal conduit, electrical metallic tubing, flexible
conduit or armored conductor which shall connect
directly to the service disconnecting means enclosure
and extend continuously to the water meter, to which it
shall be securely connected by means of an approved
clamp. Flexible conduit and armored conductor may be
used in existing buildings for grounding purposes only
where this ground is concealed or a major portion of
the ground is concealed.
(2) Change introductory paragraph by deleting the word "electrode"
and substitute "water meter" so that the paragraph reads as
follows:
"Grounding Conductor to Water Meter" - The grounding
connection to the water meter shall be located as follows: . . .
(3) By deleting Subparagraphs a and b as now written and substituting
in lieu thereof only Subparagraph a as follows:
(a) All grounding for new services shall be directly to the
service side of the water meter and bonded to the
street side of said water meter.
(D) The City enforces a pipe code; no Romex or BX allowed.
§ 21.142 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.143
1:680
§ 21.143. Minimum standards for service changes on dwelling-type
occupancies.
The following are minimum standards for service changes on dwelling-type
occupancies (duplex and single-family homes):
§ 21.144. Exit signs and emergency lights.
Battery backup exit signs and battery backup emergency lights shall be
installed in all new commercial and public place construction or
remodeling. Placement of such apparatus shall be consulted by the Building
Department and the Fire Department and shall be of an approved type.
§ 21.145. Minimum standards for electrical apparatus when making
housing inspections.
The minimum standard set forth in the Chicago Electrical Code shall be
enforced and amended to include one-hundred-twenty-volt, single-phase
fifteen-ampere and twenty-ampere receptacles installed in the following
locations:
(A) The use of aluminum cable for electrical service is prohibited.
(B) In all grounds for new service, the cable must go directly to the water
meter and not to the nearest cold-water pipe.
(C) Division 27, Article 200-600, is amended to eliminate "grounding
electrode" and add "water meter."
(D) Division 27, Article 200-600, is amended to eliminate "electrode" and
add "water meter" and to further eliminate Items (A) and (B) of said
section. Henceforth, all grounding for the new service shall be directly
to the service side of the water meter and bonded to the street side of
the water meter.
(E) A sixteen-circuit one-hundred-amp breaker panel shall be installed.
(F) A ground jumper wire must be attached to the water meter.
(G) Each home must have its own independent riser of 2 1/2 inches of
heavy-weight pipe; or a Sam Garvin riser kit may be used. It must not be
attached to the old four-inch-by-four-inch riser. It must stand on its own.
The riser shall not have any couplings above the roof.
(H) The enforcement of ground fault interrupters will be pursued; locations
shall include bathrooms, kitchens, garages, outdoor locations and near
laundry tubs. Any receptacles installed in a crawl space, at or below
grade level and in unfinished basements shall have ground fault
protection for personnel.
(I) The use of service entrance cable is prohibited.
(J) The use of mini breakers is prohibited.
§ 21.143 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.145
1:681
§ 21.146. Electrical fees; permit required. [Amended 4-25-2006 by
Ord. No. 5-2006]
§ 21.147. Electrical sign permit fees.
The original permit fee shall cover one year. Subsequent annual
reinspection fees shall be the same as the original permit fee. Permit fees
shall be computed as follows:
(A) Installed in crawl spaces at or below grade level and in unfinished
basements shall have ground fault interrupter protection for personnel.
(B) All one-hundred-twenty-volt single-phase fifteen- and twenty-ampere
receptacles installed within six feet of a kitchen sink to serve
countertop surfaces shall have ground fault interrupter protection for
personnel.
(A) Every person, at the time an application for a permit for electrical work
is made, shall pay to the City the fees provided for electrical work set
forth in Chapter 14 in the Electrical Code of Chicago referred to in
§ 21.142, as amended. See § 21.147 for electrical sign fees.
(B) No person shall do any work without a permit and no permit shall issue
unless the applicant is qualified under this code to receive one and the
permit fees are paid. The minimum electrical permit fee shall be $50.
For cable TV, see Article 18 of this chapter.
(A) Electric signs projecting over the public way, $0.50 per square foot of
area of each face. The area of skeleton letters shall be computed as that
area within the perimeter design of the letters. No fee shall be less than
$7.50.
(B) Electric signs on private property, illuminated signs flat against a
building (flat signs), illuminated painted wall signs and illuminated
signboards.
25 nominal 50-watt or 50-volt ampere lamps or less, $7.50, plus
$0.20 for each of the next 25 lamps, plus
$0.17 for each of the next 25 lamps, plus
$0.15 for each of the next 25 lamps, plus
$0.12 for each of the next 100 lamps, plus
$0.11 for each of the next 100 lamps, plus
$0.10 for each additional lamp over 300
Fees, if lamps are other than 50 watts, 50-volt ampere units, shall be
based on the total connected load reduced to 50-volt ampere units and
the above schedule applied.
(C) Ground signs, any part of which projects over the public way, shall pay
fees as computed for projecting signs. Ground signs entirely over
§ 21.145 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.147
1:682
§ 21.148. through § 21.149. (Reserved)
private property, less than 24 feet above surrounding street level or
surrounding grade level, whichever is higher, shall pay a fee as
indicated in Subsection (B) [plus the structure fees indicated in
Subsection (C)].259
(D) Permits issued for the re-erection or alteration of any electric sign,
illumination of signboards or illumination of flat or wall signs shall be
$7.50. The fees for permits issued for illuminated signs to be erected for
a period not to exceed 30 days shall be 1/4 of the annual sign fee. No fee
shall be less than $7.50. The fee for cancellation of any permits shall be
$7.50 and shall be deducted before the remaining amount is refunded.
259. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2). This ordinance also repealed former Subsection (C), establishing fees for roof signs.
§ 21.147 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.148
1:683

ARTICLE 14
Fuel Oil Storage Tanks
§ 21.150. Use and location.
§ 21.151. through § 21.159. (Reserved)
(A) It shall be unlawful to install fuel oil storage tanks for single-family
dwelling use in excess of 275 gallons. The size of tanks for other use
shall be in size consistent with building area and use.
(B) Tanks shall not be permitted above ground except in enclosed
structures abutting the building on at least one side and extended
vertically from ground to eave of roof or parapet, being of construction
and exterior finish matching the unit to which attached. The interior
shall be finished with noncombustible and nonabsorbent materials,
cement-asbestos or similar in prototype. An electric light shall be
required within the enclosure unless an existing light provides
adequate illumination into the space. The tank shall be adequately
supported with legs on concrete or masonry units, and with fill and vent
pipes extending to the exterior in an approved manner.
(C) Buried oil tanks shall be coated with asphaltum, paint or other
protective coating, and backfilled with sand to protect coating and
provide stable position; and the top of the tank shall be a minimum of
one foot zero inches below adjoining grade.
(D) In the event of leaking tanks requiring replacement during October
through March, and the owner intends to bury the tank but is prevented
by frost, or the owner intends to convert to gas and has authorization
from the Northern Illinois Gas Company, the owner shall file notice with
the Building Commissioner and obtain written approval to permit the
tank to remain above ground until not later than May 1 following, after
which time it shall be buried or enclosed as hereinabove described, or
removed and replaced with gas fuel; or the owner shall be subject to a
fine as prescribed for violations of the Building Code.
(E) In residences with basements, the oil tank may be located in the
basement area, adequately supported on legs and vented to the
exterior; and in no case closer than 10 feet zero inches to an open flame
of any device.
(F) Oil tanks serving public assembly and commercial structures shall be
buried as described.
(G) Liquid gas tanks for residences shall be permitted, if used as interim
heating, until converting to natural gas, and are subject to location and
use restrictions as determined by the Fire Department and Building
Commissioner.
§ 21.150 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.151
1:685

ARTICLE 15
Private Residential Swimming Pools
§ 21.160. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL — A receptacle for water, or
an artificial pool of water, having a depth at any point of more than 18
inches, intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein
of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment thereto.
§ 21.161. Type; height.
No permanent, in-the-ground, swimming pools shall be allowed. The
maximum pool height of any private residential swimming pool shall be 54
inches. Restrictions shall not apply to any pool under 18 inches in height.
§ 21.162. Location.
§ 21.163. Fences.260
Swimming pool fences shall conform to the requirements of the
International Residential Code adopted by Article 1 of this chapter.
§ 21.164. Sanitary conditions.
(A) No portion of a private residential swimming pool shall be located at a
distance less than three feet from any side or rear property line or
building line, unless permission is granted in writing by the owner of
the adjacent property. Said pool must be erected on an approved
nonorganic base consisting of concrete, asphalt, or three inches of
sand.
(B) At no time in filling or draining a private residential swimming pool
shall water be allowed to pond or flood on adjacent property, and if
special outdoor lights are used in conjunction with a pool, they shall not
be placed so as to shine on adjacent property.
(A) Every private residential swimming pool of 2,500 gallons or more
capacity shall be equipped with a recirculation system, capable of
filtering the entire contents of the pool in 12 hours, or less, when the
flow is calculated at a maximum of three gallons of water per minute,
per square foot of filter area.
(B) Filters shall be capable of maintaining a reasonable clarity of pool
water and proper germicidal levels shall be maintained at all times
260. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2). See also Art. 11, § 21.126, of this chapter.
§ 21.160 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.164
1:687
§ 21.165. Electrical requirements.
§ 21.166. Inspection and use.261
No private residential swimming pool shall be made use of between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. in violation of the noise or nuisance
restrictions of the City Code. The Public Health Office shall cause periodic
inspections of private residential swimming pools to be made to determine
whether or not the provisions of this code regarding health, sanitation and
safety applicable thereto are being complied with.
§ 21.167. Permit fee. [Amended 4-25-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
All homeowners or residents who have a pool of 18 inches in height or over
shall register the same with the City Clerk at the time of its installation and
pay a fee of $25 for each pool. There shall be no annual fee for said pool.
§ 21.168. (Reserved)262
§ 21.169. (Reserved)
during pool usage to protect the health of users. A chlorine residual of
0.3 to 1.0 parts per million shall satisfy this requirement.
(C) The pH (alkalinity and acidity) of the pool water shall be maintained
between 7.0 and 8.0. Testing devices capable of accurately measuring
pH and germicidal levels shall be utilized by every owner to ensure safe
pool operations.
(D) During long periods of nonuse, all pools shall be covered with a pool
cover which completely covers the pool and extends down six inches on
all sides.
(A) No current carrying electrical conductors, including outside lights,
shall cross private residential swimming pools, either overhead or
underground, within 10 feet of such pools. A ground fault interrupter of
a breaker or receptacle type shall be required on all circuits feeding
pool equipment.
(B) All metal fences, enclosures, or railings near or adjacent to private
residential swimming pools and filter motors, which might become
electrically alive, shall have an approved driven ground with 3/4 inch
galvanized pipe or equal five feet long driven in the ground.
261. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
262. Editor's Note: Former § 21.168, Penalty, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 21.164 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.169
1:688
ARTICLE 16
Public Buildings
§ 21.170. Responsibility.
The owner, agent, occupant or person charged with the custody of any
public building, auditorium, hotel, theater, lodge hall, or church, and in the
case of schools, the President of the Board of Education or the person in
charge thereof or owning the same, shall be held liable for the equipment
and maintenance of such apparatus as is required in this article for the
maintenance and safety of all exits, stairs, doors, windows or passageways.
§ 21.171. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Safety or his assistants to
inspect all apparatus to be installed, and their location, and to make or
cause to be made periodic inspections concerning the operation and
accessibility of regular and emergency exits in all such public places.
§ 21.172. Fire appliances.
The location and number of fire appliances shall be as follows (unless
another location shall be more accessible and convenient for protection
against fires):
(A) Theaters:
(1) Stage, two one-quart chemical hand extinguishers, one on each
side of the stage; one two-and-one-half gallon chemical hand
extinguisher, readily accessible; one five-gallon hand pump; one
fire axe.
(2) Foyer: two one-quart chemical hand extinguishers, one at each end;
manager's office, one two-gallon chemical hand extinguisher or
five-gallon hand pump.
(B) Public buildings, auditoriums, lodge halls and hotels: five-gallon hand
pump and fire axe at or near the main entrance on the ground floor;
five-gallon hand pump at or near the foot of all basement stairways; two
pails in boiler room unless oil burner is used, then two-and-one-half
gallon special chemical hand extinguisher just outside boiler room
door; one-quart chemical hand extinguisher on stage, and one-quart
chemical hand extinguisher in lobby.
(C) Churches: one five-gallon pump at or near main entrances on ground
floor; one five-gallon hand pump and fire axe in boiler room.
(D) Schools: one five-gallon hand pump and fire axe at or near main
entrance on ground floor; same at head of each stairway; same in boiler
room.
§ 21.170 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.173
1:689
§ 21.173. Fire drills.
It shall be the duty of the principal or other person in charge of the pupils
in every school in the City to establish and maintain a good and efficient
fire drill, which shall be practiced at least twice a year during the time the
building is used for school purposes. A written report shall be made by the
principal or person in charge of such building of each fire drill held, and of
the time elapsed from the first fire signal until the last person was out.
§ 21.174. Removal of fire protection equipment.
It shall be unlawful to remove from its proper place any fire apparatus or
appliances except for inspection or in case of emergency.
§ 21.175. Doors.
All public buildings which may be or are used for church, school, opera
performance, theater, lecture room, hotel, public meeting or similar
purposes, or which may be or are used for the collection of people for
worship, amusement or instruction, and all buildings used for stores to
which the public is invited, shall be so built that all doors leading from the
main hall or place of assembly shall open outward; and all means of egress
for persons within such buildings shall be by means of doors which shall
open outward from the main hall and from the building.
§ 21.176. Exit lights.
In all theaters and public meeting halls a light illuminating the word "Exit"
shall be kept burning over each regular and emergency exit while the
theater or hall is occupied by an audience or by patrons.
§ 21.177. Compliance with disability and accessibility laws.
All plans for new construction and for the substantial rehabilitation of an
existing structure shall be certified as complying with the Americans with
Disabilities Act, the Illinois Accessibility Code (71 Ill. Adm. Code 400), the
White Cane Law (775 ILCS 30/1 et seq.) and any other relevant federal or
state laws.
§ 21.178. through § 21.179. (Reserved)
§ 21.173 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.178
1:690
ARTICLE 17
Dangerous Buildings
§ 21.180. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DANGEROUS BUILDING — Includes:263
§ 21.181. Nuisances.
Any such dangerous building in the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
§ 21.182. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the City, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or
person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain
in a dangerous condition, or to occupy such building or permit it to be
occupied while it is or remains in a dangerous condition.
§ 21.183. Abatement.
Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure which is
dangerous to the public health because of its condition.
(A)
Any fence or other man-made structure which, due to construction, age,
lack of proper repair or other cause, is especially liable to fire, and
creates a fire hazard.
(B)
Any building or other man-made structure which, by reason of faulty
construction, age, lack of proper repair or maintenance, is liable to
cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part
of such structure.
(C)
Any building, shed, fence or other man-made structure which, because
of its condition or because of a lack of doors or windows, is available to
and frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful
occupants of such structure.
(D)
(A) Whenever the Director of Public Safety, the Building Inspector, the Fire
Marshal, or the Health Officer shall be of the opinion that any building
or structure in the City is a dangerous building, he shall file a written
statement to this effect with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall
thereupon cause written notice to be served upon the owner thereof,
and upon the occupants thereof, if any, by registered mail or by
personal service. Such notice shall state that the building has been
declared to be in a dangerous condition, and that such dangerous
263. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.180 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.183
1:691
§ 21.184. Removal of damaged buildings.
condition must be removed or remedied by repairing or altering the
building or by demolishing it; and that the condition must be remedied
at once. Such notice may be in the following form:
"To_____ (owner/occupant) of the premises known and described as
_____, you are hereby notified that (describe building) on the above
premises has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building
after inspection by the _____ The reasons for this decision are__________
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building at once, or
the City will proceed to do so."
(B) If the person receiving such notice has not complied therewith within
10 days from the time when the notice is served upon him personally or
by registered mail, or posted on the premises, the Director of Public
Safety may, upon orders from the Council, proceed to remedy the
condition or demolish the dangerous building; provided that where the
owner of the premises is unknown, or where his whereabouts are
unknown to the City Clerk, such notice may be posted in a prominent
place on the premises.
(A) Any building or structure within the fire limits of the City, as prescribed
by ordinance, which has been or may be damaged by fire, decay or
other cause to the extent of 50% of its value shall be torn down and
removed.
(B) Upon written notice by the Director of Public Safety, the Building
Inspector, the Health Officer, or the Fire Marshal, filed with the City
Clerk, the City Clerk shall notify the Council of the receipt of such
notice. The Council shall appoint three persons to determine whether or
not such building or structure has been damaged to the extent of 50%
of its value. A copy of such notice filed with the City Clerk, together
with a notice of the appointment of this board of three persons, shall be
served upon the owner of the premises by personal service or by
registered mail to his last known address. Such notice may be in the
following form:
"To __________
You are hereby notified that __________ has determined that the
building owned by you at __________ has been damaged by fire, decay
or otherwise to the extent of 50% of its value; and that a board of three
persons has been appointed to verify this finding, which board will hold
its first meeting in the __________ in the City Hall on the __________ day
of __________ at the hour of _____ o'clock, at which time it will determine
whether this finding is correct. If this finding is verified by the board,
you must tear down and remove said building."
(C) If the board of three members determines that the building in question
has been damaged to the extent of 50% of its value, it shall be the duty
§ 21.183 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.184
1:692
of the owner to tear down or remove the building within 20 days after
the finding of the board, and it shall be unlawful to occupy or permit
such building to be occupied after such finding.
§ 21.184 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.184
1:693

ARTICLE 18
Cable TV
§ 21.185. Permit required; application.
It shall be unlawful to construct or erect any portion of a cable TV system
prior to obtaining a permit from the City. An application shall be filed with
the office of the Building Commissioner upon such forms as he shall deem
necessary. Said application shall be accompanied by a complete set of plans
showing the location of all work to be performed and certified to as required
by § 21.65 of this chapter.
§ 21.186. Contractors.
Any and all persons constructing or erecting any portion of a cable TV
system shall obtain a license and be bonded as all other contractors in the
City. Any person who installs wire or cable through which an electric charge
is carried shall be licensed as an electrical contractor. All other contractors
shall be licensed as general contractors.
§ 21.187. Occupation of streets.264
No street shall be blocked or occupied by any person constructing or
erecting any portion of a cable TV system without obtaining a street
occupation permit. For the purposes of cable TV, the locations to be blocked
or occupied shall be given to the Building Commissioner and the Director
of Public Works at least two business days prior to their blockade or
occupation. Adequate warning devices, including barricades, shall be
supplied to direct traffic to other areas by the contractor.
§ 21.188. Fees.
(A) The permit fee for the construction and erection of a cable TV system
shall be $100 per mile of cable installed or mile of stand installed. The
distance of cable to and from any residence or building from the main
line shall not be calculated for the per-mile cost. In addition, an
inspection fee of $10 per building to which a connection is made from
the main line shall be paid, except in the case of buildings wherein more
than one dwelling unit or more than one commercial unit is being
serviced, in which case the inspection fee shall be $10 per building plus
$5 for each additional unit serviced therein.
(B) The fee of $100 per mile shall be paid in advance of work performed,
but may be paid in installments if work is to be performed in
installments or by sections. The inspection fee of $10 shall be paid in
advance of any connection to a building.
264. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 5, Art. 6, Standards for Construction of Facilities in Rights-of-
Way.
§ 21.185 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.188
1:695
§ 21.189. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to the construction of any and
all cable TV systems from and after the date of its passage, regardless of
whether or not a portion of that cable TV system may have already been
erected.
(C) The fee for the blockage of a street shall be $5 per location per week. In
addition, a cash bond of $500 shall be posted by such person with the
City.
(D) The permit fees herein are in lieu of all other permit fees required
under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 21.188 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.189
1:696
ARTICLE 19
Compliance and Enforcement
§ 21.190. Compliance required.
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation
to construct, erect, enlarge, remodel, alter, repair, raise, lower, underpin,
move or wreck any building, structure, or any portion thereof, in violation
of the building ordinance. It is further declared unlawful to equip, use or
occupy any building, structure, or any portion thereof in the City with any
devices, or for any business or other purposes, in any manner prohibited
by the building ordinances of the City. Violators of any of the provisions or
requirements of this section of the building ordinance shall be subject to the
general penalty provided for violations of the building ordinance.
§ 21.191. Nuisances.
Any building, structure, or any portion thereof hereafter constructed,
erected, enlarged, remodeled, altered, repaired, raised, lowered,
underpinned or moved within the City, in any manner contrary to the
provisions of the building ordinance or any laws of the City, is hereby
declared a nuisance, and the person, owner, lessor or lessee, agent,
architect, builder, contractor, housemover, or mechanic so constructing,
erecting, enlarging, remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering,
underpinning or moving the same, contrary to any of the provisions of said
laws or ordinance, shall be subject to the general penalty provided for
violations of said laws or ordinance.
§ 21.192. Enforcement procedure.
The procedure in all cases of unauthorized deviations from, or violations
of, the provisions of the building ordinance found on inspections required
by the preceding section shall be as follows: A verbal notice shall be
immediately served by the building officer at the site, and on the person or
persons doing or in charge of the work being done, or responsible for or
capable of correcting or of causing to be corrected the deviations observed.
If a verbal notice cannot be served on the site, or if served is disregarded
(or deemed inadequate by the building officer for the purpose), then written
notice, on forms prepared for the purpose and designating the deviation
observed, shall be posted at the site, in as safe and conspicuous a place
as practicable and where, if unmolested, the same must certainly come
to the notice of any person or persons either employed on the work or
frequenting or occupying the building, structure, or premises, and a copy
of the notice so posted shall be mailed to the last known address of the
owner, agent or person in control of the building or structure involved. In
the event a written notice of a deviation observed from the provisions of the
building ordinance has been posted and mailed, as aforesaid, and the work
or condition continues in defiance thereof, or if the deviation, of whatever
nature, is not promptly corrected in a manner consistent with the provisions
of the building ordinance and the urgency of the case, then the deviation
§ 21.190 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.192
1:697
shall be considered a willful violation and the building officer shall promptly
stop the work and, if need be, shall close the building or structure to the
public. The facts pertaining to the case and the steps so far taken therein
shall next (and forthwith) be reported in writing (on forms prepared for the
purpose) to the Building Commissioner, who in turn shall forthwith proceed
to enforce the provisions and penalties of the building ordinance for and in
such case provided. The Chief of Police and City Attorney, pursuant to and
consistent with the duties of their respective offices, shall assist in enforcing
the building ordinance against violators who defiantly refuse to comply
with notices from the building officers; and each officer named in this
section shall act in conjunction with the Building Commissioner and Deputy
Building Commissioners, insofar as may be necessary and practicable. But
nothing in this section is intended, or shall be construed, to disqualify or
exempt any officer of the City not named therein from the duty of assisting
in the enforcement of the building ordinance. The building officers and
other officers named, who may assist them in case of flagrant or defiant
violations of the building ordinance, are hereby authorized to use the police
power of the City in such manner and to such extent as the character of the
violation and the urgency, hazards, rights and interests of public health and
safety may justify and demand for the case involved. No failure on the part
of any officer to take any action hereby required, nor any failure to give any
notice hereby required, shall excuse any violation of any law or ordinance.
§ 21.193. Stop-work orders; permit cancellation.
Building officers are hereby empowered and directed to stop work on any
building, structure, or portion thereof that is being done in a reckless,
unsafe or unsanitary manner, or with the use of defective or improper
materials; and on any building, structure, or portion thereof proposed for
unlawful purposes as regards location, intended use, or occupancy; and any
work that in any other respect is being done contrary to the provisions
of the building ordinance or to the requirements of any other laws or
ordinances. This right and duty shall exist and be performed irrespective
of any permit that may or may not have been either required or issued
for the work, building, structure, or any portion thereof involved. The
suspension of work shall be for such time as may be necessary to secure
a correction of the particular violations and features complained of, or at
least until a satisfactory agreement and arrangement (approved of by the
Mayor and Building Commissioner) is reached that such correction will be
made; and if a court trial is made, then the work shall be suspended and
held in abeyance until the court renders its decisions. Any person, firm or
corporation having charge of, directing, or in any way engaged in work that
violates the building ordinance who shall refuse or fail to promptly desist
from such work on written notice from any building officer, or who, having
desisted on either verbal or written notice, shall resume the work before the
violation which occasioned the work is corrected or agreed to be corrected
satisfactory to the officer causing the work to be stopped (or some other
building officer higher in authority) and consistent with the purposes of the
building ordinance, or who, before having been authorized by the officer
causing the same to be stopped (or by some other building officer higher
§ 21.192 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.193
1:698
in authority), resumes work stopped by building officer, shall be deemed
guilty of violating the building ordinance, and shall be subject to the general
penalty provided therefor in said building ordinance. Permits for work being
done in violation of the building ordinance may be canceled or revoked
on order of the Building Commissioner, as is elsewhere provided in said
ordinance.
§ 21.194. Responsibility of architects and other professionals.
Any architect, structural engineer, contractor, subcontractor or other
person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly engaged in the design,
construction, erection, enlargement, remodeling, altering, repairing,
raising, lowering, underpinning, moving, or wrecking of any building,
structure or portion thereof who shall knowingly design, construct, erect,
enlarge, remodel, alter, repair, raise, lower, underpin, move or wreck such
building, structure or a portion thereof, or suffer or permit any building,
structure or portion thereof to be designed, constructed, erected, enlarged,
remodeled, altered, repaired, raised, lowered, underpinned, moved or
wrecked in violation of the building ordinance, shall be subject to the
general penalty provided for violation of the building ordinance and all
licenses and permits granted by the City to any such person, firm or
corporation so engaged may be suspended for not less than 90 days nor
more than two years.
§ 21.195. Time frame for completion of work.
Any architect, structural engineer, contractor or other person, firm or
corporation directly or indirectly engaged in the design, construction,
erection, enlargement, remodeling, altering, repairing, raising, lowering,
underpinning, moving or wrecking of any building, structure or portion
thereof who has not completed the work being done under the authority
of a permit within the period of two years from the date the permit was
issued shall be fined as provided by the general penalty of this chapter.
Such person or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
every day until such time as the work is completed or the land or building
is restored to its original form as it appeared at the time the permit was
applied for.
§ 21.196. Occupancy permits.
(A) No land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected or
altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose
whatsoever until a certificate shall have been issued by the Building
Commissioner, stating that the building complies with all the building,
zoning, health laws and ordinances and with the provisions of this
chapter.
(B) No change of use shall be made in any building or part thereof, now or
hereafter erected or altered, that is not consistent with the provisions
of these regulations. Nothing in this section shall prevent the present
§ 21.193 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.196
1:699
§ 21.197. Certificates of housing inspection.
occupancy or use of any existing fully completed building constructed
under permits issued by municipal authority, except as may be
necessary for health and safety of life and property.
(C) Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for
coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued
within 10 days after the erection or alteration of such building shall
have been completed.
(D) A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the
Building Commissioner and copies shall be furnished on request to any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the buildings
affected. A fee of $2 shall be charged for each original certificate and $1
for each copy thereof.
(E) No permit for excavation for the erection of any building shall be issued
before application has been made for a certificate of occupancy and
compliance. No buildings or premises or part thereof may be occupied
or used until such certificate shall have been issued. The Building
Commissioner shall enforce this provision by mandatory injunction,
when necessary.
(F) The Building Commissioner may, when the building is completed or
nearly completed, except for certain items which will not affect the
occupancy of the building, including on-site improvements similar to
landscaping, sidewalks, paving of the parking lot, fences, painting, and
similar work, issue a temporary occupancy permit upon the deposit
with the City of a bond equivalent to 125% of the estimated cost of the
improvements or work to be completed, to be returned to the
contractor upon completion of the improvement within seven months.
In the event that said improvements are not completed by said date, the
City may revoke said temporary occupancy permit, and shall have the
right, by mandatory injunction, to compel the owner or contractor to
complete same at the owner's or contractor's cost, the money on
deposit to be returned to the contractor, less the City's cost for the
mandatory injunction, including reasonable attorney's fees, when the
work is completed and a final occupancy permit is issued.
(A) It shall be unlawful for a person who is the new owner or lessee of
residential housing to occupy the same until a certificate of housing
inspection without any deficiencies has been issued for the subject
property, within the prior three months.
(B) For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have the
meanings set forth below:
LEASE — The transfer of occupancy rights of real property for
consideration, even if no written agreement is entered into.
§ 21.196 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.197
1:700
OWNER — The title holder of the real property, including but not
limited to the beneficiaries of a land trust, all partners in a partnership,
and the officers of a corporation.
SALE — The transfer for consideration of the title to real estate and
includes the purchase of a condominium unit or the share in a
cooperative apartment association or a corporation.
(C) All applications for a certificate of housing inspection shall be made on
such forms as prescribed by the Building Department. [Amended
5-9-2006 by Ord. No. 6-2006]
(1) The Building Department shall issue a certificate within 14 days
after gaining access to the subject property, whether by consent or
by warrant, and after the payment of the following fee:
(a) For a single-family dwelling: $50.
(b) For a cooperative apartment or condominium: $50.
(c) For buildings containing more than one dwelling unit: $50 per
unit in building.
(2) In the event the applicant requires an inspection within five days of
filing the application, the fee shall be $100. The above-referenced
fees only apply to the original inspection and a reinspection. Should
an applicant or the City require more than two inspections, the
applicant will be required to pay an additional $50.
(3) The Building Department shall inspect the subject property for
compliance with the building, housing, property maintenance, and
zoning code and ordinances of the City. All deficiencies shall be
noted on said certificate.
(D) No evidence obtained in a consented inspection of real property
pursuant to this section shall be used in the prosecution of any criminal
or ordinance violation against the owner of the property when
inspection was made.
(E) Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect any property, no
entry or inspection shall be made without the procurement of a warrant
from the Circuit Court of Cook County.
(1) The court may consider any of the following factors, along with
such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as to
whether a warrant shall issue:
(a) Eyewitness account of violation.
(b) Citizen complaints.
(c) Tenant complaints.
(d) Plain-view violations.
§ 21.197 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.197
1:701
§ 21.198. through § 21.199. (Reserved)
(e) Violations apparent from City records.
(f) Property deterioration.
(g) Age of property.
(h) Nature of alleged violation.
(i) Similar properties in the area.
(j) Documented violations of similar properties in the area.
(k) Passage of time since last inspection.
(l) Previous violations on the property.
(2) Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light of
reasonable legislative and administrative standards which show
that there is reason to believe that a condition of nonconformity
exists with respect to a particular property in violation of a City
ordinance.
(F) Nothing herein shall prohibit the sale or lease of real estate to a new
owner or lessee even if no certificate of housing inspection has been
obtained or even if such certificate shows deficiencies thereon. The City
does not guarantee the condition of the subject property and is not
responsible for any claims arising out of the subject property or the
condition thereof. The City does not warrant that all deficiencies are
listed in a certificate and does not warrant anything as to the condition
of the property or the habitability thereof.
§ 21.197 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.198
1:702
ARTICLE 20
Penalty
§ 21.200. General penalty; additional remedies.
(A) Unless a separate fine or penalty is provided for in a section of this
chapter, then any person, firm or corporation who or which violates,
neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists or opposes the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense, and every such
person or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
every day on which such violation, neglect or refusal shall continue; and
any builder or contractor who shall construct any building in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter, and any architect designing,
drawing plans for or having charge of such building or who shall permit
it to be constructed, shall be liable to the penalties provided and
imposed by this section.265
(B) In addition to the penalty provided by Subsection (A), the City shall file
suit and proceed to demolish, repair, enclose, recover cost or sue for an
injunction to cause compliance as provided for in 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1 and
5/11-31-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
265. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.200 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.200
1:703

ARTICLE 20A
Administrative Adjudication of Code Violations266
[Added 9-9-2003 by Ord. No. 2-2003]
§ 21.200.1. Establishment of Code Hearing Department; definitions.
§ 21.200.2. Hearing procedures not exclusive.
The remedies provided for by this article are not exclusive and the City has
the option of prosecuting code violations in any manner provided by law.
§ 21.200.3. Violation notice and report.
(A) The City of Hometown, pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/
11-31.1-1 et seq., hereby establishes a Code Hearing Department to
expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations.
(B) For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:
BUILDING INSPECTOR — Any officer or employee of the City of
Hometown whose duties include the inspection or examination of
structures or property in the City of Hometown to determine whether a
code violation exists.
CODE — Any provision of the Municipal Code of the City of Hometown
relating to or establishing construction, zoning, plumbing, heating,
electrical, fire prevention, sanitation, property maintenance or other
health or safety standards applicable to property or structures or that
requires, after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and
debris, the removal of inoperable motor vehicles, or the abatement of
nuisances from private property.
HEARING OFFICER — A City employee or an officer or agent of a
municipality, other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
PROPERTY OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of a structure, or
a person who contracts with the federal government, or any agency
thereof, to care for vacant residential real estate.
Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether
or not a code violation exists;
(1)
Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a code violation;
(2)
Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing
and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
(3)
Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating
whether a code violation exists.
(4)
266. Editor's Note: This article appeared in the 2001 Code as Ch. 19, Art. 7, but was moved to
this chapter at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 21.200.1 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.200.3
1:705
§ 21.200.4. Subpoenas; defaults.
At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear
the case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear
and give testimony at the hearing. If, on the date set for the hearing, the
defendant or his or her attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may
find the defendant in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept
evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
(A) When a Building Inspector, police officer or other individual authorized
to issue code violations finds a code violation to exist, he or she shall
note the violation on a multiple-copy violation notice and report form
that indicates:
(1) The name and address of the property owner;
(2) A citation to the specific code provision or provisions alleged to
have been violated and a description of the circumstances present
that constitute the alleged violation;267
(3) The date and time on which the violation was observed;
(4) The names of the witnesses of the violation; and
(5) The address of the property or structure where the violation is
observed.
(B) The violation report form shall be forwarded to the Code Hearing
Department, where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of
the report and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces
provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be
less than 30 days nor more than 40 days after the violation is reported.
(C) One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of
the Code Hearing Department and shall be part of the record of
hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual
representing the City in the case so that he or she may prepare
evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the
date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first
class mail to the property owner, along with a summons commanding
the property owner to appear at the hearing. If the name of the owner of
the property or structure cannot be ascertained, or if service on the
owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the owner by
posting or mailing a copy of the violation report form on the front door
of the structure where the violation is found, not less than 20 days
before the hearing is scheduled.
267. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.200.3 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.200.5
1:706
§ 21.200.5. Continuances; representation at code hearings.
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings
under this article except in cases where a continuance is absolutely
necessary to protect the rights of the owner. Lack of preparation shall not
be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing
officer under this section shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the City
may be presented by the Building Inspector, by any other City employee
or by an attorney designated by the City. However, in no event shall the
case for the municipality be presented by an employee of the Code Hearing
Department. The case for the dwelling owner may be presented by the
owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative.
§ 21.200.6. Hearing officer to preside; evidence.
At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and
shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of
a code violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial
proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this article.
§ 21.200.7. Defenses to code violations.
It shall be a defense to a code violation charged under this article if the
owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the
hearing officer's satisfaction that:
§ 21.200.8. Findings, decision and order.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing
and shall be designated as "findings, decision and order." The findings,
decision and order shall include the hearing officer's findings of fact, a
decision whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of
fact, and an order ordering the owner to correct the violation or dismissing
the case, in the event a violation is not proved. If a code violation is proved,
the order may also impose the sanctions that are provided in the code for
the violation proved. A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be
served on the owner within five days after it is issued; service shall be in
(A) The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at the
time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed.
(B) The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants
and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the
dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue to
cause the violations.
(C) An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner
or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting
the code violation.
§ 21.200.5 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.200.8
1:707
the same manner as the report form and summons are served pursuant to
§ 21.200.3 above. Payment of any penalty or fine, and the disposition of said
monies, shall be in the same manner as provided for in the Municipal Code,
unless otherwise provided by the City Council.
§ 21.200.9. Review under Administrative Review Law.268
The findings, decisions and orders of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review under the Administrative Review Law.
§ 21.200.10. Judgment on findings.
Any fine, cost, or other sanction imposed on a property owner remaining
unpaid after the exhaustion of, or failure to exhaust, judicial review
procedures under the Administrative Review Law, or which is affirmed after
appeal, shall be a debt due and owing the City of Hometown and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law. The City may commence a
proceeding in the Circuit Court of Cook County for purposes of obtaining a
judgment on the finding, decision or order. The City of Hometown is hereby
authorized to commence any such action in conformance with the provisions
of 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-11.1 and the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure. Any
finding, decision or order of the hearing officer shall attach to the property
as well as the property owner so that a finding of a code violation cannot
be avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any
subsequent transferee or owner of the property takes subject to the finding,
decision and order of the hearing officer.
§ 21.200.11. Maintenance of property under federal government
contracts; penalties.
A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its agencies,
including without limitation the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible
for maintaining the property to prevent and correct municipal health and
safety code violations. A person who intentionally violates this section is
guilty of a business offense and shall be fined not less than $501 and not
more than $1,000.
§ 21.200.12. Nonexclusivity of remedies.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the City of Hometown
is not precluded from using any other method authorized by law to enforce
the provisions of its codes.
268. Editor's Note: See 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
§ 21.200.8 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.200.12
1:708
ARTICLE 21
Housing Regulations
§ 21.201. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to provide for the public health, safety
and welfare by the establishment and enforcement of minimum housing
standards to the end that all dwellings within the City of Hometown shall
be safe, sanitary, free from fire and health hazards, fit for human habitation
and beneficial to the public welfare and shall not constitute a blighting or
deteriorating influence upon the City or any of its areas; to establish the
responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants with respect to such
minimum housing standards; to authorize the inspection of dwellings to
establish compliance with such minimum housing standards; to establish
procedures for the enforcement of such minimum housing standards; to
authorize the vacation or condemnation of dwellings not in compliance with
such minimum housing standards; and to provide penalties for the violation
of such minimum housing standards.
§ 21.202. Scope, applicability and conflict.
§ 21.203. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City of Hometown that the
several provisions of this article are separable in accordance with the
following rules:
(A) The requirements imposed by this article shall be in addition to any and
all other applicable requirements imposed by other ordinances and
regulations of the City of Hometown.
(B) This article is applicable to occupancy for residential purposes of any
building, whether or not such building was erected, altered or
converted in full or substantial compliance with ordinances in force at
the time of its erection, alteration or conversion and, except as
hereinafter provided, whether or not such building was erected, altered
or converted prior to the effective date of this article.
(C) In the event restrictions imposed by this article are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable restrictions imposed by
any other provisions of any other ordinance of the City or of any other
law, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations which are more restrictive shall be deemed to
govern.
(A) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
article to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions
of this article.
(B) If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this article to a particular property,
§ 21.201 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.203
1:709
§ 21.204. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms and phrases shall have
the meanings given herein:
ABANDONED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit which is unoccupied for
at least a ninety-day period.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE —
building or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of
the provision to any other property, building or structure.
A subordinate building, structure, or use which is located on the same
lot on which the principal building or use is situated and which is
reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary
use of such building or main use, when permitted by zoning district
regulations.269
(A)
An accessory use includes the following:
(1) Patio.
A garage or building for domestic storage, as defined and regulated
by this article.
(2)
(3) Animal shelter.
Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same
lot with any retail service or business use, unless such storage is
excluded by the district regulations.
(4)
Storage of goods in or produced by manufacturing activities, on
the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities, unless such
storage is excluded by the district regulations.
(5)
Off-street motor vehicle parking areas, and loading and unloading
facilities.
(6)
Signs, as permitted and regulated in each district incorporated in
this article.
(7)
Public utility communication, electric, gas, water, and sewer lines,
their supports and incidental equipment.
(8)
Swimming and wading pools, private, for use by the residents of
the dwelling and their guests.
(9)
(B)
Where a substantial part of the wall of an accessory building is a part
of the wall of the main building or where an accessory building is
attached to the main building in a substantial manner as by a roof, such
(C)
269. Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Zoning.
§ 21.203 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.204
1:710
APPROVED — Approved by the Building Commissioner pursuant to this
article, or approved by any other person or board designated by the
ordinances of the City to give approval to the matter in question.
BASEMENT — A story having part but not more than 1/2 of its height below
grade. A basement is counted as a story for the purpose of height regulation
if subdivided and used for business or dwelling purposes other than by a
janitor employed on the premises.
BUILDING — Any structure designed or intended for the support,
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property.
When a structure is divided into separate parts by unpierced walls
extending from the ground up, each part is deemed a separate building.
BUILDING COMMISSIONER — The Building Commissioner of the City of
Hometown or his authorized agent or representative.
CELLAR — A story having more than 1/2 of its height below grade. A cellar
is not included in computing the number of stories for the purpose of height
measurement. A cellar will not be used for habitation.
DWELLING — Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used
exclusively of and for residential purposes, but not a mobile home.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms in a residential building or
residential portion of a building which are arranged, designed, used, or
intended for use by one family, and which includes cooking space and lawful
sanitary facilities reserved for the occupants thereof.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating or trapping; or by any other recognized legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Health Officer.
FAMILY — One or more persons, related by blood, adoption or marriage,
living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit; or a number of
persons living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit though
not related by blood, adoption or marriage.270
GARBAGE — Any rejected or waste household food, offal, swill or carrion,
and every accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the
preparation, use, cooking and dealing in, or storage of, meats, fish, fowl,
fruits or vegetables, and any other matter of any nature which are subject to
decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odor,
or which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material
for flies or other germ-carrying insects.
accessory building shall be counted as part of the main building except
if used to house a motor vehicle.
270. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.204 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.204
1:711
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a dwelling unit measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls or from the center line of walls separating dwelling units.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The square footage of floor area located in a
habitable room, measured from the outside exterior wall, where the average
clear ceiling height is not less than 7 1/2 feet in at least 50% of such room;
provided, however, that floor area located where the ceiling height is less
than five feet, or located in a habitable room (other than a kitchen) where
the least horizontal dimension is less than seven feet, shall not constitute
habitable floor area.
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room or enclosed floor space meeting the
requirements of this article and used or intended to be used for sleeping,
living, cooking or dining purposes, including utility rooms but excluding
such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, hallways,
cellars, storage spaces, garages and similar spaces.
HOT WATER — Water at a temperature of not less than 120° F.
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or portion thereof, or a group of buildings,
which provides sleeping accommodations for transients on a daily or weekly
basis, whether such establishments are designated as a hotel, inn,
automobile court, motel, motor inn, motor lodge, tourist court or
otherwise.271
INFESTATION — The presence within or around a dwelling or dwelling unit
of any insects, rodents or other pests.
KITCHEN — An area used, or designed to be used, for the preparation of
food.
LET — To give another person the right to occupy any portion of a dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit. The act of "letting" shall be deemed to be
a continuing act for so long as the person given the right to occupy the
premises continues to do so. A further "letting" by any occupant of a portion
of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit is, for purposes of this article,
also a "letting" by the owner or operator of the dwelling.272
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building, or portion thereof, designed for or
occupied by more than two families.
OCCUPANT — Any person living in, sleeping in, or having actual possession
of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.273
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
271. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
272. Editor's Note: The definition of "motel," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2). See now the
definition of "hotel or motel" above.
273. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.204 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.204
1:712
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care, management or control of
any dwelling, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are
let.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, or the agent
of said person or any person having management or control of any dwelling
or dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, a purchaser, mortgagee,
receiver or lessee in possession of any dwelling or dwelling unit.
PARKWAY — That portion of a front yard between a public sidewalk and a
private or public street.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, mortgagee in possession,
bankrupt, bankrupt trustee, trust, corporation or association. Whenever
used with respect to any penalty, the term "person" as applied to
partnerships or associations shall mean the partners or members thereof,
and as applied to trusts or corporations shall mean the trustees or officers
thereof.
PLUMBING — Gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water-heating equipment,
water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks,
installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed washing
machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any similar supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
PREMISES — A lot, plot, or parcel of land, including the buildings and
structures thereon.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking
or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, dust or any object that is removed
from the things that are presently worthless or unsuitable for immediate
purpose.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that habitable portion of a building included between
the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, installed, furnished or provided by or under the
control of the owner or operator at his own expense.
§ 21.205. Kitchen and bathroom equipment and facilities.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with the
§ 21.204 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.205
1:713
following minimum standards for kitchen and bathroom equipment and
facilities:
(A) Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a kitchen
sink in good working condition.
(B) Cooking equipment. Every piece of cooking equipment which is
supplied or used by an owner, operator or occupant shall be so
constructed and installed that it will function safely and effectively, and
shall be maintained in good working condition. Portable cooking
equipment employing flame and cooking equipment using gasoline or
kerosene as fuel for cooking are prohibited; provided, however, that this
subsection shall not apply to fondue dishes, chafing dishes or other
similar portable cooking equipment.
(C) Bathroom facilities.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room, separate
from the habitable rooms, which shall afford privacy to any
occupant thereof and which shall be equipped with a flush water
closet and a lavatory basin in good working condition.
(2) Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room, separate
from the habitable rooms, which shall afford privacy to any
occupant thereof and which shall be equipped with a bathtub or
shower in good working condition. Such room may be the same
room as required by Subsection (C)(1) hereof.
(D) Water, hot water, and sewer connections.
(1) Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required
by this article shall be properly connected with and supplied by
both hot and cold water lines. The hot water lines shall be
connected with supplied water heating facilities which are capable
of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate
amount of hot water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink,
lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower even when the heating
facilities required by this article are not in operation.
(2) All plumbing fixtures required by this article shall be properly
connected to an approved water system and to an approved
sewerage system. All water and sewer connections required by this
subsection shall conform to all applicable requirements of this
Chapter 21, Building Code.
(E) Maintenance. All equipment, facilities and connecting plumbing
required by this § 21.205 shall be maintained in a good, safe, sanitary
and workable condition.
§ 21.205 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.206
1:714
§ 21.206. Heat and heating equipment.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with the following
minimum standards for heat and heating equipment:
(A) Heating equipment and capacity. Every dwelling unit shall have heating
equipment which conforms to all applicable provisions of Chapter 21,
Building Code, of the Municipal Code of the City of Hometown and
which is capable of safely and adequately maintaining an average
temperature of 70° F. in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water
closet compartments when the outdoor temperature is -10° F. without
forcing the equipment to operate in excess of its design capacity.
Appliances designed primarily for cooking or water heating purposes
shall not be considered as heating facilities within the meaning of this
section. Portable heating equipment employing flame, and the use of
gasoline or kerosene as a fuel does not meet the requirement of this
section and is prohibited.
(B) Supply of heat. The owner or operator of any dwelling or dwelling unit
who lets such dwelling or dwelling unit under an agreement, express or
implied, to supply heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat,
without such undue restrictions of ventilation as to interfere with
proper sanitary conditions, to provide a minimum temperature in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments of 60° F.
from 6:30 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. and a minimum temperature of 65° F. at all
other times. Such temperatures shall be averaged through the dwelling
or dwelling unit.
(C) Written notice required. Written notice of a complaint concerning lack
of heat in such dwelling or dwelling unit shall first be given to the owner
or operator by certified mail, return receipt requested, before a
violation of this section shall be deemed to exist.
(D) Causes beyond control of owner or operator. Failure to furnish the heat
required by this section shall not constitute an offense where it is due to
a breakdown of the heating plant (unless such breakdown has been
caused by a violation of this section), nor where it is due to strikes, to a
general shortage of fuel, to any act of the occupant who makes the
complaint, or to any cause beyond the owner's or operator's control.
(E) Determination of average temperature. To determine if a violation of
this section has occurred, the Building Commissioner shall cause
temperature readings to be made by means of a standard Fahrenheit
thermometer in not less than two rooms, or if the unit consists of only
one room then in two opposite parts of the room at or near the extreme
as practicable, such thermometer to be placed at a point not less than
four feet nor more than six feet away from any door or window and
three feet above the floor.
§ 21.206 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.206
1:715
§ 21.207. Electrical facilities.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with the following
minimum standards for electrical facilities:
§ 21.208. Light and ventilation.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with the following
minimum standards for light and ventilation:
§ 21.209. Minimum space, use and location.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not comply with the following minimum standards for space, use and
location:
(F) Maintenance. All equipment and facilities and connecting fuel lines
required by this section shall be maintained in a good, safe and
workable condition.
(A) Electrical service, convenience outlets and fixtures. Every dwelling,
dwelling unit and habitable room shall be supplied with electrical
service, convenience outlets and fixtures in accordance with all
applicable requirements of Chapter 21, Building Code, of the Municipal
Code of Hometown.
(B) Maintenance. All outlets, fixtures and connecting electrical lines
required by this section shall be maintained in a good, safe and
workable condition.
(A) General standards. Every dwelling, dwelling unit and habitable room
shall be supplied with light and ventilation in accordance with all
applicable provisions of Chapter 21, Building Code, of the Municipal
Code of Hometown.
(B) Maintenance. All facilities and equipment required by this section for
natural, artificial or mechanical lighting or ventilation shall be
maintained in a good, safe and workable condition.
(A) Basic minimum gross floor area requirements. The minimum gross floor
area of dwelling units shall be as provided in Chapter 22, Zoning, of the
Code of the City of Hometown.
(B) Basic minimum floor area per occupant requirements. Every dwelling
unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of habitable floor area for the
first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
habitable floor area for every additional occupant thereof.274
§ 21.206 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.209
1:716
§ 21.210. Means of access and egress.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the following minimum standards for access and egress:
(C) Location of sleeping rooms. No dwelling unit containing two or more
sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangements that access to a
bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use by occupants
of more than one sleeping room can be had only by going through
another sleeping room, nor shall room arrangements be such that
access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another
sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment.
(D) Conditions on use of basements as habitable rooms. No basement space
shall be used as a habitable room unless it shall conform to the
following standards in addition to any other applicable standards:
(1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage or underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;
(2) The total window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes required by Chapter 21, Building
Code, of the Municipal Code of Hometown for habitable rooms;
(3) Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area or faces upon an
area way or window well where the width of such well, measured
perpendicularly to the building wall at such opening, is not less
than the distance from the bottom of the window to the finished
grade at such window; and
(4) The total of openable area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum required by Chapter 21, Building Code, of the Municipal
Code of the City of Hometown, except where there is supplied some
other device affording adequate ventilation which has the approval
of the Building Commissioner. In all cases, such space shall meet
the requirements of the Fire Code adopted as set forth in § 21.21 of
this chapter.275
(A) General standards. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be supplied
with means of access and egress in accordance with the requirements
of Chapter 21, Building Code, of the Code of the City of Hometown.
(B) Maintenance and obstructions. All means of access and egress required
by this section shall be maintained so as to provide safe and convenient
274. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
275. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.209 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.210
1:717
§ 21.211. Garbage and rubbish disposable facilities.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with the following
minimum standards for garbage and rubbish disposal facilities:
§ 21.212. Protection from insects, rodents and pests.
No person shall occupy as an owner-occupant nor let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with the
following minimum standards for the protection from insects, rodents and
pests:
§ 21.213. Identification of dwellings and dwelling units.276
No person shall occupy as an owner-occupant or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with the
standards for identification set forth in Chapter 5, Article 5, House
Numbering, of the City Code and the building code adopted by the City in
accordance with Article 1 of this chapter.
access to and egress from the dwelling and dwelling unit which they
serve and shall be kept free from any obstruction.
(A) Facilities to be supplied. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be
supplied with facilities for the temporary storage and disposal of
garbage and rubbish as required by Chapter 15, Article 3, of the
Municipal Code of Hometown.
(B) Maintenance. The facilities required by Subsection (A) above shall be
maintained in a good, nonleaking condition, capable of being tightly
sealed, and as clean as possible.
(C) Disposal and storage of garbage and rubbish. The disposal and storage
of garbage and rubbish shall be in accordance with all applicable
provisions of Chapter 15, Article 3, of the Municipal Code of Hometown;
and all premises shall be kept free from any debris, object, material or
condition which may create a health, accident or fire hazard, or which is
a public nuisance, or which constitutes a blighting or deteriorating
influence on the neighborhood.
(A) Conditions conducive to infestation. Every dwelling, dwelling unit and
its premises shall be maintained free of conditions conducive to the
breeding of or infestation by rodents, insects or pests.
276. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.210 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.214
1:718
§ 21.214. General maintenance.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with the following
minimum standards for general maintenance:
(A) General.
(1) All dwellings and dwelling units and all parts thereof, both exterior
and interior, shall be maintained in good repair and shall be
capable of performing the function for which they or any feature
thereof was designed or intended to be used.
(2) Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is
required under this article, and every chimney and smoke-pipe,
shall be so constructed and installed that it will function safely and
effectively, and shall be maintained in sound working condition.
(3) No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service facilities,
equipment or utility which is required under this article to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued from any occupied
dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by him, except such
temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or
alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when
discontinuance of service is approved by the Building
Commissioner.
(B) Foundations, walls and roofs. Every foundation, exterior wall and roof
of every dwelling and every accessory structure shall be substantially
weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof; shall be capable of affording
privacy; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be kept
free of holes or breaks, and of loose or rotting boards, timbers, bricks,
stones and other structural material; and shall be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be
placed thereon.
(C) Exterior surfaces. All exterior surfaces of any dwelling or accessory
structure shall be reasonably capable of withstanding the effects of the
elements and decay. Any exterior surface which is deteriorated,
decaying, disintegrating, or which has weathered with dirt and grime or
which has lost its capability to reasonably withstand the effects of the
elements and decay through peeling or flaking of the paint or other
protective coating, shall be repaired, repainted or resurfaced.
(D) Exterior repairs and maintenance to harmonize with existing exterior.
Whenever repair, replacement or maintenance of exterior walls or roofs
is required to comply with Subsections (B) and (C) hereof, such repair,
replacement or maintenance shall be undertaken so as to match,
conform and be consistent with the existing exterior, and shall comply
with all applicable provisions of Chapter 21, Building Code, of the
Municipal Code of Hometown.
§ 21.214 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.214
1:719
(E) Windows and exterior doors. Every window, window screen, exterior
door, exterior door screen, basement or cellar door, basement or cellar
door screen, and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight,
watertight, windtight, and rodentproof; shall be equipped with all
appropriate hardware; shall be capable of being easily opened unless
designed to be fixed; and shall be kept in good repair.
(F) Floors; bathroom floors. All floors shall be substantially rodentproof;
and shall be free of holes, wide cracks, and loose, protruding, warped or
rotting floor boards which might constitute a possible accident hazard.
Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably
impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a
clean and sanitary condition. Where such floor surfaces exist, they may
be overlaid with carpeting designed and intended for use in bathrooms.
(G) Interior walls and ceilings. Every interior wall and ceiling shall be
substantially rodentproof; shall be free of holes and large cracks and
any flaking, peeling, loose or deteriorated paint, plaster, wallboard,
paneling or other material; and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
No lead-based paint shall be applied to any interior wall or ceiling.
Bathroom and kitchen walls shall have waterproof surfaces where
necessary to prevent water damage.
(H) Stairways and porches. Every inside and outside stairway and porch
and every appurtenance thereto shall be maintained in a good state of
repair and free from rotting, loose or deteriorating supports, rails,
floors, and stairs so as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the
loads that normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
(I) Accessory structures. All garages, tool sheds and all other accessory
structures shall be kept in good repair so as not to be unsafe or become
a harbor for rats and other rodents. Fences and roadside mailboxes
shall be maintained in good repair, solid and in the same condition
required for other exterior surfaces. Television antennas shall be firmly
and securely fastened to the dwelling and shall be maintained in good
repair.
(J) Accumulation of debris. The interior areas of dwellings and dwelling
units, including basements, attics and other storage areas, and the
premises and accessory buildings associated therewith, shall be
maintained free of any debris, object, material or condition which does
or may create a hazard to the health or safety of persons, is conducive
to infestation, presents a fire hazard or constitutes a blighting or
deteriorating influence on the neighborhood.
(K) Vegetation. No premises shall contain uncontrolled growth of
vegetation in violation of Chapter 5, Article 3, and Chapter 18, Article 3,
of the Municipal Code of Hometown, and all trees, hedges and other
plantings shall be kept trimmed so as to avoid interference with persons
§ 21.214 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.214
1:720
§ 21.215. Responsibilities of owners and operators.
Every owner or operator of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall:
or vehicles passing on public ways, easements or adjoining private
property.
(L) Driveways and walkways. Cement or asphalt driveways, walkways and
parking areas shall be maintained free of loose or broken material and
cracks shall be repaired as necessary to avoid safety hazards. Stone
driveways, walkways and parking areas shall be maintained in forms
designed to prevent the spread of gravel to public ways, easements and
adjoining private property.
(M) Gutters and downspouts. All gutters and downspouts shall be securely
and firmly fastened to the dwelling, shall be maintained free of debris
which might prevent their proper functioning and shall not be allowed
to discharge in a manner which might create unnecessary erosion.
(A) Compliance with duties: comply with all duties imposed on him by this
article.
(B) Shared area and facilities: maintain in a clean, sanitary and safe
condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises,
including parkways, and maintain and repair any equipment or facilities
which said owner or operator supplied or is required by this article to
supply.
(C) Extermination: exterminate any insects, rodents or other pests in any
dwelling unit if infestation is caused by the failure of the owner or
operator to maintain the dwelling in a rodentproof or reasonably
insectproof condition, and exterminate such pests in any dwelling unit
in the dwelling, regardless of the cause of infestation, if infestation
exists in two or more of the dwelling units in the dwelling or in the
shared or public areas of any dwelling containing two or more family
units.
(D) Garbage and rubbish disposal: supply and maintain facilities for the
temporary storage and disposal of garbage and rubbish as required by
Chapter 15, Article 3, of the Municipal Code of Hometown and provide
for the collection of garbage and rubbish from the premises in the
manner provided therein. The provisions of this subsection shall not be
applicable to non-occupant owners of dwellings containing fewer than
three dwelling units.
(E) Janitorial service: provide a janitor as found necessary by the Building
Commissioner. This subsection shall not apply to dwellings containing
fewer than seven dwelling units, to dwellings having a resident owner
or operator, to cooperative apartment units, nor to condominium
apartment units.
§ 21.214 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.215
1:721
§ 21.216. Responsibility of occupants.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall:
§ 21.217. Additional responsibilities of owners and operators of
hotels and motels.
(F) Notice of maximum occupancy: advise the occupant of every dwelling
and dwelling unit, in writing, either by insertion in the lease between
the parties or otherwise, of the maximum number of occupants
permitted in the occupied premises under this article.
(A) Compliance with duties: comply with all duties imposed on him by this
article.
(B) Maintenance: maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the
dwelling, dwelling unit and premises which he occupies and controls
and be responsible for his own misuse of areas and facilities available in
common.
(C) Supplied facilities and equipment: keep all supplied facilities, including
plumbing fixtures and cooking and refrigeration equipment, in a clean
and sanitary condition and exercise reasonable care in their proper use
and operation.
(D) Garbage and rubbish disposal: dispose of all garbage and rubbish in a
clean and sanitary manner by placing it in approved storage or disposal
facilities which are safe and sanitary. Every occupant shall provide such
facilities for and within his dwelling unit and shall maintain them in a
clean and sanitary manner. Every non-owner occupant of a dwelling
containing fewer than three dwelling units in which the owner does not
reside shall be responsible for the duties imposed by § 21.215(D) as to
his dwelling unit.
(E) Extermination: be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents
and pests in his dwelling unit, except when the owner or operator is
responsible under § 21.215(C).
(F) Accumulation of debris and storage of goods: not place on the premises
any material which causes a fire hazard, otherwise endangers the life,
health or safety of any occupant of such dwelling or constitutes a
blighting or deteriorating influence on the premises or neighborhood,
nor place in storage on the premises any furniture, equipment or
material which harbors insects, rodents or other pests or is conducive
to infestation.
(G) Occupancy: not permit any dwelling unit let by him to be occupied so
that any occupancy resulting therefrom violates any of the provisions of
this article.
(A) General responsibilities. Every owner or operator of a hotel or motel
shall have the same responsibilities as those imposed by § 21.215,
§ 21.215 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.217
1:722
§ 21.218. Transfer of responsibility.
A contract effective as between the owner and operator or operator and
occupant or owner and occupant with regard to compliance hereunder shall
not relieve any party of his direct responsibility under this article.
§ 21.219. Rules and regulations.
The Building Commissioner is authorized to adopt such written rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the proper interpretation and
enforcement of this article so far as it pertains to the building regulations,
Chapter 21, Building Code, and Chapter 22, Zoning, of the City and the
Health Officer so far as it pertains to the health regulations, Chapter 15
of the Municipal Code of Hometown. Such rules and regulations shall not
conflict with or waive any provisions of this article or any other ordinance
of the City of Hometown. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted
to the City Council for approval and no such rule or regulation shall be
effective without such approval. Such rules and regulations, upon approval
of the City Council, shall be kept on file with the Building Commissioner and
Health Officer for public examination. Such rules and regulations shall have
the force and effect of this article and shall continue in effect until revoked
by the Building Commissioner and Health Officer, with the approval of the
City Council.
§ 21.220. Inspections and right of entry.
except that where greater responsibilities are imposed by this section,
this section shall control.
(B) Additional responsibilities. The owner and/or operator of every hotel or
motel shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls,
floors and ceilings and for the maintenance of a sanitary condition in
every part of the hotel or motel. He shall further be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests wherever found in
the hotel or motel. He shall further be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance and extermination of the entire premises where the entire
structure or building is leased or occupied by him. He shall further be
responsible for the disposal of all garbage and rubbish by supplying
each rooming unit with facilities for storage and disposal of garbage
and rubbish and by providing for the general garbage and rubbish
storage, disposal and collection needs of the hotel or motel in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 15 of the Municipal Code
of Hometown.
(A) Inspections authorized. The Building Commissioner and Health Officer
may make regular inspections to determine the condition of buildings,
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises located within
the City for the purpose of safeguarding the health and safety of all
occupants and of the general public. The Building Commissioner and
Health Officer may make such inspections whenever they shall deem
§ 21.217 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.220
1:723
§ 21.221. Notice of violations.
such an inspection necessary; provided, however, that such inspections
must be made at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice to, and
with the consent of, the owner or operator and the occupant, except
when an existing emergency requires immediate action.
(B) Legal process not required. Except where the owner or operator or
occupant refuses entry, an order of court, subpoena or other legal
process shall not be necessary to any entry, examination or survey in
connection with the inspections authorized by this section. No entries
shall be forced. In-view violations may be processed without entry.
(C) Inspection upon warrant. Whenever the Building Commissioner or
Health Officer or his delegate, after presentation of proper credentials
and request for entry to inspect, is refused access to any building,
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, the Building Commissioner or
Health Officer is authorized to petition any judge for the issuance of a
search warrant authorizing the inspection of such building, dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit for the purpose of making such
inspections as shall be necessary to the enforcement of the provisions
of this article.
(D) Owner's right of entry. Every occupant of a building, dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or
employee, access to any part of such building, dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit, or its premises, for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of
this article or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful
order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. Entry pursuant to
this subsection shall be made only at reasonable times and after
reasonable notice to the occupant unless an existing emergency
requires immediate action.
(A) Notice required. Whenever in the opinion of the Building Commissioner
or Health Officer any violation of the provisions of this article is found to
exist, he shall, within 10 days after discovery thereof, serve written
notice of such alleged violation upon the owner, operator or occupant
responsible therefor.
(B) Method of service. Notice shall be given either by personal service or by
mailing a copy thereof to the alleged violator by certified mail, return
receipt requested, at his last known address or, in the event neither of
these is effective to actually notify the alleged violator, by posting a
copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the building containing
the alleged violation.
(C) Required contents. Such notice may include more than one alleged
violation; shall demand compliance with this article; and shall specify a
period of time for compliance, which shall be such time as, in the
§ 21.220 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.221
1:724
§ 21.222. Effect of noncompliance.
If any alleged violation, of which notice has been given in conformity with
§ 21.221, is not corrected or eliminated within the time specified in such
notice, then:
opinion of the Building Commissioner or Health Officer, is reasonably
required to effect changes necessary for compliance.
(D) Permissible contents. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial
action which if taken will effect compliance with the provisions of this
article and with any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
(A) Violator subject to penalty. The responsible owner, operator or occupant
shall be subject to the general penalty provisions provided for in
§ 21.200 of this chapter.
(B) Designation of dwelling as unfit for human habitation. The dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be designated as unfit for human
habitation in accordance with the procedures established by § 21.223.
(C) Designation of dwelling as dangerous and a public nuisance. Where the
alleged violations are of such a nature or extent that, in the opinion of
the Building Commissioner or Health Officer, they render the building,
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or any part thereof, unsafe and
dangerous to the life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of
the occupants or the residents of the City, or where the building,
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or part thereof, is uncompleted or
has been abandoned, the Building Commissioner or Health Officer shall
declare and designate the building, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit, or part thereof, as dangerous and a public nuisance in accordance
with the procedures of § 21.225.
(D) The Health Officer may provide for the removal of garbage and debris
from private property when the owner of such property, after notice
pursuant to § 21.221, refuses or neglects to remove such garbage and
debris, and may collect from such owner the reasonable cost thereof.
This cost is a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to all
subsequent liens and encumbrances, except tax liens, if within 60 days
after such cost and expense is incurred the City Clerk, in the name of
the City, files notice of lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds or the
office of the Registrar of Titles of such county if the real estate affected
is registered under the Torrens system. The notice of lien shall consist
of a sworn statement setting out (1) a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification thereof, (2) the amount of money
representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the service,
and (3) the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by
the City. However, the lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose
rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to removal of
the garbage and debris and prior to the filing of such notice, and the
lien shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other
§ 21.221 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.222
1:725
§ 21.223. Designation of dwelling as unfit for human habitation.
Whenever any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit is subject to
designation as unfit for human habitation under the provisions of
§ 21.222(B), the Building Commissioner shall carry out such designation in
compliance with the following procedures:
lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of
such notice. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or
persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed,
the lien shall be released by the City and the release may be filed of
record as in the case of filing notice of lien. The lien may be enforced by
proceedings to foreclose as in case of mortgages or mechanics' liens.
Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced within two years after
the date of filing the notice of lien.
(E) Exception. No person acting as managing agent or collector of rents of
any property involved in any proceeding because of violations or
alleged violations of the provisions of this article shall be liable therefor
if such person shall, within five days after receipt of notice of any
alleged violation or of summons, have notified the owner or owners of
the property, or the employer of such person, of the purported violation
or violations of any provision or provisions of this article in writing, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall have delivered to the
Building Commissioner or Health Officer, whoever has sent the notice, a
copy of such notice, with proof of service thereof on the owner or
owners or the employer of such person.
(A) Notice and placarding. The Building Commissioner shall serve notice of
the dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit as unfit for human
habitation upon the owner, operator and occupant thereof. Service shall
be by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by posting of a
placard at each entrance of the affected dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
(B) Contents. The notices and placards required by Subsection (A) hereof
shall state that the affected dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit is,
by such notice or placard, declared to be unfit for human habitation in
accordance with the provisions of this article; shall state the specific
uncorrected violations of this article leading to such designation and
the person or persons responsible for the correction thereof; and shall
order the affected dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit to be vacated
within a specific reasonable period of time as determined by the
Building Commissioner, which may be immediately where conditions
exist presenting immediate hazards to human life, health or safety.
Such notices and placards shall further state the right of any aggrieved
person to file an appeal pursuant to § 21.230 of this article within 30
days of the date of the receipt of such notice.
(C) Defacing or removing placard. No person shall deface or remove the
placard required by Subsection (A) hereof from any dwelling, dwelling
§ 21.222 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.223
1:726
§ 21.224. Effect of designation of dwelling as unfit for human
habitation.
§ 21.225. Designation of building or dwelling as dangerous and
public nuisance.
Whenever any building, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or any part
thereof, is subject to designation as dangerous and a public nuisance under
the provisions of § 21.222(C) of this article, the Building Commissioner
or Health Officer shall carry out such designation in compliance with the
following procedures:
unit or rooming unit which has been designated as unfit for human
habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in § 21.224(B).
(A) Vacation required. Any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit
designated as unfit for human habitation shall be vacated within the
time specified by the Building Commissioner pursuant to the provisions
of § 21.223 of this article.
(B) Conditions for resumption of human habitation. No dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit which has been designated as unfit for human
habitation in accordance with § 21.223 of this article shall again be
used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and
the placard so designating it is removed by, the Building Commissioner,
who shall remove such placard only when the defects upon which the
designation was based have been eliminated, and after the dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit has been inspected and found to comply
in all respects with the requirements of this article.
(A) Notice and placarding. The Building Commissioner shall serve notice of
the designation of the building, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or
part thereof, as dangerous and a public nuisance upon the owner,
operator, occupant and lien holders of record. Service shall be by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and by posting a placard at
each entrance of the affected building, dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit. Where the identity or whereabouts of the owner or lien
holder cannot be ascertained, notice mailed to the person or persons in
whose name the premises were last assessed shall be sufficient notice.
(B) Contents. The notices and placards required by Subsection (A) hereof
shall state that the affected building, dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit, or part thereof, is by such notice or placard declared to be
dangerous and a public nuisance in accordance with the provisions of
this article; shall state the specific alleged uncorrected violations of this
article deemed sufficient to justify such designation; and shall further
state that such designation may result in an order for demolition. Such
notice shall require the party to appear before the Building
Commissioner at a hearing to be held at a specified place and time, not
less than 10 days following the date of the notice, to show cause why
the designated building, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or part
§ 21.223 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.225
1:727
§ 21.226. Effect of designation of building or dwelling as dangerous
and public nuisance.
thereof, should not be vacated and repaired or demolished in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
(C) Defacing or removing placard. No person shall deface or remove the
placard required by Subsection (A) hereof from any building, dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit, or part thereof, which has been designated
as dangerous and a public nuisance, except as provided in § 21.226 of
this article.
(D) Hearing and findings. At the appointed time and place, the Building
Commissioner shall hear such testimony as the interested parties shall
offer relative to the designated building, dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, or part thereof, and shall, based on such testimony and
his investigation, make written findings of fact as to whether the
building, dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit is properly designated
as dangerous and a public nuisance.
(A) Order. Upon a finding pursuant to § 21.225 that the building, dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit, or part thereof, has been properly
designated as dangerous and a public nuisance, the Building
Commissioner shall issue an order to the owner, operator, occupant and
lien holders of record, commanding the owner to vacate and repair or
demolish the building, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or part
thereof; authorizing any lien holder of record to demolish such building,
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or part thereof, at his own risk to
prevent the attachment of a City lien, as provided in Subsection (D)
hereof; and shall authorize any person so notified to vacate or repair
such building, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or part thereof.
(B) Petition to Circuit Court. Unless the designated building, dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit, or part thereof, shall have been vacated
and the repair or demolition thereof commenced within 15 days of the
issuance of an order pursuant to Subsection (A) hereof, the Mayor shall
petition the Circuit Court of the county in which the premises are
located, pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1, for an order
requiring such vacation and authorizing such demolition or repair.
(C) Repair or demolition by City. Upon receipt of an order of court
authorizing the repair or demolition of a designated building, dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit or part thereof, the Building Commissioner
shall cause the designated building, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit, or part thereof to be repaired or demolished, as the facts may
warrant, by the City; provided, however, that where the Building
Commissioner finds it to be in the best interest of the City and its
residents, he shall notify the City Council and request it to take all
actions necessary to compel repair or demolition by the owner,
including the application for an injunction pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/
§ 21.225 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.226
1:728
§ 21.227. Emergency cases.
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to
the life or safety of any person unless a building, dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, or part thereof, is immediately repaired or demolished, the
Building Commissioner shall request the City Council to waive all provisions
of this article and to proceed directly to secure a demolition order according
to the procedures of 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1. The City Council shall use its
discretion in this request.
§ 21.228. Assistance of City Attorney.
Whenever any person fails, refuses or neglects to obey an order issued
pursuant to this article or in any other manner does not comply with the
duties imposed upon him by this article, the Mayor may notify the City
Attorney of the circumstances and request the City Attorney to institute
such legal action as may be required to effect compliance.
§ 21.229. Additional remedies.
The imposition of any penalty pursuant to this article shall not preclude
the City from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court
of proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful repair or maintenance; to
restrain, correct or abate a violation; to prevent the occupancy of a building,
dwelling or dwelling unit; to require compliance with the provisions of this
article or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations, or the
orders and determinations of the Building Commissioner, Health Officer or
the Board of Building Appeals.
11-31-2. All contracts for repair or demolition by the City shall be let by
competitive bid.277
(D) Lien for repairs or demolition. The costs of any vacation, repair or
demolition undertaken pursuant to this article by the City, or any lien
holder of record, shall be recoverable from the owner of the premises
and shall be a lien upon such premises, as provided by 65 ILCS 5/
11-31-1 and 65 ILCS 5/11-31-2.
(E) Conditions for resumption of use. No building, dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, or part thereof, which has been designated as dangerous
and a public nuisance in accordance with § 21.225 of this article shall
again be used for any purpose until and unless written approval is
secured from, and the placard so designating it is removed by the
Building Commissioner, who shall remove such placard only when the
defects upon which the designation was based have been eliminated,
and after the building, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or part
thereof, has been inspected and found to comply in all respects with the
requirements of this article.
277. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.226 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.230
1:729
§ 21.230. Appeals.
Appeals may be taken to the Board of Building Appeals, established by
Article 7 of this chapter, by the following persons, at the following times, in
the following manner, and with the following effects:
(A) Scope of appeal. An appeal may be taken from any decision of the
Building Commissioner, made pursuant to the authority conferred by
this article, which finds a violation of any provision of this article;
designates any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit unfit for human
habitation or dangerous and a public nuisance; orders the vacation,
repair or demolition of any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit;
interprets this article; or which in any other manner adversely affects
an owner, operator or occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit subject to the provisions of this article.
(B) Persons entitled to appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision within
the scope of Subsection (A) hereof may appeal from such decision.
(C) Time for appeal. An appeal shall be commenced within 30 days after the
date of the receipt of notice of the decision appealed from. Appeals not
commenced within such time shall be deemed waived.278
(D) Commencement of appeal. An appeal under this section shall be
commenced by filing with the Building Commissioner a notice of
appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, and by filing said appeal and a
copy of said notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The Building
Commissioner shall forthwith transmit to the Secretary of the Board all
of the papers constituting the record upon which the decision from
which appeal has been taken was made. The notice of appeal and the
appeal itself shall be filed in such number of copies, be in such form,
and contain such information as the Board may provide from time to
time by general rule.
(E) Stay pending appeal. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the decision appealed from and all duties imposed
thereby, unless the Building Commissioner certifies to the Board of
Building Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that
by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion,
cause immediate hazards to human life, health or safety, in which case
the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order, which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record upon
application following notice to the Building Commissioner and upon due
cause shown. Any stay in effect pursuant to this Subsection (E) shall
continue until a decision on the appeal is rendered pursuant to
Subsection (F) hereof.
(F) Action on appeal. The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for
a public hearing on the appeal, shall give due notice thereof to the
278. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.230 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.230
1:730
§ 21.231. Notice of suspected abandonment.
§ 21.232. Effect of notice of suspected abandonment.
If a suspected abandoned dwelling unit is not reoccupied within 30 days
after service of the notice required by § 21.231, the dwelling unit shall be
designated as an abandoned dwelling unit.
§ 21.233. Designation of dwelling unit as abandoned dwelling unit.
Whenever any dwelling unit is subject to designation as an abandoned
dwelling unit, the Building Commissioner shall carry out such designation
in compliance with the following procedures:
parties having a known interest therein and shall render a written
decision without unreasonable delay. Upon the concurring vote of a
majority of its members then holding office, the Board may reverse or
affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify, the decision from which the
appeal was taken, and to that end the Board shall have all the powers
of the Building Commissioner with respect to such decision.
(A) Whenever a dwelling has been unoccupied for a period of 60 days, the
Building Commissioner shall serve written notice upon the owner and
any operator, lessee, or mortgagee of the dwelling unit that the
dwelling unit may be designated as an abandoned dwelling unit within
30 days after service of the notice required by this section.
(B) Notice shall be given by personal service or by mailing a copy thereof to
the owner and any operator, or lessee or mortgagee of the suspected
abandoned dwelling unit by certified mail, return receipt requested, at
his or her last known address. In the event that notice by mail is
ineffective to effect actual notice to the owner, or to any operator, lessee
or mortgagee of the dwelling unit, notice of the suspected abandonment
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area and
a copy of the notice required by this section shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on or about the suspected abandoned dwelling unit.
(C) Such notice shall inform the owner, and any operator, lessee or
mortgagee of the suspected abandoned dwelling unit that unless the
dwelling unit is reoccupied within 30 days after service of the notice
required by this section, the dwelling unit shall be designated as an
abandoned dwelling unit and shall be posted as such and subject to
reinspection and the issuance of an occupancy permit in the manner
provided herein.
(A) Notice and placarding. The Building Commissioner shall serve notice of
the designation of the dwelling unit as an abandoned dwelling upon the
last owner, and operator, lessee or mortgagee. Service shall be certified
mail, return receipt requested, and by posting a placard at each
entrance of the affected dwelling unit. Where the identity or
whereabouts of the owners, operators, lessee, or mortgagee cannot be
§ 21.230 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.233
1:731
§ 21.234. Effect of designation of dwelling unit as abandoned
dwelling unit.
§ 21.235. Fee for inspection of abandoned dwelling unit.
The fee for inspection of an abandoned dwelling unit shall be $15.
§ 21.236. through § 21.299. (Reserved)
ascertained, notice shall be mailed to the person or persons to whom
the last tax bill was mailed.
(B) Contents. The notices and placards required by Subsection (A) hereof
shall state that the affected dwelling unit is by such placard declared to
be an abandoned dwelling unit within the meaning of § 21.204; and
shall further state that inspection of the abandoned dwelling unit by the
Building Commissioner shall be required prior to occupancy of the
dwelling unit by an owner, operator or lessee and that it is unlawful to
reoccupy an abandoned dwelling unless and until an occupancy
certificate for such dwelling unit has been issued by the Building
Commissioner. Such notice shall state that any person intending to
occupy the abandoned dwelling unit shall notify the Building
Commissioner five days prior to occupancy of the abandoned dwelling
unit.
(C) It shall be unlawful to remove or deface the placard required by
Subsection (A) hereof from any dwelling unit, except as provided in
§ 21.234(B) of this article.
(A) Any dwelling unit designated as an abandoned dwelling unit shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Commissioner prior to occupancy
of the dwelling unit.
(B) No dwelling unit which has been designated as an abandoned dwelling
unit in accordance with § 21.233 shall again be used for any purpose
until and unless written approval is secured from, and the placard so
designating the dwelling unit as an abandoned dwelling unit is removed
by, the Building Commissioner, who shall remove such placard only
after the dwelling unit has been inspected.
(C) The Building Commissioner shall not issue an occupancy permit for the
abandoned dwelling unit unless and until the abandoned dwelling unit
has been inspected and found to comply in all respects with the
requirements of this article.
§ 21.233 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.236
1:732
ARTICLE 22
Satellite Earth Stations
§ 21.300. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SATELLITE EARTH STATION — An antenna of any size, shape or
description designed for receiving communication or other signals from
satellites. Said antenna may have a low-noise amplifier (LNA) and be
connected with coaxial cable to a television or other receiver. A satellite
earth station is also commonly referred to as an "earth station," a "ground
station" or a "satellite dish."
§ 21.301. Permit required.
No person, commercial business, firm, partnership, corporation, trust or
other legal entity shall erect or cause to be erected an earth station without
a permit, nor shall any such work commence before a permit is issued in
accordance with this article.
§ 21.302. Application for permit; fee; notification of abutters.
An application for a permit shall be on forms furnished by the Building
Commissioner, and shall be accompanied by a current survey showing
the dimensions of the lot, and the location of all buildings or structures
thereon, and specifications describing the earth station and its structural
and engineering components (the manufacturer's specifications) shall be
attached. All such applications shall be signed by the property owner and
shall be accompanied by a fee of $75. The exact location, height and other
proposed construction of the satellite earth station shall not be varied
without written approval of the Building Commissioner. The Building
Commissioner must notify, by certified mail, owners of real estate adjoining
the property upon which the proposed earth station is to be erected at least
10 days before issuing a permit.
§ 21.303. Location restrictions.
No satellite earth station shall be erected:
(A) In any front yard;
(B) In any side yard;
(C) Within five feet of the side lot lines;
(D) Within five feet of the rear lot line;
(E) Within five feet of the rear wall of the main structure located on the lot;
(F) Within five feet of the side wall of the garage;
§ 21.300 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.303
1:733
§ 21.304. Construction specifications.
All satellite earth stations shall meet the following construction and erection
requirements:
(G) On any roof or attached to any building in a residentially or
commercially zoned district; or
(H) On a chimney, tower, tree, pole or spire, or any extended structure
above the ground to extend its height.
(A) The dish shall not exceed six feet in diameter;
(B) Galvanized metal supports, or equivalent, must be used;
(C) A concrete base extending not less than 42 inches below the surface
must be used to anchor the dish to the ground. Foundation drawings
must be approved by the Building Commissioner;
(D) The maximum height of the highest part of the dish shall not exceed 15
feet above the ground on which it is erected;
(E) The dish and structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 75
miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires;
(F) No linkage, physically or electronically, shall be permitted to a receiver
not located on the same lot;
(G) Installation must conform to the provisions of the Chicago Electrical
Code, including mandatory use of Underwriters Laboratories approved
cable, except as may be modified by Article 13 of this chapter;
(H) Wiring to the earth satellite station shall be placed at least four inches
beneath the surface of the ground, and shall be within rigid conduit;
(I) That portion of the wiring exposed between its emergence from the
ground to and through its entry into the structure shall be enclosed in
conduit;
(J) Any driving motor shall be limited to one-hundred-twenty-five-volt
maximum design voltage and shall be encased in protective guards; the
motor must be connected to a grounding rod;
(K) The pole to which the earth station is mounted must be capped and
connected to a minimum of four grounding rods;
(L) The earth station must be provided with a ground-fault interrupter; and
(M) The earth station must be provided with a separate circuit-breaker.
§ 21.303 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.305
1:734
§ 21.305. Variances.
The provisions of this article may be varied in cases of hardship or
impracticability by the Board of Building Appeals. See Article 7 of this
chapter.
§ 21.306. through § 21.399. (Reserved)
§ 21.305 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.306
1:735

ARTICLE 23
Solar Energy Collector Systems
§ 21.400. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POTENTIALLY AFFECTED OWNER — The applicant or the owner of the feesimple
title or the contract purchaser of any real property which lies within
300 feet of the solar collector.
SOLAR BOARD OF REVIEW — Consist of the members of the Building
Board of Appeals (see Article 7). The Board shall hear requests for variances
and appeals from the decision of the Building Commissioner to grant or
deny a solar permit.
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR SYSTEM — Any device or combination of
devices that relies upon sunshine as an energy source, and is designed to
collect solar energy and transmit it for heating of internal spaces or potable
water.
SOLAR RIGHT — A property right to an unobstructed line-of-sight path
from a solar collector to the sun which permits radiation from the sun to
impinge directly on the solar collector. The extent of the solar right shall be
described by that illumination provided by the path of the sun on the winter
solstice day, which is put to a beneficial use.
WINTER SOLSTICE DAY — The day on or about December 21 which marks
the beginning of winter in the northern hemisphere and is the time when
the sun reaches its southernmost point.
§ 21.401. Permit required.
No person, commercial business, firm, partnership, corporation, trust or
other legal entity shall install or cause to be installed a solar energy
collector system without a permit nor shall any such work commence before
a permit is issued in accordance with this article. Solar energy collector
systems in use at the effective date of this article shall apply for a permit
within six months from said date to continue its use, but no permit fee shall
be charged.
§ 21.402. (Reserved)279
§ 21.403. Restrictions on solar right.
(A) Solar collectors shall be located on the solar user's property so as not to
unreasonably or unnecessarily restrict the uses of neighboring
property. Unreasonable or unnecessary restriction shall include, but not
279. Editor's Note: The definitions formerly found in this section were moved to § 21.400 of this
article at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 21.400 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.403
1:737
§ 21.404. Solar access permit.
§ 21.405. Application for permit; review and determination; notice;
appeals.
be limited to, any restriction which would prohibit the uses allowed by
Chapter 22, Zoning, of the City Code.
(B) No solar right attaches to a solar collector or a portion of a solar
collector which would be shaded by a hypothetical non-lighttransmitting,
ten-foot-high wall located on the property line where the
solar collector is located on a winter solstice day.
(C) The solar right to radiation of the sun before 9:00 a.m. or after 1:00
p.m. Central Standard Time is de minimus and may be infringed
without compensation to the owner of the solar collector.
(D) A solar right which is not applied to a beneficial use for a period of two
years or more shall be deemed abandoned without priority.
(E) The priority of new construction with regard to interference in solar
rights shall vest as of the date the application for a building permit is
approved.
(A) A solar permit must be issued before a solar right may be established
under this article.
(B) A solar permit shall be granted for any proposed or existing solar
collector which complies with the requirements of this and other City
ordinances and state law.
(C) A solar permit shall not be granted if its issuance would prevent any
affected property owner from erecting, consistent with legal
requirements, a structure of a size, character, and usefulness
reasonably typical of those in existence on similar lots subject to the
same zoning requirements located within 300 feet of the lot in question.
However, nothing in this section prohibits issuance of a permit because
it would impose requirements on a neighboring lot owner that are more
restrictive than the height and setback requirements that would
otherwise apply, as long as reasonable use and enjoyment of such lot is
preserved.
(D) Solar rights under applications filed subsequent to the effective date of
this article shall vest on the date the solar permit is issued, which date
shall also be the priority date of the solar right. The solar collector shall
be put to beneficial use within one year of that time. The Building
Commissioner shall certify the right and its beneficial use within one
year of its vesting, and in the event beneficial use has not been
established, he shall revoke the permit.
§ 21.403 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.405
1:738
(A) Any person desiring to obtain a solar right shall first make application
to the Building Commissioner for a solar access permit. A permit
application for a solar right shall consist of the following:
(1) The original and two copies of a completed solar access permit
application on forms provided by the Building Commissioner.
(2) A review fee of $150.
(3) Legal description of property and names and mailing addresses of
all potentially affected owners.
(4) Permanent index number and names and addresses of all taxpayers
of properties listed in Subsection (A)(3).
(5) The original and two copies of a site plan drawn to scale showing at
least the following detail:
(a) Owner's name, legal and common address of the site and use of
the structure.
(b) North arrow, scale and date of preparation of the plan.
(c) Names of all adjacent streets.
(d) Dimensions of property.
(e) Dimensions, heights and location of all structures on the site
and on neighboring property as may be required by the
Building Commissioner, but none in excess of 300 feet from the
property line.
(f) Location, height and common name of all trees, bushes and
shrubs on the site and on neighboring property as may be
required by the Building Commissioner, and estimated height
at full growth, but none in excess of 300 feet from the property
line.
(g) Location and height of all walls and fences on the site and on
the property line with abutting property.
(h) Design, construction and orientation of solar collector.
(i) For existing collectors, the first date the solar collector was
beneficially used.
(j) Such topographical information and engineering calculations
as may be necessary in the Building Commissioner's discretion
to document the solar right.
(k) Signature block for Building Commissioner's approval.
(B) Upon receipt of a permit application, the Building Commissioner shall
review the application and site plan and any comments received
thereon, inspect the site of the proposed or existing solar collector, and
§ 21.405 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.405
1:739
§ 21.406. Prior existing uses.
shall cause the applicant to make any necessary corrections and
additions to the permit application and site plan.
(C) The Building Commissioner shall, within 10 days of his determination,
give notice by mail to the potentially affected property owners and
taxpayers, in which they shall be advised:
(1) As to whether he has granted or denied the solar permit.
(2) Of the right to inspect the application, site plan and related
documents at the Building Commissioner's office.
(3) Of the right to appeal the decision of the Building Commissioner
and of the procedure to obtain a hearing thereon before the Solar
Board of Review.
(D) Potentially affected property owners or taxpayers may appeal the
issuance or denial of a permit by filing with the Building Commissioner
a written request for a hearing within 10 days following the date of
mailing of the notice by the Building Commissioner. The Solar Board of
Review shall, upon receipt of a written appeal, hold a hearing not less
than 15 days, but not more than 30 days, from the date of receiving the
appeal. The Board shall cause service of notice of the date, time and
location of such hearing to be made by mail upon the permit applicant,
the Building Commissioner, and the potentially affected property
owners and taxpayers, and shall give at least one public notice thereof
in a newspaper of general circulation in the City; such notice shall be
mailed and published not less than 15 days, nor more than 30 days,
before the hearing. Upon the hearing, any person may appear in
person, or by agent or attorney. A majority of the Solar Board of Review
members may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the Building
Commissioner. The solar access permit shall be issued, rescinded or
modified as necessary to comply with the decision of the Board.
(E) Proof of mailing of the notice upon either the owner or taxpayer shall be
sufficient notice to the potentially affected property owners and
taxpayers.
(F) The fee for an appeal shall be $50 and shall accompany the request for
an appeal not less than 15 days, but not more than 30 days, from the
date of receiving the appeal.
(A) The lawful location of structures in existence prior to the time of
beneficial use of an existing solar energy collection system or in
existence at the effective date of this article may be continued even
though the location does not conform to the requirements of this
article.
(B) The solar applicant takes the permit subject to the natural growth of all
vegetation which exists at the time of filing the application.
§ 21.405 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.406
1:740
§ 21.407. Variances; fee.
§ 21.408. Location restrictions; installation and testing.
(C) Such structure or vegetation which has been damaged by fire or a
calamity may be restored to its original condition, provided the work is
commenced within one year of the calamity. In addition, normal and
routine maintenance of structures may be carried on.
(D) Whenever the use of such structure or vegetation has been
discontinued for a period of one year, the structure or vegetation shall
not thereafter be reestablished unless such future use shall be in
conformance with provisions of this article.
(A) Any person desiring to erect any solar collector or other structure, or
increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any
vegetation or otherwise use the property not in conformance with this
article may apply for a variance from the Solar Board of Review.
Applicants for variation for a solar right shall include information
required in § 23.405 for solar right applications; other applications shall
include the information required of Subsections (C) and (D) of § 23.405.
The Solar Board shall fix a reasonable time for the variance hearing and
give public notice in the same time and manner as provided in
§ 23.405(D), as well as to the applicant for the variations and the owner
of the solar right, with the description of the property involved, a
statement of the nature of the requested variance and the time and
place of the hearing. Failure to mail a notice to every potentially
affected owner or taxpayer shall not affect the validity of any hearing or
determination of the Solar Board. The hearing shall be conducted in the
same manner as hearings for variation under Chapter 22, Zoning, of the
City Code. A variance shall not be granted by the Board unless,
following the hearing, it finds:
(1) That the strict application of the provisions of this article would
result in substantial and unavoidable hardship.
(2) That all possible measures have been, and will be, taken to
minimize interference with solar or other property rights.
(3) That the variance granted is the minimum adjustment that will
accomplish this purpose.
(B) A fee of $50 shall accompany the request for a variance in addition to
the required fee for a solar right.
(A) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PRIMARY TANK — A solar energy storage tank which receives thermal
energy from the collector.
§ 21.406 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.408
1:741
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A device used for absorbing incidence solar
radiation and converting it into useful energy. Said solar collector shall
be capable of collecting, storing or transmitting at least 25,000 BTUs
on a clear winter solstice day.
SOLAR SYSTEM — A solar heating system consisting of a complete
assembly of components, equipment, controls, interconnecting means
and terminal elements needed to convert solar energy into thermal
energy for heating space and potable water inside buildings.
(B) Restrictions. No component of a solar energy collector shall be erected:
(1) Within three feet of the common line on any duplex roof.
(2) On the roof of any garage.
(3) In any front yard.
(4) In any side yard.
(5) Within five feet of the rear lot line.
(6) Within five feet of the side lot lines in any back yard.
(C) Installation and testing.
(1) All systems shall be installed in an approved manner to protect all
potable water supply systems from backflow, cross-connection or
contamination.
(2) Installation of all components of the system shall conform to
regulations contained in the Building Code adopted by the City as
set forth in Article 1 of this chapter and the City of Chicago
Electrical and Plumbing Codes, as adopted by the City of
Hometown.280
(3) Installation of all components of the system shall be carried out by
appropriate registered or certified contractors: electrical,
plumbing, welding, and so forth.
(4) Collectors shall be approved by the Building Commissioner for the
use intended. They shall be securely fastened in place and shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instructions or other methods approved by the Building
Commissioner. These shall include, but not be limited to, being
anchored to supports of not less than 1 1/4 inches by 1 1/4 inches
by 1/8 inch galvanized iron or other material equal in strength with
rust- and decay-resisting qualities. These supports shall have not
less than two inches of clearance above the roof and shall be
anchored to the roof rafters with galvanized lag bolts in an
approved manner, to prevent leaks or damage to the roof. All
280. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 21.408 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.408
1:742
installations shall be in compliance with applicable wind-load
requirements.
(5) The collector coil shall be sized and designed for intended specific
use, forced circulation or thermosyphon, and code-approved
materials.
(6) If other than a manufactured water heater is used, the storage hot
water tank for domestic hot water shall be code-approved and not
less than 25 gallons per person for residential premises.
Commercial tank use shall be sized based upon the projected
consumption of hot water to be used in the structure. An approved
type of heater or booster shall be installed as a supplement, in
order to maintain required water temperature, and all storage hot
water tanks shall be properly insulated.
(7) All hot water heater and storage hot water tanks shall be installed
by certified plumbing contractors, as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
(8) No portion of the piping system shall be covered or concealed until
it first has been tested, inspected and approved by the Plumbing
Inspector.
(9) All piping shall be tested and the test pressure for nonpotable
subsystems shall be equal to at least the subsystem design working
pressure. All necessary apparatus for conducting the tests shall be
furnished by the permittee.
(10) An accessible full-way valve shall be installed on the cold water
supply pipe at or near the connection to the solar system. This valve
shall meet water heater shut-off valve requirements.
(11) Automatic freeze protection shall be provided for all collectors and
exposed piping.
(12) A pressure-relief device shall be provided on the potable water
system. Each section of the solar system that can be valved-off or is
otherwise located, and where excessive pressure can develop, shall
be protected by an additional pressure-relief device. For the
purpose of this section, the system shutoff valve shall be considered
an isolating valve. Pressure-relief devices for nonpotable
subsystems shall be set at no more than the maximum pressure for
which the subsystem was designed. Drains for pressure-relief
valves located inside or outside the building shall be approved by
the Plumbing Inspector.
(13) Mixing valves shall be installed in the system to ensure that hot
water supply in plumbing fixtures will not exceed 160° F. On onetank
systems, where the water heater controls utilize fusible-link
type over-temperature protection, there shall be provided controls
designed to shut off the solar circulating pump at 180° F. These
§ 21.408 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.408
1:743
§ 21.409. through § 21.499. (Reserved)
controls shall not be considered a substitute for the mixing valve
required by this section. On two-tank systems, the mixing valve
shall be located in the piping between the primary tank and water
heater.
(14) Cross-connection controls shall be provided. If a heat exchanger is
used in conjunction with potable water, it shall be approved by the
Building Commissioner and Plumbing Inspector prior to
installation.
(15) Unions shall be installed within 12 inches of the water heater,
primary tanks, pumps and similar equipment, which may require
service by removal or replacement, in a manner which will
facilitate ready removal.
(16) Upon completion of the solar system, the permittee shall sign a
certificate of system installation compliance with this code. The
certificate shall list the following information:
(a) Type of freeze protection.
(b) Mixing valve setting in degrees Fahrenheit.
(c) Subsystem working pressure psi (if applicable).
(d) Subsystem test pressure psi (if applicable).
(e) Heat exchanger make and model number (if applicable).
(f) Circulating pump over-temperature protection shutoff setting
degrees Fahrenheit (required only in a one-tank system where
the water heater controls utilize fusible-link type overtemperature
protection).
(17) Upon receipt of the certificate of system installation compliance
with this code, the Building Commissioner shall cause a final
inspection to be made of the solar system by the Plumbing,
Electrical and Building Inspectors. Following approval of the
system installation, the Building Commissioner shall sign a
certificate of approval or completion. No solar system shall be put
into operation without this signed certificate.
§ 21.408 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.409
1:744
ARTICLE 24
Rental Housing
[Added 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 7-2007]
§ 21.500. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms are hereby defined:
BUILDING CODE — Chapter 21 of the City of Hometown Municipal Code.
BUILDING COMMISSIONER — The Building Commissioner of the City of
Hometown or any person authorized to act by the Building Commissioner.
DWELLING UNIT — Any part of a building used as a residence or sleeping
place by one or more persons.
OWNER — The legal title holder or holders of the realty, except:
RENTAL HOUSING — Any single- or multifamily building containing one or
more dwelling units occupied by a tenant for which rental income is paid.
Rental housing does not include a condominium unit unless a person owns
or controls more than 50% of the units in a condominium building and more
than 50% of the units are occupied by tenants. Rental housing shall exclude
cooperative corporations and associations.
RENTAL MANAGER — A person who is not the owner of property but
receives compensation for managing any rental housing.
TENANT — A person occupying a dwelling unit pursuant to an oral or
written rental agreement.
§ 21.501. Registration required.
The owner of any building used as rental housing shall file a registration
statement for each such building with the City Clerk of the City of
Hometown. The registration statement shall be on a form provided by the
City Clerk and shall contain the following information:
If legal title is held by an Illinois land trust, "owner" shall mean the
beneficial owner or owners of the land trust; and
(A)
If there is a purchaser or purchasers under a real estate installment
sales contract, "owner" shall mean the purchaser or purchasers.
(B)
(A) The name, street address, and telephone number of each owner of the
building. If the owner is a partnership, corporation, limited-liability
company or similar entity, the statement shall include the name, street
address, telephone number and position of the responsible partner or
officer.
(B) The street address and permanent index number of the building, and
the number of dwelling units therein.
§ 21.500 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.501
1:745
§ 21.502. Time for registration. [Amended 11-27-2007]
The registration statement shall be filed no later than January 31 of each
calendar year and within 20 days after a change in ownership of the
building. Registration shall be effective for a period of February 1 through
January 31, thereafter.
§ 21.503. Inspections required.
After rental housing is registered, the Building Commissioner shall cause
each dwelling unit to be inspected. Rental housing shall be inspected every
12 months or upon a change of ownership.
§ 21.504. Notice of inspections; results of inspection.
(C) If rents are collected or the property is managed by a person who is not
the owner, then the name, street address, and telephone number of
such rental manager.
(A) The City of Hometown shall provide notice to the owner and tenants of
the rental housing that it intends to inspect the same. The notice shall
consist of a statement setting forth the City's intention to inspect the
rental housing and/or dwelling unit for violations of the Building Code.
The notice shall also consist of: 1) the common address of the rental
housing and/or dwelling unit to be inspected; and 2) the date and time
when the inspection is to take place. The notice shall advise the owner
and occupant of their ability to reschedule the inspection. Any request
for rescheduling must be made in writing 24 hours prior to the
scheduled inspection. Owners and occupants will be given at least
seven days' notice of an inspection.
(B) If the rental housing is found to be in compliance with the Building
Code of the City of Hometown, no further action will be taken by the
City of Hometown. In the event that an inspection shows that the rental
housing does not comply with the Building Code, the Building
Commissioner shall issue a deficiency report and permit the listed
deficiencies to be remedied. All deficiencies shall be remedied within 30
days from the issuance of the deficiency report. An extension of time
may be granted to remedy deficiencies upon a showing of good cause. A
reinspection of the rental housing shall be made to determine if the
rental housing has been brought into compliance with the Building
Code of the City of Hometown.
(C) Consent or refusal for an inspection (reinspection) of rental housing or
a dwelling unit shall be obtained from the tenant of the rental housing
or dwelling unit. In the event the rental housing or dwelling unit is
unoccupied, the owner shall have the right to consent to or refuse an
inspection. An owner or tenant may refuse an inspection either before
or at the time of the scheduled inspection. No adverse action will be
taken against an owner or tenant withholding consent to inspect rental
housing or a dwelling unit. In the event of such refusal, the City may
§ 21.501 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.504
1:746
§ 21.505. Code violations.
In the event that code violations are found to exist, and have not been
remedied as provided for in this article, the City may file a complaint with a
court of competent jurisdiction to seek compliance with its Building Code.
§ 21.506. Other remedies.
The City of Hometown reserves the right to enforce the Building Code in
any manner available to it under the law. This article shall not be considered
the City's exclusive remedy, or a waiver of any other remedies provided by
law.
petition the Circuit Court of Cook County for the issuance of an
administrative search warrant.
§ 21.504 CITY GOVERNMENT § 21.506
1:747
Chapter 22
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 5.
Health regulations — See Ch. 15.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 16.
Signs — See Ch. 18, Art. 8.
Building Code — See Ch. 21.
§ 21.506 HOMETOWN CODE § 21.506
1:748
ARTICLE 1
Title
§ 22.01. Short title.
This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the "Hometown
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 22.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.01
1:749

ARTICLE 2
Intent and Purpose
§ 22.02. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
(A) To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, and
general welfare of the people.
(B) To divide the City of Hometown into zones or districts, restricting and
regulating therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, and use of buildings, structures, and land for residence,
business, and manufacturing and other specified uses.
(C) To protect the character and the stability of the residential, business,
and manufacturing areas within the City of Hometown and to promote
the orderly and beneficial development of such areas.
(D) To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to
property.
(E) To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the area
of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate
light and air and to protect the public health.
(F) To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
residential, business, manufacturing, or other uses within such areas.
(G) To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform therein.
(H) To prohibit uses, buildings, or structures incompatible with the
character of development or intended uses within specified zoning
districts.
(I) To prevent additions to, or alteration or remodeling of, existing
buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations imposed hereunder.
(J) To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off-street
parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial
vehicles.
(K) To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, and other hazards in
the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare.
(L) To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by
regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land
surrounding them.
§ 22.02 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.02
1:751
(M) To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the City
of Hometown.
(N) To provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings
and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of
desirable development in each district.
§ 22.02 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.02
1:752
ARTICLE 3
Definitions
§ 22.03. Terms defined.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular
number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word
"building" shall include the word "structure"; and the word "shall" is
mandatory and not directory.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — A use or structure that:[Amended by
Ord. No. 5-2007]
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms used as a family dwelling,
including bath and kitchen accommodations, located in a building in which
there are three or more such rooms or suites.
APARTMENT HOUSE — See "dwelling, multiple."
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR — General repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or
reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body frame
or fender straightening and repair, overall painting, subject to the
requirements of the Building Code. Storage of unlicensed vehicles,
inoperative vehicles, repaired vehicles awaiting payment, or vehicles for the
purpose of stripping parts, is prohibited.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A place where gasoline is stored only
in underground tanks, kerosene or motor oil and lubricants or grease, for
operation of automobiles, is retailed directly to the public on premises,
including minor accessories and service for automobiles. Storage of
unlicensed vehicles, inoperative vehicles, repaired vehicles awaiting
payment, or vehicles for the purpose of stripping parts is prohibited.281
Is subordinate in extent and purpose to, and serves, a principal use or
structure; and
(A)
Is customarily found as an incident to such principal use or structure;
and
(B)
Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of those
occupying, working at, or being served by such principal use or
structure; and
(C)
Except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this
chapter, is located on the same zoning lot as such principal use or
structure; and
(D)
Is under the same ownership and control as such principal use or
structure.
(E)
281. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.03 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.03
1:753
BASEMENT — A story having part, but not more than 1/2, of its height
below grade.
BREEZEWAY — An open structure on two sides attached to and leading
from the main building to the garage on the same lot.
BUILDING — Any structure designed or intended for the support,
enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property.
When a structure is divided into separate parts by unpierced walls
extending from the ground up, each part is deemed a separate building.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance from the first floor to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the ridge of a gable, hip,
gambrel or mansard roof.
COURT — An open, unoccupied space, other than a yard, which is bounded
on two or more sides by a building or buildings.
DISTRICT — A section or sections of the City of Hometown for which the
regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height of
buildings, or the size of yards, or intensity of use are uniform.
DWELLING — Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed or used
exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A building designed for occupancy by one
family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DUPLEX — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two families on two separate lots sharing a single party wall.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building designed for occupation by more than
two families containing two or more dwelling units.
FAMILY — One or more persons, related by blood, adoption or marriage,
living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, or a number of
persons living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit though
not related by blood, adoption or marriage.282
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building for housing motor-driven
vehicles which are the property of and for the use of the occupants of the
lot on which the private garage is located.
GRADE — Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet
from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street.
For buildings having walls adjoining one street, the elevation of the
sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street.
(A)
For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average
of the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of all walls adjoining the
street.
(B)
282. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.03 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.03
1:754
HOME OCCUPATION — Any occupation or profession practiced by a
member of the family residing on the premises, and which occupation is
clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling.
A home occupation is a use located and conducted so that the average
neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence.
The operation of a home occupation is also subject to the following
conditions and limitations:[Amended by Ord. No. 5-2007]
For the buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level
of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of
the building.
(C)
The total amount of space used in conjunction with the home
occupation shall not be devoted to more than 1/4 of the total area of any
one story.
(A)
There shall be no signs, advertising, displays or activity that would
indicate, from the exterior of the residence, that the residence is being
used, in part, for any purpose other than that of a dwelling.
(B)
The operation of a home occupation does not allow the parking or
storage of motor vehicles which are otherwise prohibited by the zoning
regulations governing the premises of the home occupation. The
premises containing the home occupation shall be subject to the zoning
regulations of the district in which it is located.
(C)
The outside display of goods and the outside storage of equipment is
prohibited.
(D)
No more than one person may be employed on the premises, except
family members residing on the premises.
(E)
All activities involved in the home occupation shall take place inside
the home. No accessory building shall be employed for the home
occupation.
(F)
No commodity shall be sold on the premises or, if intended for sale or
use elsewhere, stored on the premises.
(G)
The home occupation shall not generate noise, vibration, glare, fumes,
odors or electrical interference beyond that which normally occurs in
the zoning district in which it is located.283
(H)
No home occupation shall consist in whole or part of the sale or
boarding of animals.
(I)
No home occupation shall be permitted to operate without a valid
business license.
(J)
283. Editor's Note: Former Subsection (9), which immediately followed this subsection and
restricted media advertising, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30,
General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 22.03 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.03
1:755
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space on the same lot with a building
or group of buildings for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading and unloading passengers, merchandise, or material.
LOT — A parcel of land intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this
chapter, including one main building together with its accessory buildings,
the open spaces and parking spaces required by this chapter and having its
principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which
has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County,
Illinois; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds prior to the adoption of the ordinance.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear
lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersections.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE — A lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER — A facility operated by
an organization or business that is registered by the Illinois Department
of Agriculture to perform necessary activities to provide only registered
medical cannabis dispensing organizations with usable medical cannabis
per the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act (410
ILCS 130/1 et seq.), enacted by the State of Illinois, as may be amended
from time to time.[Added 1-28-2014 by Ord. No. 1-2014]
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION — A facility operated
by an organization or business that is registered by the Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from
a registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis,
paraphernalia, or related supplies and educational materials to registered
qualifying patients, per the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.), enacted by the State of Illinois,
as may be amended from time to time.[Added 1-28-2014 by Ord. No.
1-2014]
MEDICAL CANNABIS FACILITIES — Both medical cannabis cultivation
centers and medical cannabis dispensing organizations.[Added 1-28-2014
by Ord. No. 1-2014]
NONCONFORMING USE — Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use
at the time of passage of this chapter, or amendments thereto, which does
No home occupation shall be permitted without the necessary licensing
from the State of Illinois.
(K)
§ 22.03 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.03
1:756
not conform after the passage of this chapter, or amendments thereto, with
the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
PARKING SPACE — A durably surfaced area designed to store one standardsize
automobile. All parking stalls shall be at least nine feet in width. All
parking spaces shall access directly upon an aisle or driveway of such
design as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access. All new
and existing parking areas shall be improved with paved brick, asphalt or
concrete surface over a proper base.
PATIO - GARAGE PORCH — An accessory structure being open on three
sides attached to a garage; the overall size of both (garage and patio) may
not be more than 20 feet in width and 22 feet in length; open sides can only
be covered by ventilated screening or a continuous operable sash providing
a minimum of 50% of floor area in ventilating openings except during the
months of October through and including February when an operable and/
or removable sash may be used in place of ventilating screening. A solid wall
may be built around the patio no higher than 30 inches above the finished
floor.
PLACE — An open unoccupied space, other than a street or alley,
permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property.
POOL, SWIMMING AND WADING — A receptacle for water, or an artificial
pool of water, having a depth at any point of more than 18 inches, intended
for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings,
and including all appurtenant equipment thereto.284
STREET — All property dedicated or intended for public or private streets,
highway, freeway, or roadway purposes or subject to public easements.
STORY — That portion of the building, other than a cellar, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there
is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above
it.
STREET LINE — A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous street.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground, including, but without limiting,
advertising signs, billboards, backstops, tennis courts, garages, walls or
fences.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any changes in the supporting members of
a building, such as bearing walls and partitions, columns, beams, or girders,
or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
TERRACE, OPEN — A level and rather narrow plane or platform which may
be improved with a surface of concrete, masonry, or stone units which, for
the purpose of this chapter, is located adjacent to one or more faces of
284. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.03 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.03
1:757
the principal structure and which is constructed no higher than the height
of the finished first floor, except a terrace located in the front yard may
have a masonry wall or ornamental iron railings not more than three feet
in height above mean grade, provided it does not project into the required
front yard more than 12 feet and in a duplex district the wall or railing
must be installed simultaneously and symmetrically on both lots of a duplex
dwelling. Terraces shall be installed on a nonorganic base only; i.e., sand,
concrete, or screening.
USE — The purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon
is designed, arranged, or intended, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except
as otherwise provided herein. In measuring the yard for the purpose of
determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth
of the rear yard, the mean horizontal distance between the lot line and the
main building shall be used.285
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the front of a lot between the
side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the
street line and the main buildings or any projection thereof, other than the
projection of the usual steps, entrance way, open terrace, bay windows, or
eaves.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the rear of a lot measured between
the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the
rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than
steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots, the rear
yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its
least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in
all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the main building and the side line or the lot
and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
285. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.03 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.03
1:758
ARTICLE 4
Use Districts
§ 22.04. Districts.
In order to classify, regulate, and restrict the locations of trades, industries,
and the locations of buildings designed for specific uses, to regulate and
limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or structurally
altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to
regulate and determine the areas of yards, courts, and other open spaces
within and surrounding such buildings, the City of Hometown, Illinois, is
hereby divided into districts of which there shall be four in number, known
as:
A Single-Family Dwelling District
B Two-Family Duplex Dwelling District
C Multiple-Family Dwelling District
D Commercial District
§ 22.05. Boundaries; Zoning Map.
The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the map made a part of this
chapter, which map is designated as the "Zoning Map." The Zoning Map
and all the notations, references, and other information shown thereon are
a part of this chapter and have the same force and effect as if the Zoning
Map and all the notations, references, and other information shown thereon
were all fully set forth or described herein, which Zoning Map is properly
attested and is on file with the Clerk of the City of Hometown, Illinois.
§ 22.06. Annexation.
All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City of Hometown,
Illinois, shall be considered as being in the A Single-Family Dwelling District
until otherwise changed by ordinance.
§ 22.07. Zoning of streets, alleys, public ways and railroad rights-ofway.
All streets, alleys, public ways, and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise
specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same use district as the
property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways, and
railroad rights-of-way. Where the center line of a street, alley, public way or
railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas,
unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as
that of the abutting property up to such center line.
§ 22.04 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.07
1:759

ARTICLE 5
General Provisions
§ 22.08. Scope of regulations.
No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used
for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the building
or land is located.
§ 22.09. Permits.
No application for a building permit or other permit or license, or for a
certificate of occupancy, shall be approved by the Building Commissioner
and no permit or license shall be issued by any other City department which
would authorize the use or change in use of any land or building contrary
to the provisions of this chapter, or the erection, moving, alteration,
enlargement or occupancy of any building designed or intended to be used
for a purpose or in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 22.10. Building height, bulk, and lot coverage.
§ 22.11. Rezoning of public and semi-public areas.
An area indicated on the Zoning Map as a public park, recreation area,
public school site, or other similar open space shall not be used for any
other purpose than that designated; and when the use of the area is
discontinued, it shall automatically be placed in the A Single-Family
(A) No building shall be erected, reconstructed, relocated, or structurally
altered so as to have a greater height or bulk, a higher percentage of lot
coverage or smaller open space than is permissible under the
limitations set forth herein for the district in which such building is
located, except that chimneys, cooling towers, and necessary
mechanical appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the maximum
height provisions when erected in accordance with all other ordinances
of the City of Hometown.
(B) No space allocated to a building or dwelling group for the purpose of
complying with the side, rear, or front yard or court or open space, or
lot area requirements of this chapter shall thereafter, by reason of a
change in ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy the
yard, court, open space, or lot area requirements of any other building
or dwelling group.
(C) No usable open space or off-street parking space or loading space
existing or provided hereafter for any building shall be reduced below
the minimum requirements hereafter set forth for such usable open
space, parking space, or loading space, nor be further reduced if
already less than said minimum requirement.
§ 22.08 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.11
1:761
Dwelling District until appropriate zoning is authorized by the City Council
within three months after the date of an application filed for rezoning.
§ 22.11 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.11
1:762
ARTICLE 6
(Reserved)286
§ 22.12. through § 22.14. (Reserved)
286. Editor's Note: Former Art. 6, Signs, was repealed 9-3-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004. See now
Ch. 18, Art. 8, Signs.
§ 22.12 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.12
1:763

ARTICLE 7
Fences
§ 22.15. General regulations.
§ 22.16. Patio fences.
(A) Fences may be erected to a maximum height of six feet and a minimum
height of not less than three feet. The acceptable materials for use as a
fence and the construction of the fence are established in the provisions
of Chapter 21, Building Code, § 21.126, of the Municipal Code of the
City of Hometown. Any rear lot line fence abutting the Wabash Railroad
right-of-way may be erected to a maximum height of eight feet.287
(B) All designs are subject to the approval of the Building Commissioner.
(C) Decorative slats may be installed on chain-link fences. Where there
exists a fence along the rear yard property line and along party line in a
rear yard, a second fence shall not be installed parallel to the existing
fence, except a patio fence.288
(A) Patio fences may be erected in rear yards only, to a height of six feet (or
average of six feet for stepped fencing) extending a maximum of 10 feet
from the rear wall of the original building parallel to and along the
party lot line of duplex houses. Such fence may be of wood materials,
pierced masonry or ornamental iron providing not less than 10%
daylight openings. In the case of a stepped fence, no portion shall be
higher than the bottom of the facia board of original construction and
the highest point will be adjacent to the building.
(B) The fence may be located on the party lot line if agreed to and erected
by the mutual owners; each to give the other a letter of consent and
approval.
(C) If one owner erects a patio fence, it shall be located 36 inches from the
party lot line.
287. Editor's Note: The former paragraph following this subsection, regarding the location of
fences and hedges, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General
Provisions, Art. 2).
288. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.15 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.16
1:765

ARTICLE 8
Residential Districts
§ 22.17. Purpose.
The residential districts set forth herein are established in order to protect
public health, and promote public safety, convenience, comfort, morals,
prosperity, and welfare. These general goals include, among others, the
following specific purposes:
(A) To protect residential areas against fire, explosion, noxious fumes,
offensive noise, smoke, vibration, dust, odors, heat, glare, and other
objectionable factors.
(B) To protect residential areas to the extent possible and appropriate in
each area against unduly heavy motor vehicle rattle, especially through
traffic, and to alleviate congestion by promoting off-street parking.
(C) To protect residential areas against undue congestion of public streets
and other public facilities by controlling the density of population
through regulation of the bulk of buildings.
(D) To protect and promote the public health and comfort by providing for
ample light and air to buildings and the windows thereof.
(E) To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for usable open
space on the same zoning lot with residential development.
(F) To promote the highest and best use and development of residential
land in accordance with a comprehensive land use plan, to promote
stability of residential development and protect the character and
desirable development, and to protect the value of land and
improvements and to strengthen the economic base of the City of
Hometown.
§ 22.17 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.17
1:767

ARTICLE 9
A Single-Family Dwelling District Regulations
§ 22.18. Scope.
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this article, are the A Single-Family Dwelling
District regulations.
§ 22.19. Permitted uses. [Amended 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 9-2004289]
The following uses are permitted in the A Single-Family Dwelling District:
(A) Single-family dwellings.
(B) Parks, playgrounds and community and municipal buildings owned or
operated by public agencies.
(C) Public libraries.
(D) Public and parochial schools, elementary, high, or college.
(E) Churches.
(F) Home occupations, as defined in this chapter.
(G) Swimming and wading pools and patios.
(H) Porches.
(I) Breezeways.
(J) Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the
construction work, but shall not be in place for more than one year.
(K) Open terraces.
(L) Garages for not more than one automobile, not to exceed an area of 308
square feet and located not closer than five feet to the rear lot line and
two feet to the side lot line.
(M) Garages, private. No garage shall exceed an area of 396 square feet,
nor outside dimensions of 18 feet in width and 22 feet in length along
the base. No garage shall exceed 14 feet in height. No part of any
garage shall be located closer than two feet to the side lot line, and
three feet to any house or dwelling; nor shall said garage encroach
upon any easement. No garage shall be located on any lot which cannot
provide a paved approach apron which permits the entry of two cars
and independently of the maneuverability of the others. Any garage so
erected shall be of brick or frame construction with a hip or gable
289. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.18 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.19
1:769
§ 22.20. Parking regulations.
§ 22.21. Height regulations.
§ 22.22. Yard areas.
composition roof. The brick or frame siding used shall conform to the
color, size, type and design of similar materials of the residential unit
located on said lot. Where an existing garage with a garage porch is
expanded, the following will be required: fireproof side nearest house,
front and rafters, fireproofing shall be of 5/8 inch drywall. All new
garages shall comply with the district land use regulations.
(N) Tool sheds. One tool shed shall be permitted on a lot, with an area not to
be less than seven feet by five feet and not exceeding a maximum of 10
feet by 12 feet nor eight feet six inches in height. Sheds shall be of
metal or wood frame and have siding bolted to a concrete slab, with a
minimum of four inches poured concrete floor on undisturbed solid or
solid compact fill with the top slab three inches above grade. Sheds
shall not be attached to any existing building or structure, and shall be
located on the premises or lot not less than five feet from the rear lot
and not less than two feet from the side lot lines. A tool shed is
permitted to be erected where a garage is constructed on the premises
or where a garage is subsequently erected thereon.
(A) Every dwelling hereafter erected shall provide one off-street
automobile parking space, provided that no such space shall be
permitted in a required front yard.
(B) Driveways shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 5, Streets and
Sidewalks, Article 2, of the City Code.290
(A) No building, including room additions, shall exceed two stories or 25
feet in height as measured from the finished first floor of the building as
originally constructed to the top of the highest ridge.
(B) No portion of an upper-story addition shall extend closer to an existing
front wall than 50% of the depth of the original building.
(C) Second-story additions shall have a roof pitch not less than a three-inch
rise for each twelve-inch horizontal measurement.
(D) One-story buildings and additions shall have a minimum pitch of three
inches in 12 inches and a maximum pitch of five inches in 12 inches.
(A) Front yard. Every existing one-family dwelling shall maintain and every
one-family dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall
provide a front yard of not less than 30 feet in depth.291
290. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.19 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.22
1:770
§ 22.22.1. Height regulations. [Added 10-11-2016 by Ord. No.
6-2016]
(B) Side yards.
(1) Interior lots. In the A Single-Family Dwelling District, any building
or structure, or parts thereof hereafter erected, and any residence
erected or relocated in all other districts shall be provided with an
open space or yard at least 10 feet wide along each line of the
building plot which is a side line of either the plot used or plot
adjoining.
(2) Corner lots: ten-foot side yards at a line contiguous with an
adjoining lot and at a line contiguous with the street that is
equivalent to 25% of the mean lot width.
(3) Exceptions:
(a) Incidental or accessory buildings need not provide any such
side yards, except no such building shall exceed a distance of
15 feet from the original building.
(b) Steps, open terraces and underground structures.
(c) Eaves, chimneys, bay windows and other ordinary building
projections may extend into the required yards, but not more
than 18 inches.
(d) Fences, hedges and shrubbery, provided that such obstructions
located on land at a road or street corner within the vision
triangle provided by the required building setback and side
yard shall preserve clear view between points four feet above
the crown of each intersecting roadway.
(C) Rear yard: not less than 19 feet between the main building and rear lot
line.
(A) No building, including room additions, shall exceed two stories or 25
feet in height as measured from the finished first floor of the building as
originally constructed to top of highest ridge.
(B) A second story addition may extend from the original building's front
wall to rear wall.
(C) One-story buildings and additions shall be a minimum pitch of three
inches for each twelve-inch horizontal measurement and a maximum
pitch of five inches for each twelve-inch horizontal measurement.
291. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.22 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.23
1:771
§ 22.23. Lot area and width.
Every dwelling hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated or reconstructed
shall provide a lot area of not less than 4,000 square feet and lot width not
less than 40 lineal feet.
§ 22.24. Maximum lot coverage.292
No dwelling with its accessory structures, including garages or sheds, shall
occupy in excess of 35% of the usable lot area, except that a greater
percentage, to a maximum of 40% of the usable lot area, may be allowed
on those lots of more than 4,000 square feet in area when the plan provides
for a free court of at least three feet between the main dwelling and the
accessory structure.
292. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.23 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.24
1:772
ARTICLE 10
B Two-Family Duplex Dwelling District Regulations
§ 22.25. Scope.
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this article, are the B Two-Family Duplex
Dwelling District regulations.
§ 22.26. Permitted uses. [Amended 6-24-2004 by Ord. No. 9-2004293]
The following uses are permitted in the B Two-Family Duplex Dwelling
District:
(A) Any use permitted in A Single-Family Dwelling Districts.
(B) Two-family duplex dwellings.
(C) Private garages.
(1) Interior lots. A private garage may be erected upon each building
side to house no more than two automobiles and may only be
located two feet away from a side lot line and five feet from the rear
lot line; and such garage shall not exceed in size 18 feet in width by
22 feet in depth. Under no circumstances shall a garage be erected
that extends beyond the building line of the adjoining property. No
shed, shack, lean-to, extension or other structure may be erected
against said garage or residential unit or any other portion of the
building site, except as provided for in this chapter. Any garage so
erected shall be of brick or frame construction with a hip or gable
composition shingle roof. Any brick or frame siding shall conform to
the color, size, type and design of the similar materials used in the
residential unit erected on said lot.
(2) Corner lots: same as interior lots except five feet from rear lot line
and front of garage not closer to the street than the extended line
of the street side wall of the existing residence and not farther from
the street than 30 feet from the party side lot line.
(D) An enclosed room or breezeway attaching the house to a garage will be
permitted on corner lots only. Construction must conform with the
setback line of the house and shall be constructed of the same material
in conformity with the Building Code.294
293. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
294. Editor's Note: See Ch. 21, Building Code.
§ 22.25 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.27
1:773
§ 22.27. Parking regulations.295
Parking regulations in the B Two-Family Duplex Dwelling District are the
same as in the A Single-Family Dwelling District.
§ 22.28. Height regulations.296
The height regulations in the B Two-Family Duplex Dwelling District are
the same as in the A Single-Family Dwelling Districts. Additions above
the original roof on duplex dwellings that have an existing addition will
be integrated in design with the existing second addition to preserve the
appearance of a single-family unit. The maximum height allowed for any
garage shall be established in Chapter 21, Article 9, Garages, of the
Municipal Code of the City of Hometown.
§ 22.29. Yard areas.
§ 22.30. Lot area.297
Lot area requirements in the B Two-Family Duplex Dwelling District are the
same as in the A Single-Family Dwelling District.
(A) Front yard. Minimum setback regulations are the same as in the A
Single-Family Dwelling Districts.
(B) Side yard. Side yard regulations are the same as in the A Single-Family
Dwelling Districts, except there must be a ten-foot side yard along the
lot line opposite the party wall lot line and a three-foot side yard along
the party wall lot line, with the following exceptions:
(1) If there is an existing addition on the party wall line or if both
duplex partners extend corresponding additions simultaneously.
Such additions may extend to the party wall line and will have the
party wall extended between the additions.
(2) If one or both sides of a duplex are raised to permit the
construction of a basement, such development may extend to the
party wall whether both sides are developed simultaneously or not.
Written consent of the duplex partner will be required. Such
consent to grant right of access for maintenance will be recorded.
Evidence of such recording shall be presented to the Building
Commissioner prior to the issuance of a permit.
(C) Rear yard: not less than 30 feet between the main building and rear lot
line.
295. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
296. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
297. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.27 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.31
1:774
§ 22.31. Maximum lot coverage.298
Maximum lot coverage requirements in the B Two-Family Duplex Dwelling
District are the same as in the A Single-Family Dwelling District.
298. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.31 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.31
1:775

ARTICLE 11
C Multiple-Family Dwelling District Regulations
§ 22.32. Scope.
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this article, are the district regulations in the C
Multiple-Family Dwelling Districts.
§ 22.33. Permitted uses.299
The following uses are permitted in the C Multiple-Family Dwelling District:
§ 22.34. Parking regulations.
The parking regulations for multiple-family dwellings are the same as those
in the B Two-Family Duplex Dwelling District. Where a lot is occupied by
a multiple dwelling, there shall be provided accessible parking space on
the lot adequate to accommodate two cars for each family apartment in the
main building.
§ 22.35. Height regulations.
No building shall exceed two stories or 30 feet in height.
§ 22.36. Yard area.
Front, side, and rear yard requirements are the same as in the A Single-
Family Dwelling District.
§ 22.37. Lot area.
Every multiple dwelling hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated or
reconstructed shall provide a lot area of not less than 4,000 square feet per
apartment.
(A) Any use permitted in the B Two-Family Duplex Dwelling Districts.
(B) Multiple dwellings.
(C) Institutions of a religious, educational, eleemosynary, or philanthropic
nature, but not penal or mental institutions.
(D) Hospitals and clinics, except animal hospitals, animal clinics, or mental
hospitals.
299. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.32 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.37
1:777

ARTICLE 12
D Commercial Districts
§ 22.38. Purpose.
The Commercial Districts set forth herein are established to protect public
health, to promote public safety, comfort, convenience, and the general
welfare, and to protect the economic base of the City and the value of
property. These general purposes include, among others, the following
specific objectives:
§ 22.39. Scope.
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this
chapter when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the D
Commercial Districts.
§ 22.40. Permitted uses.300
The following uses are permitted in the D Commercial District:
(A) To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a wellconsidered
plan so that adequate space is provided in appropriate
locations for the various types of business uses, thereby protecting and
strengthening the economic base of the City.
(B) To place in separate districts those businesses which may create noise,
odors, hazards, unsightliness, or which may generate excessive traffic.
(C) To permit selected business uses in districts where adjacency to or
inclusion in a residential area has sufficient elements of service or
convenience to such areas to offset the disadvantage.
(D) To encourage the grouping in appropriate locations of compatible
business uses which will tend to draw trade that is mutually
interchangeable and to promote public convenience and business
prosperity and contribute to the alleviation of traffic and pedestrian
congestion.
(E) To provide for the establishment of off-street parking facilities,
permitted and required, so as to alleviate traffic congestion and so
promote shopping convenience and business prosperity.
(A) Any use permitted in the C Multiple- Dwelling District.
(B) Automobile service stations, excluding automobile repair as defined.
(C) Bakeries whose products are sold at retail on the premises.
(D) Banks, including approved drive-through facilities.
300. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.38 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.40
1:779
(E) Barber shops or beauty parlors.
(F) Business or commercial schools or dancing or music academies.
(G) Catering establishments.
(H) Electronics and shoe repair shops.
(I) Messenger or telegraph service stations.
(J) Offices.
(K) Paint and decorating shops.
(L) Photograph galleries.
(M) Recreation buildings or structures.
(N) Restaurants.
(O) Salesrooms or showrooms, except any person or entity who or which is
engaged in the business of dealing in firearms or firearms ammunition
shall not be located within one mile of the grounds of any school or
public park. For purposes of this article, a "person or entity who or
which is engaged in the business of dealing in firearms" shall be defined
as one engaged in the business of selling firearms or ammunition at
wholesale or retail, whether or not such business constitutes the
principal business of such person or entity.
(P) Service establishments similar to others listed in this section.
(*Frontage consents required of a majority of property owners 200 feet
adjoining in each direction parallel to the front lot line. This requires
written consent.)
(Q) Stores or shops for the conduct of a retail business.
(R) Stores for the collection and distribution of laundry and dry-cleaning
articles, but not for the treatment, cleaning, or processing of such
articles.
(S) Tailor shops.
(T) Undertaking establishments. (*Frontage consents required of a
majority of property owners 200 feet adjoining in each direction
parallel to the front lot line. This requires written consent.)
(U) Public utility substations and facilities in connection therewith.
(V) Retail grocery stores.
(W) Auto laundries. (*Frontage consents required of a majority of property
owners 200 feet adjoining in each direction parallel to the front lot line.
This requires written consent.)
(X) Shoe shops, retail.
§ 22.40 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.40
1:780
§ 22.41. Accessory buildings and uses.
Accessory buildings customarily incidental to the above uses are permitted.
§ 22.42. Parking regulations.
There shall be two square feet of parking area for each square foot of floor
area. All parking requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and all
other anti-discrimination laws must be met.
§ 22.43. Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in height.
§ 22.44. Storage. [Amended 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
The lawful use of land for storage purposes which does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter shall be discontinued within one year from the
date of the approval of this chapter and the same uses of land which become
nonconforming by reason of a subsequent change in this chapter shall be
discontinued within one year from the date of the change.
(Y) Laundromats.
(Z) Drugstores.
(AA) Currency exchanges.
(AB) Medical clinic buildings.
§ 22.40 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.44
1:781

ARTICLE 13
Nonconforming Uses
§ 22.45. Buildings and uses.
The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the adoption of this
chapter may be continued, although such use does not conform with the
provisions hereof, and such use may be extended throughout the building,
provided no structural alterations, except these required by law or
ordinance, are made therein. If no structural alterations are made, a
nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming
use of the same or a more restricted classification. The foregoing provision
shall also apply to nonconforming uses in districts hereafter changed.
Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has been changed to a more
restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be
changed to a less restricted use.
§ 22.46. Damaged buildings.301
A building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, or act of God or
public enemy, to the extent of more than 50% of its value, may be restored
only if it is in conformity with the regulations of this chapter.
§ 22.47. Discontinued uses.
In the event that a nonconforming use of any building or premises is
discontinued or its normal operation stopped for a period of one year, it
shall be considered abandoned and such use shall not be reestablished
except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
§ 22.48. Buildings enlarged, extended, reconstructed or altered.
No existing building or premises devoted to a use not permitted by this
chapter in the district in which such building or premises is located, except
when required to do so by law or ordinance, shall be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, or structurally altered unless such use is changed to one
permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located.
301. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.45 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.48
1:783

ARTICLE 14
Special Uses
§ 22.49. Purpose.
The principal objective of this comprehensive zoning ordinance is to provide
for an orderly arrangement of compatible building and land uses, and for
the proper location of all types of uses required for the social and economic
welfare of the City. To accomplish this objective, each type and kind of use
is classified as permitted in one or more of the various districts established
by this chapter. However, in addition to those uses specifically classified
and permitted in each district, there are certain additional uses which it
may be necessary to allow because of their unusual characteristics or the
service they provide the public. These "special uses" require particular
consideration as to their proper location in relation to adjacent established
or intended uses, or to the planned development of the community. The
conditions controlling the location and operation of such special uses are
established by the following provisions of this article.
§ 22.50. Uses allowed by special permit.
The City Council may, by special permit after public hearing, and subject to
such protective restrictions that it deems necessary, authorize the location
of any of the following buildings or uses in any district from which they are
prohibited by this chapter:
(A) Any public building erected and used by any department of a municipal,
county, state or federal government or public utility, i.e., pumping
station, transformer station, or other similar facility.
(B) Parking lots on land not more than 300 feet from the boundary of a
commercial, business, or industrial district under such conditions as
will protect the character of the surrounding property.
(C) Radio towers and radio broadcasting stations.
(D) Firearms dealers less than one mile from any school or public park, but
in no case shall any firearms dealers be located within 500 feet of any
school or public park.
(E) Community residences, defined as a group home or specialized
residential care home serving unrelated persons with disabilities living
in a family-like setting and constituting a single housekeeping unit.
Community residences do not include a residence which serves persons
as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or persons
whose primary reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse or
for treatment of a communicable disease.
(F) Medical cannabis dispensing organizations, in the D Commercial
District only, provided the facilities otherwise comply with the
provisions of Article 23. [Added 1-28-2014 by Ord. No. 1-2014]
§ 22.49 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.51
1:785
§ 22.51. Zoning Board report.
Before issuance of any special permit for any of the above buildings or
uses, the City Council shall refer the proposed application to the Board of
Appeals, which Board shall be given 30 days in which to make a report
regarding the effect of such proposed building or use upon the character
of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utility facilities, and other
matters pertaining to the public health, public safety, or general welfare. No
action shall be taken upon any application for a proposed building or use
above referred to until and unless the report of the Board of Appeals has
been filed; provided, however, that if no report is received from the Board
within 30 days, the City Council shall act on the application without the
opinion of the Zoning Board.
§ 22.51 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.51
1:786
ARTICLE 15
Variations and Exceptions
§ 22.52. Supplemental regulations.
The district regulations hereinafter set forth in this article qualify or
supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing
elsewhere in this chapter.
(A) Public, semipublic, or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, or
schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not
exceeding 25 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a
height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is set back from each yard
line at least one foot for each foot of additional building height above
the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building
is located.
(B) Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, monuments,
stacks, stage towers, or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental
towers and spires, church steeples, radio towers, or necessary
mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a height in accordance
with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the City of Hometown,
Illinois.
(C) Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed,
except for garages, patios, and breezeways, and for the ordinary
projections of eaves, not to exceed 30 inches.
(D) Steel fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening
upon fire towers projecting into a rear yard not more than five feet, and
the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues may be permitted by the
Building Commissioner.
(E) For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling, a
group house, or a multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building
occupying one lot.
(F) Every residence, business, trade, or industry hereafter established and
requiring water supply and sewage disposal facilities shall provide
facilities conforming to standards of design and location approved by
authorities having proper jurisdiction, and any new water supply and
sewage disposal facilities hereafter provided for existing uses shall
conform to such standards.
§ 22.52 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.52
1:787

ARTICLE 16
Board of Appeals
§ 22.53. Creation and membership; terms; removal; vacancies.
A Board of Appeals is hereby authorized to be established. The word
"Board," when used in this article, shall be construed to mean the Board of
Appeals. The Board shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor
of Hometown, Illinois, with the consent of the City Council. The members
of said Board shall serve respectively for the following terms (or until their
respective successors are appointed and qualified): one for one year, one for
two years, one for three years, one for four years and one for five years for
the first five appointed, and five years each for those following the first five
appointed. The Mayor shall have the power to remove any member of the
Board for cause and after a public hearing. Vacancies upon said Board shall
be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become
vacant in the manner herein provided for the appointment of such member.
§ 22.54. Chairman.
One of members of the Zoning Board shall be designated by the Mayor, with
the consent of the Aldermen, as Chairman of said Board until his successor
is appointed. Such Chairman, or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman,
may administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses and make such
decisions and determinations as authorized herein.
§ 22.55. Written requests required; variation fee.
All requests for variations and all decisions or determinations of the Zoning
Board shall be in writing and shall become a matter of public record. The
fee for a variation hearing is $50.
§ 22.56. Jurisdiction.
(A) When a property owner shows that a strict application of the terms of
this chapter relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings
or structures, or to the use of land, imposes upon him practical
difficulties or practical hardship, then the Zoning Board may make such
variations of the strict application of the terms of the chapter as are in
harmony with its general purpose and intent. When the Zoning Board is
notified, under the evidence heard before it, that a granting of such
variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but is
necessary to alleviate some demonstrable hardship or difficulty so great
as to warrant a variation, the Board may grant such variations in the
following instances:
(1) To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a
district divides a single ownership as shown of record.
(2) To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming building which
has been destroyed or damaged to an extent of more than 50% of
§ 22.53 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.56
1:789
its value, by fire or act of God or a public enemy, where the
Zoning Board shall find some compelling public necessity requiring
a continuance of the nonconforming use, and in no case shall
such a permit be issued if its primary function is to continue a
monopoly.302
(3) To permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises
in any location for a public service corporation for public utility
purposes which the Zoning Board deems reasonably necessary for
the public convenience or welfare.
(4) To make a variance where, by reason of an exceptional situation,
surroundings, or condition of a specific piece of property, or by
reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a
specific piece of property of record, as by reason of exceptional
topographical conditions, the strict application of any provision of
this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties or particular hardship upon the owner of such property
and amount to a practical confiscation of property as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience to such detriment to the public good
and without substantially impairing the general purpose and intent
of the Comprehensive Plan as established by the regulations and
provisions contained in this chapter.
(5) To interpret the provisions of this chapter where the street layout
actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on
the District Map fixing the several districts.
(6) To permit lots that were of record at the time of the passage of this
chapter and which contain less area than the intensity of use
requirements of the dwelling district in which they are located to
be used for single-family dwellings, and to vary the side yard
regulations for such lots, but only when the owner or owners of
such lots furnish substantial proof of the inability to acquire, or to
acquire at a reasonable price, additional land adjoining the lot
which would be necessary to provide the required lot area.
(7) To waive the parking requirements in the commercial, business, or
industrial districts whenever the character or use of the building is
such as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking facilities
or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship
upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an
advantage or a convenience.
(8) To permit land within 200 feet of a multiple dwelling to be
improved for the parking spaces required in connection with a
multiple dwelling, but only when there is positive assurance that
such land can be used for such purpose during the existence of the
multiple dwelling.
302. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.56 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.56
1:790
§ 22.57. Restrictions on authority.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the
Chairman or the Board the power or authority to alter or change the Zoning
Ordinance or the District Map, such power and authority being reserved to
the City Council.
§ 22.58. Appeals; fee.
(B) In considering all appeals and all proposed variations to this chapter,
the Zoning Board shall, before making any variations from the chapter
in a specific case, first determine that the proposed variation will not
impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or
unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the
danger of fire or endanger the public safety, or unreasonably diminish
or impair established property values within the surrounding area or in
any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or
welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Hometown.
(C) The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning
Board, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is
authorized by this chapter to render a decision. Copies of all findings,
orders and decisions of the Board shall be transmitted to the City
Council for its information and records.
(A) An appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by any person, firm or
corporation, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City
affected by a decision of the Chairman of the Board. Such appeal shall
be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Board of
Appeals by general rule, by filing with the Zoning Chairman and with
the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof.
The Zoning Chairman shall forthwith transmit to the Board all of the
papers constituting the record of the action being appealed.
(B) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Zoning Chairman certifies to the Board of
Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be
granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application,
or notice to the Zoning Chairman and on due cause shown.
(C) The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of
the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and shall render a
decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay, within one year of
the date of receipt of a petition to appeal. Any person may appear and
testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or
attorney.
§ 22.56 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.58
1:791
§ 22.59. Notice of hearing.
The Board shall make no variation except in a specific case and after a
public hearing conducted by the Board. A notice of the time and place of
such public hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation
in the City of Hometown not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days
before the hearing. Such notice shall contain the address or location of the
property for which the variation or other ruling by the Board is sought, as
well as a brief description of the nature of the appeal.
§ 22.60. Meetings.
All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such time as such Board may determine. All hearings
conducted by the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
keep records of its hearings and other official actions. Findings of fact
shall be included in the minutes of each case of a requested variation, and
the reasons for making or denying such variation shall be specified. Every
rule or regulation, declaration, or determination of the Board shall be filed
immediately in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. The
Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this chapter
or with the Illinois statutes in such case made and provided.
§ 22.61. Term of orders.
(D) A fee of $125 shall be paid to the City Clerk's office for a hearing before
the Zoning Board of Appeals. [Amended 2-14-2006 by Ord. No.
1-2006]
(A) No order of the Board permitting the erection of a building shall be
valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building permit for such
erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in
accordance with the terms of such permit.
(B) No order of the Board permitting a use of a building or premises shall
be valid for a period longer than one year, unless such use is established
within such period; provided, however, that where such use permitted
is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order
shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection or
alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the
terms of such permit.
§ 22.58 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.61
1:792
ARTICLE 17
Occupancy Permits
§ 22.62. Change in use or occupancy.
Subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, no change in the use or
occupancy of land in the D Commercial Districts, nor any change of use or
occupancy in an existing building in the D Commercial Districts, shall be
made, nor shall any new building except garage and accessory buildings be
occupied for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued
by the Zoning Chairman. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the
new occupancy complies with all provisions of this chapter.
§ 22.63. Permit for excavation, erection or alteration.
No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of, a building
shall be issued before the application has been made for a certificate of
occupancy and compliance, and no building or premises shall be occupied
until that certificate and permit are issued.
§ 22.64. Record of certificates.
A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office
of the Zoning Chairman, and copies shall be furnished on request to any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in land or in a building
affected by such certificate of occupancy.
§ 22.65. Nonconforming uses.
Certificates of occupancy shall be required for all nonconforming uses of
land or buildings created by the passage of this chapter. Application for
such certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be filed with the
Zoning Chairman by the owner or lessee of the land or building occupied
by such nonconforming use within two years from the effective date of this
chapter. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Chairman to issue a certificate of
occupancy for a nonconforming use.
§ 22.62 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.65
1:793

ARTICLE 18
Plats
§ 22.66. Application for building permit.
Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat in
duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be
built upon, the size, shape and location of the building to be erected, and
such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement
of this chapter. A record of applications and plats shall be kept in the office
of the Zoning Chairman.
§ 22.66 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.66
1:795

ARTICLE 19
Boundaries of Districts
§ 22.67. Interpretation of boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the map accompanying and made a part of this
chapter, the following rules apply:
(A) The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise
shown, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying
and made a part of this chapter are bounded approximately by a street
or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary
of the district.
(B) Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where
the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots,
the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where
the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of
this chapter are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall
be construed to be the boundary of the district unless the boundaries
are otherwise indicated on the map.
(C) In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map
accompanying and made a part of this chapter shall be determined by
use of the scale appearing on the map as measured by the Zoning
Chairman.
§ 22.67 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.67
1:797

ARTICLE 20
Interpretation
§ 22.68. Minimum standards; conflicts.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety,
health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity, and general welfare. It
is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued, and
not in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, or which shall
be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or
premises, and likewise not in conflict with this chapter; nor is it intended by
this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easements, covenants,
or other agreements between parties, except that if this chapter imposes a
greater restriction, this chapter shall control.
§ 22.68 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.68
1:799

ARTICLE 21
Amendments and Changes
§ 22.69. Authorization and procedure.
(A) The Mayor and the City Council of the City of Hometown may from time
to time amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the boundaries of
districts or regulations herein established. Any amendment,
supplement, or change shall first be submitted to the Board of Appeals
for its recommendations and report. The City Council is hereby
authorized to waive the requirement that an amendment to the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance first be submitted to the Zoning
Board of Appeals and may conduct the public hearing on the proposed
zoning amendment itself.
(B) A public hearing shall be held by the Board of Appeals, and within 30
days of such hearing it shall report to the City Council any proposed
amendments. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publishing in
some newspaper of general circulation, not more than 30 days nor less
than 15 days before the hearing, stating the time and place of such
hearing. In case of written protest against any proposed amendment,
signed by the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately adjoining or
across the rear lot lines therefrom, or by the owners of 20% of the
frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered as to
such regulations or district and filed with the City Council, such
amendments shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of 2/3 of
all the members of the City Council.
(C) Before any action shall be taken as provided in this article, the party or
parties proposing or recommending a change in the district regulations
or district boundaries shall deposit with the City Treasurer the sum of
$200 to cover the approximate cost of this procedure and under no
condition shall said sum or any part thereof be refunded for failure of
said amendment or change to be enacted into law.
(D) Any notice required by this section need not include a metes-andbounds
legal description, provided that the notice includes:303
(1) The common street address or addresses; and
(2) The property index number (PIN) or numbers of all the parcels of
real property contained in the affected area.
303. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art. 2).
§ 22.69 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.69
1:801

ARTICLE 22
Violation and Penalty
§ 22.70. Penalty.304
Any person, firm, or corporation who or which violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than
$750 for each offense. Each day that violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
304. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.70 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.70
1:803

ARTICLE 23
Medical Cannabis Cultivation and Dispensaries
[Added 1-28-2014 by Ord. No. 1-2014]
§ 22.71. Purpose and applicability.
It is the intent and purpose of this article to provide regulations regarding
the cultivation and dispensing of medical cannabis occurring within the
corporate limits of the City of Hometown. Such facilities shall comply with
all regulations provided in the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Pilot Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.), as enacted by the State of
Illinois, as may be amended from time to time (the "Act"), regulations
enacted pursuant to authority granted through the Act, and the regulations
provided herein. In the event that the Act is amended, the more restrictive
of the state or City regulations shall apply.
§ 22.72. Procedure.
Medical cannabis dispensing organizations shall be a special use in the D
Commercial District and processed in accordance with the provisions of
§ 22.51 of the Hometown Zoning Ordinance and this article. No Medical
Cannabis Dispensing Organization shall be sited, opened or operated unless
specifically authorized under and pursuant to the Act and this Hometown
Zoning Ordinance.
§ 22.73. Special permit considerations.
In determining compliance with Article 14 of this chapter, the following
components of the medical cannabis dispensing organization shall be
evaluated based on the entirety of the circumstances affecting the
particular property in the context of the existing and intended future use of
other properties in the vicinity:
(A) Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses located
within the vicinity of the subject property.
(B) Proposed structure in which the facility will be located, total square
footage, security installations/security plan, and Building Code
compliance.305
(C) Hours of operation and anticipated number of customers/employees.
(D) Anticipated parking demand and available private parking supply,
including any specialized needs for handicapped parking.306
(E) Traffic generation and adjacent roadway capacity.
305. Editor's Note: See Ch. 21, Building Code.
306. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 30, General Provisions, Art.
2).
§ 22.71 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.73
1:805
§ 22.74. Cultivation centers.
It shall be unlawful to locate or operate a medical cannabis cultivation
center in any residential or commercial zoning district in the City of
Hometown.
§ 22.75. Dispensing organizations.
In those zoning districts in which a medical cannabis dispensing
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
§ 22.76. Additional requirements.
The petitioner shall install building enhancements, such as security
cameras, lighting, or other improvements, as needed or at the request of
(F) Site design, including access points, internal site circulation and
commercial vehicle loading, unloading and parking.
(G) Proposed signage plan.
(H) Compliance with all requirements provided in § 22.75, Dispensing
organizations.
(I) Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with
Article 14 of this chapter.
(A) The facility may not be located within 1,000 feet of the property line of a
preexisting public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or
secondary school, day-care center, day-care home, residential care
home or public park.
(B) The facility may not be located within 1,000 feet of the property line of
any property used residentially or zoned for a residential use.
(C) The facility may not have drive-through service.
(D) The facility must be a freestanding structure not occupied by any other
business or tenant, or used for any other purpose other than a medical
cannabis dispensing organization.
(E) Retail sales occurring within said facility shall be accessory to the
facility's intended use as a dispensing organization and shall not occupy
greater than 10% of the total square footage of the facility. For purposes
of calculating the total square footage dedicated to retail sales, that
portion of the floor area dedicated to the distribution of medical
cannabis or medical cannabis infused products shall be excluded from
this calculation; all floor area dedicated to the sale of other medical
cannabis products and/or paraphernalia shall be included.
(F) The facility shall have such parking as determined appropriate as a
result of the analysis completed through § 22.73 of this article.
§ 22.73 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.76
1:806
the City, to ensure the safety of employees and customers of the medical
cannabis dispensing organization. Said improvements may be required by
the City in excess of those security measures required by the Act.
§ 22.76 CITY GOVERNMENT § 22.76
1:807
Chapter 30
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 22.76 HOMETOWN CODE § 22.76
1:808
ARTICLE 1
Publication of Code
§ 30.01. Authorization.
This ordinance, the Municipal Code of Hometown, is authorized to be and
shall be printed and published in book form.
§ 30.02. Distribution of copies.
All of the printed copies of the Municipal Code of Hometown belonging to
the City shall be deposited with the City Clerk. He shall deliver one copy
thereof to each member of the Council and copies to such other persons as
the Council may direct.
§ 30.03. Copies to other municipalities and organizations.
The Council shall have the power to extend to or reciprocate courtesies of
other municipalities by presenting them with a copy of the Municipal Code
of Hometown, bound at the expense of the City, as to it may seem suitable
and it shall also have the power to present two copies of this Code to the
Illinois Municipal League.
§ 30.04. through § 30.09. (Reserved)
§ 30.01 CITY GOVERNMENT § 30.04
1:809

ARTICLE 2
Adoption of Code
[Added 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 7-2016]
§ 30.10. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the 2016 Municipal Code, insofar as they are substantively
the same as those of the 2001 Code and ordinances and resolutions in force
immediately prior to the enactment of the 2016 Code by this ordinance,
are intended as a continuation of the 2001 Code and such ordinances
and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such
provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior Code, ordinance
or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and
effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the City Council of
the City of Hometown, and it is the intention of said Council that each such
provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in
said Code. Only such provisions of the 2001 Code and former ordinances as
are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the
provisions of § 30.11 below.
§ 30.11. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All portions of the 2001 Code and ordinances of a general and permanent
nature of the City of Hometown in force on the date of the adoption
of this ordinance, inconsistent with the provisions contained therein, and
not contained in the 2016 Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this ordinance.
§ 30.12. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of ordinances provided for in § 30.11 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following classes of ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
(A) Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City of Hometown prior to the effective date
of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
(B) Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the City of
Hometown or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
(C) Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City of Hometown.
(D) Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the City of Hometown.
§ 30.10 CITY GOVERNMENT § 30.12
1:811
§ 30.13. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk of the City of Hometown and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and,
if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the City
Clerk of the City of Hometown by impressing thereon the Seal of the City of
Hometown, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said
City Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 30.14. Sale of Code; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the City Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a
fee to be set by resolution of the City Council. The Clerk may also arrange
for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 30.15. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the City Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
City of Hometown or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
(E) Any ordinance of the City of Hometown providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the City of Hometown or any portion thereof.
(F) Any ordinance of the City of Hometown appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the City of
Hometown or other instruments or evidence of the City's indebtedness.
(G) Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
(H) The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
(I) The annexation or dedication of property.
(J) Any ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
(K) Any ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
(L) Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for City employees.
(M) Any ordinance adopted subsequent to October 11, 2016.
§ 30.12 HOMETOWN CODE § 30.15
1:812
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the City of Hometown to
be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this
ordinance shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with Chapter 1, Article
1, of the Code. The court may, in addition to assessing a fine, impose a
requirement that the defendant perform some reasonable public service
work such as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in public parks or
along public streets or highways or the maintenance of public facilities.
§ 30.16. Changes to prior provisions; new provisions.
§ 30.17. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made Article 2 of Chapter 30 of
the Code of the City of Hometown, such ordinance to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article 2, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this ordinance
shall be numbered §§ 30.10 to 30.18, inclusive.
§ 30.18. When effective.
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect 10 days following publication
as provided by law.
(A) In compiling and preparing the prior Code and ordinances and
resolutions for publication as the 2016 Code of the City of Hometown,
no changes in the meaning or intent of such prior Code, ordinances and
resolutions have been made. In addition, certain grammatical changes,
administrative changes, and other minor nonsubstantive changes were
made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention of
the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the 2016
Code as if the prior Code, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
(B) In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule
A307 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to
become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
307. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 30.16(B), the chapters, articles and sections which
were added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the
Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 30, General Provisions, Article 2. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 11-22-2016 by Ord. No.
7-2016." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
City offices.
§ 30.15 CITY GOVERNMENT § 30.18
1:813